Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-28-1988 by Ord. No. 88-15]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The codification of a complete body of ordinances for the Township of
Towamencin, County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., consisting of Chapters 1 through 153, together with an
Appendix and Index, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as
the "Code of the Township of Towamencin," hereinafter known and referred
to as the "Code," pursuant to § 702, cl. XLI.1, of the Second Class Township
Code, 53 P.S. § 65741.1.
§ 1-2. When effective.
All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect on and after
December 28, 1988.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted by the Township of Towamencin and in force from the date of the
adoption of this ordinance and not contained in here, are hereby reenacted
as of the effective date of this ordinance as consistent herewith and in
addition to those set forth below.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 30, 1987, of a general
and permanent nature and not included in the Code or superseded or
repealed by provisions therein or inconsistent therewith.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township, or
any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given in § 1-4A and/or the date of adoption of this ordinance are
hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall. upon being printed, be
included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be temporarily
placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes in previously adopted ordinances; revisions or
additions.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Township, or other instruments
or evidence of the Township's indebtedness.
H. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
J. Any ordinance designating the boundaries of water districts.
K. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
L. The dedication of property.
M. Any ordinance or resolution establishing the salaries or rates of
compensation of any officers or employees of the Township.
N. Ordinance No. 6, Zoning, adopted April 7, 1956, and any currently
effective amendment to or revision of such ordinance.
O. Ordinance No. 7, Subdivision of Land, adopted November 5, 1956, and
any currently effective amendment to or revision of such ordinance.
P. Ordinance No. 82-8, adopted November 11, 1982, providing for the
removal of snow from the streets of subdivisions or land developments
under construction.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Township of
Towamencin for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain
grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one or
more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Supervisors that all
§ 1-4 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in a post-bound volume has been filed in the office of the
Township Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as
provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of
the Township Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Certain changes of a substantive nature were made to various
ordinances found within the Code, and certain articles or chapters have
been included as complete revisions of existing ordinances or as
additions of new provisions. These changes, additions or revisions were
made to bring the provisions into conformity with the desired policies of
the Township Supervisors, and it is the intent of the Supervisors that all
such changes, additions or revisions be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended or
added to read as such. Such changes, additions or revisions are cited
within the historical statements by the term "amended at time of
adoption of Code" or "adopted at time of adoption of Code" and are as
follows.1
C. The following sections are amended to provide, in substance, that any
person violating the provisions of the chapter or article involved shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not
more than $300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of
the fine and costs, by imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison
for not more than 30 days.2
D. The following sections are amended as in § 1-6C above with the addition
of a provision that a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues, and any
repetition of a violation shall be deemed a new offense.3
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 16B, the following sections were amended or added: §§ 27-31,
44-20, 76-5, 84-2, 84-4D, 84-18, 87-4A(2), 87-9A, 127-36A, 127-70, 127-83, 143-6 and
A156-7A.
2. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6C, the following violations and penalties sections were
amended: §§ 67-7, 72-15. 100-26A, 113-3, 119-2, 124-9, 133-9 and 143-13.
3. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6D. the following sections were amended as in § 1-6C with
additional provisions for repetition of a violation: §§ 49-8, 56-5, 87-11B, 11O-9, 127-46,
127-73, 127-86 and 130-4.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary, or someone authorized and
directed by the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Secretary for the
use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted by the
Township Supervisors subsequent to the effective date of this codification
which the Supervisors shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book; supplements provided.
Copies of the book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Township Secretary upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Supervisors which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the adoption of this ordinance adopting the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance adopting the Code, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 1-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 1-14
1:6
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township to
be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance
shall be subject. upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $300 and
costs of prosecution, and upon default in payment of the fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Recodification
[Adopted 9-24-2003 by Ord. No. 03-05]
§ 1-15. Recodification.
The Towamencin Township Code of Ordinances ("Code") shall be recodified
and renumbered as set forth in the Table of Contents attached hereto
as Exhibit A.4 Further, all subsections not shown in Exhibit A shall be
renumbered in accordance with the numbering system set forth in Exhibit
A. There shall be no substantive changes to any portion of the Code by the
adoption of this ordinance.
§ 1-16. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 1-17. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this ordinance is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts of this ordinance. It is
hereby declared as the intent of the Township that this ordinance would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 1-18. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective immediately.
4. Editor's Note: Said Appendix A is on file in Township offices and appears in this Code as its
Table of Contents.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
Chapter 2
COMPENSATION OF BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
§ 2-1. Compensation Designated.
The annual compensation of the members of the Board of Supervisors
shall be the maximum amount as permitted by applicable laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as the same may be amended from time
to time and/or the population of the Township grows all in accordance
with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. As of the date of
the enactment of this amendment and with the population of Towamencin
Township being between 15,000 to 24,999 individuals, the compensation
for each Supervisor is initially set at $4,125 per annum effective January
1, 2017, with said salary being automatically amended to the maximum
amount as permitted by law without the necessity of further ordinance
adoption. Said salary shall be payable monthly or quarterly as determined
by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 2-2. Compensation for present term.
All current members of the Board of Supervisors who are presently serving
a term in office at the passage of this amendment shall continue to receive
the salary now being paid, unaffected and not increased by the provisions
of this amendment, for the remainder of his or her current term in office.
Each supervisor of Towamencin Township elected or appointed after the
adoption of this article shall receive compensation as a supervisor in the
maximum amount permitted as the General Assembly may from time to
time determine, except as restricted by the provisions of Section 606 of the
Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 65606.
Chapter 5
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
§ 5-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTACK — A direct or indirect assault against the Township of Towamencin,
its government, its environs or against the nation by the forces of a hostile
nation or the agents thereof, including but not limited to assault by
bombings; radiological, chemical or biological means; or sabotage.
COORDINATOR — The Emergency Management Coordinator of the
Emergency Management Agency of the Township of Towamencin.
DISASTER — Actual or threatened attack, natural disaster, extraordinary
fire, epidemic, evacuations or any other pending or actual emergency or
calamity which endangers or threatens to endanger the health, safety, life
§ 1-18 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 5-1
1:10
or property of the residents of the Township, or endangers or threatens the
constituted government of the nation or state.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — To carry out the basic government
functions of maintaining the public peace, health and safety, including plans
and preparations for protection from, and relief, recovery and rehabilitation
from the effect of, an attack on the Township and such activity in connection
with a disaster as defined herein.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES — The employees, equipment and
facilities of all Township departments, boards, institutions and commissions,
and all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by or
obtained from volunteer persons or agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT VOLUNTEER — Any person duly enrolled,
identified and appointed by the Coordinator and assigned to participate in
Emergency Management Agency activity.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership,
including the plural as well as the singular and both genders.
REGULATIONS — The plans, programs and emergency procedures
established by the Emergency Management Agency which are deemed
essential to an adequate program.
VOLUNTEER — A person contributing a service, equipment or facilities to
the Emergency Management Agency without remuneration
§ 5-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are:
§ 5-3. Emergency Management Agency created.
A. To establish an Emergency Management Agency that will be
responsible for the complete and efficient utilization of all Township
facilities to safeguard and protect life and property within the Township
of Towamencin during a state of war, a local emergency or disaster.
B. To establish the Emergency Management Agency and its attendant
responsibilities, duties and powers, including but not limited to
provisions for the promulgation of a basic emergency management plan
with necessary lines of succession.
C. To establish the Emergency Management Coordinator and his
attendant responsibilities, duties and powers as Coordinator of the
Emergency Management Agency.
D. To provide for the promulgation of emergency management
regulations, enforcement and penalties.
A. There is hereby created an Emergency Management Agency for the
Township of Towamencin. The Emergency Management Agency shall
consist of a Coordinator, to be known as the "Emergency Management
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:11
§ 5-4. Powers and duties.
Subject to the direction and control of the Township Board of Supervisors,
the Emergency Management Agency shall have the following powers and
duties:
Coordinator," who shall be selected by the Township Board of
Supervisors and appointed by the Governor of Pennsylvania. Said
Coordinator shall serve at the pleasure of the Township Board of
Supervisors or its designated alternate. The Coordinator may appoint
a staff as is necessary, but in all circumstances said appointments,
if any, shall be with the express approval of the Township Board of
Supervisors or its designated alternate. The members of the Emergency
Management Agency shall serve without compensation.
B. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be professionally
competent and capable of planning, effecting coordination among
various departments and generally controlling coordinated operations
by emergency preparedness forces.
C. The employees, equipment and facilities of all Township departments,
boards, institutions and commissions will be at the disposal of the
Emergency Management Agency and will participate as directed by the
Coordinator with the approval of the Township Board of Supervisors;
provided, however, that duties assigned to the various departments
shall be the same as or similar to the normal activities of said
department.
A. To prepare a comprehensive basic plan for emergency management and
keep the basic plan current to provide for the fullest protection of the
Township and its inhabitants in case of disaster or declared emergency.
B. To recommend to the Township Board of Supervisors or its designated
alternate all necessary rules and regulations for the implementation of
the basic plan and all other rules and regulations necessary for the
protection of the Township and its inhabitants in case of disaster or
declared emergency.
C. To provide individual and organizational training programs to ensure
prompt, efficient and effective disaster emergency services.
D. To organize, prepare and coordinate all locally available manpower,
materials, supplies, equipment, facilities and services necessary for
disaster emergency readiness, response and recovery.
E. To adopt and implement precautionary measures to mitigate the
anticipated effects of disaster.
F. To have available for inspection at its emergency operations center all
emergency management plans, rules and orders, if any, of the Agency.
§ 5-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 5-4
1:12
§ 5-5. Powers and duties of Coordinator.
Subject to the direction and control of the Township Board of Supervisors,
the Emergency Management Coordinator shall have the following powers
and duties:
§ 5-6. Purchases.
No purchase or purchases shall be made, no contract entered into and no
expenses incurred by the Emergency Management Agency which involve
the payment of more than $25 per occurrence without prior consent of the
Township Manager or the Board of Supervisors.
§ 5-7. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority
contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of
the Emergency Management Agency as herein defined in the enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter or any regulations, plan or order issued
hereunder.
§ 5-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation
or order promulgated hereunder, upon conviction before a District Justice
within the district of which the Township of Towamencin is a part, shall be
fined not less than $300 plus costs of prosecution. In default of the payment
of any fine, such person shall be liable to imprisonment of not more than
90 days in the Montgomery County Prison. Whenever any violator shall be
notified by a representative of the Township or by service of summons or
prosecution or in any other way that such violation has been committed,
G. To provide prompt and accurate information regarding local disaster
emergencies to appropriate commonwealth and local officials and
agencies and the general public.
A. To oversee the formulation of the basic plan of emergency management
and to direct its implementation in time of disaster or declared
emergency.
B. To designate the lines of succession within the Emergency Management
Agency and be responsible for the proper performance of all necessary
duties and functions assigned to the various departments under the
basic plan.
C. To make recommendations for rulings, orders or ordinances on behalf
of the Emergency Management Agency to the Township Supervisors or
their designated alternate whenever requested to do so and whenever it
is deemed necessary or advisable.
D. To make reports to the Township Board of Supervisors as required.
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-8
1:13
each day that the violator shall continue in such violation shall constitute a
separate offense, punishable by fine or penalty.
Chapter 7
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
§ 7-1. Council created.
An Advisory Council to be known as the "Towamencin Township
Environmental Advisory Council" is hereby created and shall continue to
function until this chapter is revoked.
§ 7-2. Composition.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall be composed of seven residents
of Towamencin Township.
§ 7-3. Appointment of members.
Council members shall be appointed in accordance with the following
procedures:
§ 7-4. Compensation; reimbursement for expenses.
Council members shall receive no compensation for their services, but may
be reimbursed for the expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them
in the performance of their duties.
§ 7-5. Coordination with Board of Supervisors.
The Environmental Advisory Council is to be advisory to and shall
coordinate its activities with the Board of Supervisors, and such other local
government agencies as deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 7-6. Designation of Chairman.
The Board of Supervisors shall designate the Chairman of the Council.
A. All Council members shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Council members' terms of office shall expire on the first Monday in
January following the last year of their term of office.
C. Duly appointed Council members shall serve a term of three years,
except the initial appointment which shall be so staggered that the
terms of approximately 1/3 of the members shall expire each year.
D. Whenever possible, one member shall also be a member of the
Township Planning Commission.
§ 5-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 7-7
1:14
§ 7-7. Duties.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall undertake such environmental
tasks as requested by the Board of Supervisors of the Township for the
promotion and conservation of the natural and historic resources and for
the protection and improvements to the quality of the environment within
the Township.
§ 7-8. Records and reports; minutes of meetings.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Board of Supervisors which
shall be printed in the annual municipal report or otherwise made known
and available. Minutes of each meeting shall be forwarded to the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 7-9. Appropriation of funds.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township may, from time to time,
appropriate funds for the expenses incurred by the Council.
Chapter 11
INTERMUNICIPAL ASSISTANCE
§ 11-1. Authorization of agreement for police assistance.
The Board of Supervisors hereby authorizes and empowers the Township
to enter into and execute the Police Service Agreement, attached hereto
as Exhibit A,5 with the Borough of Lansdale, Hatfield Township and Upper
Gwynedd Township, in order to provide and receive police assistance and
cooperation when requested in accordance with the Police Service
Agreement.6
Chapter 17
MANAGER, TOWNSHIP
§ 17-1. Creation of office.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Board of
Supervisors, subject to the right to abolish said office at any time by
ordinance.
5. Editor's Note: Copies of Exhibit A are on file in the offices of the Township Manager and
the Chief of Police.
6. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 83-42 adopted December 15, 1983, adopted the chain of
command set forth in Exhibit A attached thereto for the purpose of requesting assistance
on behalf of the Township of Towamencin pursuant to the Police Service Agreement. The
Police Service Agreement was approved by the Board of Supervisors upon a motion
adopted on January 10, 1984.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-2
1:15
§ 17-2. Appointment and removal. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-08]
§ 17-3. Qualifications. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-08]
§ 17-4. Bond of Manager. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-08]
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Manager shall give a bond
to the Township with bonding company as surety, to be approved by the
Board of Supervisors, for the faithful performance of the duties of the office.
The Township shall pay the premium for said bond. The amount of the bond
shall equal the highest amount of Township funds estimated by the Board of
Supervisors to be available to the Manager at any time during the current
year.
§ 17-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-08]
A. The Manager may be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of
all the members of the Board of Supervisors. The Manager shall serve
at the pleasure of the Board and may be removed at any time by a
majority vote of the Board.
B. The Manager shall receive not less than 30 days' written notice of
termination unless termination is based upon cause, in which event
termination may be immediate.
C. The Manager's compensation shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the Second
Class Township Code.
A. The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and
administrative abilities with special reference to training and
experience in municipal management and to the duties of the office as
set forth in this chapter without regard to race, color, creed, sex or
political affiliation.
B. The Manager shall possess a Bachelor's Degree in Public
Administration, or related field approved by the Board, from an
accredited institution.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors as a whole for the
proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township. The
powers and duties of administration of all Township business shall be
vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by
statute upon other Township officers.
B. Subject to recall or revision by ordinance of the Board of Supervisors,
the powers and duties of the Township Manager shall include the
following:
§ 17-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 17-5
1:16
(1) The Manager shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of
all municipal departments and all Township employees.
(2) The Manager shall hire and, when necessary for the good of the
service, shall discipline, suspend or discharge any employee under
his supervision based upon merit system principles and the
evaluation and recommendation of the department head, provided
further that, with respect to other Township employees, the hiring
and firing thereof shall be subject to the terms, if any, set forth in
any personnel manual promulgated by the Supervisors. The
Manager shall report at each meeting of the Board of Supervisors
any action taken pursuant to the authority of this subsection.
(3) The Manager shall participate in all personnel actions affecting
department heads, shall periodically perform employee evaluations
and make recommendations to the Board regarding salaries of
personnel under the Manager's supervision.
(4) The Manager shall prepare and submit to the Board before the
close of each fiscal year a detailed, balanced budget for the next
fiscal year and an explanatory budget message when requested.
Such budget shall be submitted in sufficient time to allow for its
study and adoption within the time limitations of the Second Class
Township Code. In preparing the recommended budget, the
Township Manager shall obtain from the head of each department,
agency, board or office estimates of revenues and expenditures and
such other supporting data as is deemed necessary. The Township
Manager shall review such estimates and may revise same prior to
submission of the recommended budget to the Board.
(5) The Manager shall be responsible for the administration of the
budget after its adoption by the Board of Supervisors and shall
prepare monthly financial statements of all revenues and
expenditures with appropriate recommendations to the Board.
(6) The Manager shall, in conjunction with the preparation of the
yearly budget, develop long-range fiscal plans for the municipality,
such plans to be presented annually to the Board of Supervisors for
its review and adoption.
(7) The Manager shall submit to the Board, as soon as possible after
the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and
administrative activities of the Township for the preceding year.
(8) The Manager shall periodically prepare and submit to the Board of
Supervisors reports as to the conduct of Township affairs and such
other reports as requested by the Board.
(9) The Manager shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the
Board and supply facts pertinent thereto.
§ 17-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-5
1:17
(10) The Manager shall attend all regular and special meetings of the
Board of Supervisors, unless excused by the Board of Supervisors.
The Manager may participate in the general discussions of the
Board but shall not have the right to vote.
(11) The Manager may hold such other municipal offices or head one or
more of the municipal departments as the Board may from time to
time direct.
(12) The Manager shall conduct the general affairs of the Township,
including but not limited to purchasing, collections, administration
and enforcement of contracts, leases and franchises, in accordance
with applicable laws and ordinances and the directives and policies
of the Board of Supervisors.
(13) The Manager may employ, with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, experts or consultants to perform work and to provide
advice to the Township in connection with any of the functions of
the Township.
(14) The Manager shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of
law and shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of
same except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon
other Township officers by law.
(15) The Manager shall see that all money owed to the Township is
promptly paid and that proper proceedings are taken for the
security and collection of all Township claims.
(16) All questions and complaints regarding Township services, actions
and personnel shall be referred to the Township Manager. The
Manager shall investigate, evaluate, respond to and dispose of such
questions and complaints in accordance with Township policies and
regulations and shall report thereon to the Board of Supervisors.
(17) The Manager shall serve as the liaison between the Board of
Supervisors and the public and shall make all appropriate
Township information available to the public.
(18) The Manager shall research and investigate the administration and
governmental functions of other municipalities and other
governmental agencies in order to make recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors regarding appropriate ordinances affecting
the health, safety, welfare and administration of the Township.
(19) The Manager shall see to the publication of all notices, ordinances,
or other documents required by law to be published and to prepare
or cause to be prepared all reports which the Township or any of
the officials thereof are required by law to prepare.
(20) The Manager shall be responsible for maintaining in good order all
municipal records required by law to be kept by the Township.
§ 17-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 17-5
1:18
§ 17-6. Absence or disability of Manager.
Should the Manager become ill or disabled or otherwise need to be absent
from the Township, the Assistant Manager or other person designated by
the Board of Supervisors shall perform the duties of the Manager. The
Assistant Manager or other designated person shall not perform these
duties for a period in excess of two weeks without approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 17-7. Limitations.
Chapter 21
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES
(21) The Manager shall perform all lawful duties designated by the
Board of Supervisors.
A. It is the express intention of this chapter that individual members of the
Board of Supervisors shall not interfere with, dictate, influence or
attempt to interfere with, dictate or influence the day-to-day
administrative operations of the Township. However, nothing herein
shall prevent the Board from establishing a committee of its own
members to review the operations and legislative needs of the Township
departments or from assigning its members to liaison relationships with
boards, commissioners, and authorities. [Amended 12-17-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-08]
B. Limitations upon Manager.
(1) The Manager shall have no authority to fill any position or take any
action reserved to the Board of Supervisors by the Second Class
Township Code.
(2) The Manager shall not hire or fire any department head without
approval of the Board.
(3) Other than making recommendations and presenting alternatives
to the Board, the Manager shall refrain from any attempt to
influence decisions of a legislative or quasi-judicial nature,
including but not limited to zoning changes, consideration of
subdivision or development plans and purchase of open space or
park lands. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-08]
(4) The Manager shall refrain from actively engaging in federal, state,
county or municipal politics.
§ 17-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-7
1:19

ARTICLE I
Sewer Authority
[Adopted 5-4-1964 by Ord. No. 26]
§ 21-1. Declaration of intent.
The Board of Township Supervisors, being the municipal authorities of
the Township of Towamencin, hereby signifies its intention and desire to
organize, together with the Board of Township Commissioners of the
Township of Upper Gwynedd, an Authority under the provisions of the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.7
§ 21-2. Authorization to execute Articles of Incorporation; content.
The Chairman of the Board of Township Supervisors of this Township and
the Township Secretary are hereby authorized and directed to execute, on
behalf of this Township, Articles of Incorporation for said Authority stating,
among other things:
A. That the name of the Authority is "Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin
Municipal Authority."
B. That the said Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
C. That no other Authority has been organized under said Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended, or under the Act of June 28, 1935,
P.L. 463, and is in existence in or for the incorporating municipalities,
except Upper Gwynedd Township Authority organized pursuant to
certificate of incorporation dated May 6, 1953, and Towamencin
Township Municipal Authority organized pursuant to certificate of
incorporation dated June 21, 1955.
D. That the names of the incorporating municipalities are the "Township of
Upper Gwynedd" and the "Township of Towamencin," both in
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, and setting forth the names and
addresses of the municipal authorities of said municipalities.
E. That there shall be six members of the Board of the Authority, three
appointed by the Township of Upper Gwynedd and three appointed by
the Township of Towamencin, and that the names, addresses,
appointing Township and terms of office (which shall commence on the
date of appointment) of the first members of the Board of the Authority
are as follows:
7. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-2
1:21
§ 21-3. Township members of Board; terms.
The said John B. Taylor, H. Warren Dimming and Linwood A. Kulp, Jr., all of
whom are citizens and residents of this Township, are hereby appointed by
the Township of Towamencin for the terms of two years, four years and five
years, respectively, from January 1, 1965.
§ 21-4. Notice of adoption; filing of Articles.
The proper officers of this Township are hereby directed to publish in
accordance with the requirements of the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, as amended, notice of this article and of the day on which said Articles
of Incorporation will be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania; to file said Articles of Incorporation, together with the
necessary proofs of publication of said notice, with the Secretary of the
commonwealth; and to do all things necessary or appropriate to effect the
incorporation of Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Authority.
§ 21-5. Construction of sewage collection system.
Name Address
Appointing
Township
Term of Office
Expiring
Linwood A. Kulp,
Jr.
311 Erie Drive
Lansdale, Pa.
Towamencin 1 year from
January 1, 1965
Joseph C.
Clarkson
723 Green St.
Lansdale, Pa.
Upper Gwynedd 5 years from
January 1, 1965
H. Warren
Dimmig
962 Weikel Rd.
M.R. 2
Lansdale, Pa.
Towamencin 4 years from
January 1, 1965
Edward S. Maher Allentown Rd.
M.R. 2
Lansdale, Pa.
Upper Gwynedd 3 years from
January 1, 1965
John B. Taylor 1121 Nash Ave.
Lansdale, Pa.
Towamencin 2 years from
Janury 1, 1965
Warren E. Weston General Nash
Dr. R.D. 2
Lansdale, Pa.
Upper Gwynedd 1 year from
January 1, 1965
A. The first project to be undertaken by the Authority shall be:
(1) To construct a sewage collection system in the watershed of
Towamencin Creek lying in the Towamencin Service Area of the
Township of Upper Gwynedd as said area shall, from time to time,
§ 21-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 21-5
1:22
§ 21-6. Approval of sewer agreement.
The sewer agreement dated as of May 1, 1964, between the Township
of Upper Gwynedd and the Township of Towamencin, submitted to this
meeting and providing, among other things, for the formation of Upper
Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Authority, for the planning and
construction of sewage facilities by the Authority and for the allocation of
costs, rentals and service charges between the Townships, is hereby in all
respects approved and ordered filed with the minutes of this meeting, and
the proper officers of the Township are hereby authorized to execute and
deliver said sewer agreement in the form hereby approved.
be more specifically defined by resolution of the Board of Township
Commissioners of said Township, for lease to the Township of
Upper Gwynedd;
(2) To construct a sewage collection system in the Township of
Towamencin for lease to the Township of Towamencin;
(3) To acquire, upon request of the Township of Towamencin, existing
collection sewers and sewer systems from Towamencin Township
Municipal Authority for operation by the Authority or for lease to
the Township of Towamencin; and
(4) To construct, operate and maintain in the Township of Towamencin
trunk and outfall sewers and a sewage disposal plant for the
accommodation of the collection systems above mentioned.
B. The first project of the Authority shall be undertaken and conducted
under and subject to the terms of the sewer agreement dated as of May
1, 1964, hereinafter authorized, as from time to time amended.
§ 21-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-6
1:23

ARTICLE II
Water Authority
[Adopted 6-1-1964 by Ord. No. 27]
§ 21-7. Declaration of intent.
This Township hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority (the "Authority") jointly in a group consisting of the Boroughs of
Lansdale and Souderton and the Townships of Franconia, Hatfield, Lower
Salford, Towamencin and Worcester, under the provisions of the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.8
§ 21-8. Initial project.
The initial project to be undertaken by the Authority is: to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, interconnect, maintain, operate, own and lease, either
in the capacity of lessor or lessee, waterworks, sources of water supply,
water rights and allocations, water supply works and water distribution
systems in the above-mentioned municipalities or any of them, or anywhere
else, and for such municipalities or any of them and for such other territory
as it may be authorized to serve.
§ 21-9. Authorization to execute Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors are hereby
authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the Township of
Towamencin Articles of Incorporation for the Authority in substantially the
form presented to this meeting, which is hereby approved and is ordered to
be filed with this article.
§ 21-10. Notice of adoption.
The Township Secretary is hereby directed to cause a notice of the
substance of this article to be published (separately or jointly with respect
to similar ordinances adopted by other municipalities) once in the legal
periodical for Montgomery County and once in a newspaper published
8. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq. A preamble to this article contained the
following recital: WHEREAS, This Township has been a member of the North Penn Water
Study Committee (the 'Committee') formed in July 19693 by the Boroughs of Hatfield,
Lansdale, North Wales, Souderton and Telford and the Townships of Franconia, Hatfield,
Lower Gwynedd, Lower Salford, Montgomery, Towamencin, Upper Gwynedd and Worcester
(all together being referred to as the 'municipalities') all of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania; and "WHEREAS, the Committee after thorough study and after considering
certain engineering and other documents has presented its Preliminary Recommendation
to form a North Penn Water Authority dated October 29, 1963, as amended (the
'Committee Recommendation'), which has in turn been considered by the governing body
of this Township; and "WHEREAS, the Committee Recommendation proposes the
formation of a North Penn Water Authority (the 'Authority') to acquire the assets of the
water supply and distribution agencies in certain of the municipalities, to interconnect
and improve such facilities, to develop interim and long-range water sources, to extend
present distribution systems, to purchase and sell water to certain other municipalities,
agencies and water companies and to operate a retail water agency; "NOW, THEREFORE,
be it ordained and enacted by the Supervisors of the Township of Towamencin as follows:"
§ 21-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-10
1:25
and of general circulation in such county pursuant to the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.9
§ 21-11. Filing of Articles.
The President and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors are directed to
file said Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of
publication, with the Secretary of the commonwealth, and to do all other
acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the
Authority.
§ 21-12. Representation on Board.
Section 6 of the Authority's Articles of Incorporation shall provide that the
restrictive municipalities which are incorporating members of the Authority
shall each have one representative on the Board of the Authority.
§ 21-13. Appointment of representative.
The following-named person is hereby appointed as the first member of the
Board of the Authority to represent this Township, whose term of office shall
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from January
1 next succeeding the date of incorporation:
Name Address Term
John M. Waligora Lansdale, Pa., R.D. #1 1 year
§ 21-14. When effective.
This article shall become effective when ordinances substantially similar to
this (except, in the case of the boroughs, for the addition of a section with
respect to the transfer of existing water systems) have been enacted by
the Boroughs of Lansdale and Souderton and the Townships of Franconia,
Hatfield, Lower Salford and Worcester.
9. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 21-10 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 21-14
1:26
ARTICLE III
Infrastructure Authority
[Adopted 11-27-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
§ 21-15. Declaration of intent.
The governing body of the municipality has conducted a public hearing,
notice of which was advertised once in the Montgomery County Law
Reporter and once in The Reporter, a newspaper published and of general
circulation in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, as required by the Act
hereinafter defined, for the purpose of organizing an Authority under such
Act, and hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an Authority
under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,10 as
amended (the "Act"), to be known as "Towamencin Township Infrastructure
Authority" (the "Authority").
§ 21-16. Authorization to execute Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman and the Secretary of the governing body are hereby
authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the municipality Articles of
Incorporation for the Authority in substantially the form attached hereto as
Exhibit A and made a part hereof.11
§ 21-17. Notice of adoption.
The Chairman and the Secretary of the governing body are hereby
authorized and directed to cause a notice of the substance of this article to
be published once in the Montgomery County Law Reporter and once in The
Reporter, a newspaper published and of general circulation in Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, as required by the Act.
§ 21-18. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman and the Secretary of the governing body are hereby
authorized and directed to file said Articles of Incorporation, together with
the necessary proofs of publication of the notices referred to in §§ 21-15
and 21-17 above, with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
and to do all other acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the
incorporation of the Authority.
§ 21-19. Members of Board; terms.
The following named persons be and they hereby are appointed as the
first members of the Board of the Authority, whose terms of office shall
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from the first
Monday in the month of January next succeeding the date of incorporation:
10.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: The Infrastructure Authority Articles of Incorporation are included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 21-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-19
1:27
Name Address Term of Office
Lillian Smith 1100 Sumneytown Pike
Lansdale, PA 19446
1 year expiring
December 31, 1997
Phil Kopp 2226 Mulberry Court
Lansdale, PA 19446
2 years expiring
December 31, 1998
Ken Finger 1591 Meadow Glen Drive
Lansdale, PA 19446
3 years expiring
December 31, 1999
Lee Delp 840 Keeler Road
Lansdale, PA 19446
4 years expiring
December 31, 2000
Clair Clemens 675 Reinert Road
Hatfield, PA 19440
5 years expiring
December 21, 2001
§ 21-20. Projects and powers.
The Authority shall undertake only such project or projects as shall
hereafter be specified from time to time by resolution or ordinance of the
governing body. The Authority shall have all powers granted by the Act
which are necessary or desirable for purposes of carrying out such specified
projects.
§ 21-19 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 21-20
1:28
ARTICLE IV
Towamencin Authority
[Adopted 1-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
§ 21-21. Declaration of intent.
The governing body of the municipality has conducted a public hearing,
notice of which was advertised once in the Montgomery County Law
Reporter and once in The Reporter, a newspaper published and of general
circulation in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, as required by the Act
hereinafter defined, for the purpose of organizing an Authority under such
Act, and hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an Authority
under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as
amended (the "Act").12
§ 21-22. Authorization to execute Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman and the Secretary of the governing body are hereby
authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the municipality Articles of
Incorporation for the Authority in substantially the form attached hereto as
Exhibit A and made a part hereof.13
§ 21-23. Notice of adoption.
The Chairman and the Secretary of the governing body are hereby
authorized and directed to cause a notice of the substance of this article to
be published once in the Montgomery County Law Reporter and once in The
Reporter, a newspaper published and of general circulation in Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, as required by the Act.
§ 21-24. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman and the Secretary of the governing body are hereby
authorized and directed to file said Articles of Incorporation, together with
the necessary proofs of publication of the notices referred to in §§ 21-21
and 21-23 above, with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
and to do all other acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the
incorporation of the Authority.
§ 21-25. Members of Board; terms.
The following named persons be and they hereby are appointed as the
first members of the Board of the Authority, whose terms of office shall
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from the first
Monday in the month of January next succeeding the date of incorporation:
12.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: The Towamencin Authority Articles of Incorporation are included at the end
of this chapter.
§ 21-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-25
1:29
Name Address Term of Office
Theresa O'Hara 806 Swartley Rd.,
Lansdale
December 31, 1999
Joseph Ziegler 2018 Spring Valley Way,
Lansdale
December 31, 2000
Richard Law 913 Tennis Way,
Lansdale
December 31, 2001
Patricia Younce 2159 Pheasant Hill Way,
Lansdale
December 31, 2002
Edward Gillette 1509 Fairview Way,
Lansdale
December 31, 2003
§ 21-26. Projects and powers.
The Authority shall undertake only such project or projects as shall
hereafter be specified from time to time by resolution or ordinance of the
governing body. The Authority shall have all powers granted by the Act
which are necessary or desirable for purposes of carrying out such specified
projects.
§ 21-25 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 21-26
1:30
Chapter 27
PENSION FUNDS
§ 21-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-26
1:31

ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 2-27-2002 by Ord. No. 02-214]
§ 27-1. Plan adopted by reference; effect on previous provisions.
The previous ordinances or resolutions relating to the Police Pension Plan
of Towamencin Township with an effective date prior to the adoption date
of the amendment and restatement of the Plan are hereby repealed with
respect to benefits accruing on or after the amendment and restatement
effective date, and the attached amendment and restatement of the Plan15 is
enacted; and further, be it ordained and enacted by Towamencin Township
that the previous ordinances or resolutions relating to the Plan's Trust Fund
with an effective date prior to the adoption date of the amendment and
restatement of the Trust are hereby repealed and the attached amendment
and restatement of the Trust is enacted.
§ 27-2. Designation of chief administrative officer and trustee.
A. The Township Manager is hereby appointed as the chief administrative
officer of the Plan. The chief administrative officer, as the agent of the
employer, is authorized and directed to execute the attached
amendment and restatement of the Plan and the attached amendment
and restatement of the Trust.
B. The Pension Committee is hereby confirmed as the trustee of the Trust.
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Part 1, Policemen, of this chapter,
adopted 12-27-1983 by Ord. No. 83-11.
15.Editor’s Note: The Police Pension Plan is included as an attachment to this chapter in
Appendix A. Said plan was amended and restated 1-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01.
§ 27-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-2
1:33

ARTICLE II
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 2-27-2002 by Ord. No. 02-116]
§ 27-3. Plan adopted by reference; effect on previous provisions.
The previous ordinances or resolutions relating to the Nonuniformed
Employees Pension Plan of Towamencin Township with an effective date
prior to the adoption date of the amendment and restatement of the Plan
are hereby repealed with respect to benefits accruing on or after the
amendment and restatement effective date, and the attached amendment
and restatement of the Plan17 is enacted; and further, be it ordained and
enacted by Towamencin Township that the previous ordinances or
resolutions relating to the Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan of
Towamencin Township Fund with an effective date prior to the adoption
date of the amendment and restatement of the Trust are hereby repealed
and the attached amendment and restatement of the Trust is enacted.
§ 27-4. Designation of chief administrative officer and trustee.
A. The Township Manager is hereby appointed as the chief administrative
officer of the Plan. The chief administrative officer, as the agent of the
employer, is authorized and directed to execute the attached
amendment and restatement of the Plan and the attached amendment
and restatement of the Trust.
B. The Pension Committee is hereby confirmed as the trustee of the Trust.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Part 2, Nonuniformed Employees, of
this chapter, adopted 6-24-1987 by Ord. No. 87-10.
17.Editor’s Note: The Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan is included as an attachment to
this chapter in Appendix B. Said plan was amended and restated 1-28-2009 by Ord. No.
09-02.
§ 27-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-4
1:35

ARTICLE III
Nonuniformed Pension Committee
[Adopted 10-16-2002 by Ord. No. 02-7]
§ 27-5. Trustees for plan.
The members of the Nonuniformed Pension Committee, hereinafter
referred to as the "trustees," shall act as trustees for the plan. The
Committee shall consist of three persons: one Supervisor, one person
appointed by the Board of Supervisors, and one person selected by a
majority vote of the nonuniformed employees.
§ 27-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-5
1:37

ARTICLE IV
Nonuniformed Employees Money Purchase Pension Plan
[Adopted 7-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-10]
§ 27-6. Plan established.
§ 27-7. Effective date.
This article is made effective as of August 1, 2014.
A. Towamencin Township (the "employer") hereby establishes a money
purchase retirement plan (the "plan") in the form of the ICMA
Retirement Corporation Governmental Money Purchase Plan and Trust,
pursuant to the specific provisions of the adoption agreement (executed
copy attached hereto).18
B. The plan shall be maintained for the exclusive benefits of eligible
nonuniformed employees and their beneficiaries.
C. The employer hereby executes the Declaration of Trust, Vantage Trust,
intending this execution to be operative with respect to any retirement
or deferred compensation plan subsequently established by the
employer, if the assets of the plan are to be invested in the Vantage
Trust.
D. The employer hereby agrees to serve as trustee under the plan and to
invest funds held under the Vantage Trust.
E. The Township Manager shall be the coordinator for the plan; shall
receive reports, notices, etc., from the ICMA Retirement Corporation or
the Vantage Trust; shall cast, on behalf of the employer, any required
votes under the Vantage Trust; and may delegate any administrative
duties relating to the plan to appropriate departments; and
F. The employer hereby authorizes the Township Manager to execute all
necessary agreements with the ICMA Retirement Corporation
incidental to the administration of the plan.
18.Editor's Note: The adoption agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-7
1:39
Chapter 31
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
§ 31-1. Declaration of intent and scope.
The intent, purpose and scope of this chapter is to protect and promote
safety, health and morals; to accomplish a coordinated development of the
Township; to provide for the general welfare by guiding and protecting
amenity, convenience, future governmental, economic, practical, social and
cultural facilities, development and growth, as well as the improvement of
governmental processes and functions; to guide uses of land and structures,
type and location of streets, public grounds and other facilities; and to
permit the Township to minimize such problems as may presently exist or
which may be foreseen. It is the further intent of this chapter that any
recommendations made by the herein-created Planning Commission to the
Board of Supervisors shall be advisory only.
§ 31-2. Commission created; membership. [Amended 1-10-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-1]
A Planning Commission is hereby created, which shall have nine members.
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but may
be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses. However, elected
or appointed officers or employees of the Township shall not, by reason of
membership thereon, forfeit the right to exercise the powers, perform the
duties or receive the compensation of the municipal offices held by them
during such membership.
§ 31-3. Appointment, term and vacancy. [Amended 1-10-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-1]
All members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Towamencin. The term of each of the
members of this Commission shall be for four years or until his successor
is appointed and qualified, except that the terms of the members first
appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be so fixed that not more than
three shall be reappointed or replaced during any future calendar year. The
Chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly notify the appointing
authority of the municipality concerning vacancies in the Commission, and
such vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
§ 27-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 31-4
1:40
§ 31-4. Residency and employment status. [Amended 1-10-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-1]
All of the members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of
Towamencin Township. On the Planning Commission appointed pursuant to
this chapter, at least six of the members, designated as citizen members,
shall not be officers or employees of the Township.
§ 31-5. Removal of members.
Any member of a Planning Commission, once qualified and appointed, may
be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in
office, and failure to attend three consecutive meetings and/or failure to
attend a minimum of 50% of the regularly designated meetings held in
a calendar year may be considered nonfeasance and cause for removal.
Any member may be removed for other just cause, by a majority vote of
the Board of Supervisors which appointed the member, taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent take such a vote.
A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it in writing. Any appointment to fill a vacancy created by removal
shall be only for the unexpired term.
§ 31-6. Conduct of business.
The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice-Chairman and create
and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual
terms and may succeed themselves. The Commission may make and alter
bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures, consistent with
the ordinances of the Township and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The Commission shall keep a full record of its business and
shall annually make a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities
to the governing body. Interim reports may be made as often as may be
necessary or as requested by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Quorum. Five members attending a meeting shall constitute a quorum
for purposes of conducting business. [Amended 1-10-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-1]
B. Special meetings. The Chairman may call special meetings by written
notice mailed to the members of the Commission 72 hours prior to the
meeting.
C. Subcommittees. The Chairman may appoint subcommittees to carry out
the business of the Commission, and he shall be a member of each
committee, with at least two additional members constituting each
committee. The Chairman may appoint as standing committees:
(1) A committee to develop and recommend a comprehensive plan and
amendments thereto.
§ 31-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-6
1:41
§ 31-7. Powers and duties.
(2) A committee to study and recommend amendments to the Zoning
Code, subdivision ordinances and other related land use
ordinances.19
(3) A committee to review and recommend land development and land
use plans, including common open space.
A. The Planning Commission shall, at the request of the Board of
Supervisors, have the power and shall be required to:
(1) Prepare the comprehensive plan for the development of the
Township, as set forth in this chapter, and present it for the
consideration of the governing body.
(2) Review all land use subdivision and make recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors for a rejection or acceptance of plans and
suggest conditions to be imposed, all in compliance with applicable
Township ordinances and laws.
(3) Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files
of the Planning Commission shall be in the possession of the
Township.
B. The Planning Commission, only at the request of the Board of
Supervisors, may:
(1) Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning the
adoption or amendment of an official map.
(2) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors of the Township a
zoning ordinance and make recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors on proposed amendments to it, as set forth in this
chapter.
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development, planned residential development regulations, as set
forth in this chapter.
(4) Do such other act or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by this chapter.
(5) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors an environmental
study.
(6) Submit to the appointing authority of a municipality a
recommended capital improvements program.
(7) Promote public interest in and understanding of the comprehensive
plan and planning.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch 153, Zoning; Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development; Ch. 87,
Grading and Excavating; and Ch. 100, Mobile Home Parks.
§ 31-6 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 31-7
1:42
§ 31-8. Administrative and technical assistance.
The appointing authority may employ administrative and technical services
to aid in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, either as consultants
on particular matters or as regular employees of the Township. A county
planning agency, with the consent of its governing body, may perform
planning services for the Township if the Board of Supervisors requests
such assistance and may enter into agreements or contracts for such work.
§ 31-9. Assistance from other governmental units.
The Planning Commission may, with the consent of the Board of
Supervisors, accept and utilize any funds, personnel or other assistance
made available by the county, the commonwealth or the federal
government, or any of their agencies, or from private sources. The Board
of Supervisors may enter into agreements or contracts regarding the
acceptance or utilization of the funds or assistance, in accordance with the
governmental procedures of the Township of Towamencin.
Chapter 35
TAX COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 143.
(8) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
(9) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(10) Require from other departments and agencies of the Township
such available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Commission.
(11) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and land surveys with the consent of the owner.
C. In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or
recommendation of the Planning Commission which involves
engineering consideration shall be subject to review and comments of
the Engineer, which shall be incorporated and separately set forth in
any report, written act or recommendation of the Planning Commission.
§ 31-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-9
1:43

ARTICLE I
Duties and Fees
[Adopted 4-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-3; amended in its entirety
2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-1]
§ 35-1. Additional duties of Tax Collector.
The duties of the Tax Collector for Towamencin Township shall henceforth
be deemed to include the providing of real estate tax certifications, when
requested, in order to facilitate real estate settlements of land parcels
within the Township.
§ 35-2. Certification fees. [Amended 9-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-04]
A. The Tax Collector is hereby empowered to charge a fee of $25 per
certification.
B. A minimum of five working days is requested for processing.
§ 35-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-2
1:45

ARTICLE II
Compensation
[Adopted 1-29-1997 by Ord. No. 97-01; amended 12-17-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-10]
§ 35-3. Legislative intent.
§ 35-4. Salary.
Beginning upon the commencement of the term of any appointed or elected
Tax Collector following the date of this article the salary for the Township
Tax Collector for the collection of real estate and per capita taxes shall be
$2,600 per annum.
A. It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township to
fix the salary to be paid to the Tax Collector for the performance of
duties in the collection of all Township real estate and per capita taxes
for any tax collector to be appointed or elected following the effective
date of this article and until an amendment is made to this article.
B. The Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township finds that it is in the
best interests of the Township to have the Tax Collector deputized by
the Township for the collection of both Township and County taxes. The
deputizing of the Township for such purposes will allow for greater
efficiency in the collection of taxes resulting in a financial benefit to the
Township. Towamencin Township requests that the Tax Collector with
the approval of his or her surety and the approval of Montgomery
County deputize the Township, in writing, which shall enable the
Township to continue to receive and collect any and all of the Township
and County taxes in a manner and with like authority as the Tax
Collector.
§ 35-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-4
1:47
Chapter 38
WORKERS COMPENSATION
§ 38-1. Authorization to execute trust agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township is hereby authorized to
execute the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement for
the participation of Towamencin Township in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust, which Agreement is attached hereto as Exhibit A and
is on file for inspection and review at the Towamencin Township Municipal
Building, 1675 Sumneytown Pike, Kulpsville, Pennsylvania. This Agreement
may be amended after the enactment of this chapter to conform to any
requirements imposed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and any of
its agencies, including the Department of Labor and Industry Bureau of
Workers' Compensation.
§ 38-2. Purpose of participation.
The participation of Towamencin Township in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust is authorized for the purpose of enabling Towamencin
Township to reduce the cost of workers' compensation claims through the
creation of a group self-insurance fund.
§ 38-3. Payment of benefits.
Towamencin Township delegates to the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust the authority to pay workers' compensation benefits on
its behalf in accordance with the Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation Act
and the Pennsylvania Occupational Disease Act.20
§ 38-4. Issuance of permit.
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
Bureau of Workers' Compensation has approved the issuance of a permit
to the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust to operate as a group
self-insurance fund subject to certain conditions.
§ 38-5. Responsibility of Trust.
As an approved self-insurance fund, the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust will be responsible for the payment of workers'
compensation claims on behalf of all the Trust participants.
§ 38-6. Conditions of participation.
As set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust
Agreement, the following conditions, among others, apply to the
20.Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq. and 77 P.S. § 1201 et seq., respectively.
§ 35-4 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 38-6
1:48
participation of Towamencin Township in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust:
§ 38-7. Term of participation.
Towamencin Township agrees to participate in the Trust for a minimum
period of two years subject to the terms and conditions of the Delaware
Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement. After the expiration of
that minimum two-year period, each participant may withdraw under the
A. The Trust shall consist of at least five homogeneous municipal
participants organized as local government agencies under
Pennsylvania law.
B. Each participant satisfies all eligibility and admission requirements for
membership in the Trust.
C. Each participant pledges and agrees to appropriate funds to pay all its
annual contributions and assessments which are required for the
creation of a fund maintained at a level sufficient to pay all workers'
compensation claims and related expenses incurred by the Trust
participants.
D. Each participant agrees to jointly and severally assume and discharge
the workers' compensation liabilities of each and every other
participant in accordance with the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement when required to do so by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry Bureau of Workers'
Compensation.
E. Each participant will institute any and all loss prevention measures of
risk management procedures as may be required for the purpose of
minimizing or eliminating work place risks to its employees.
F. Each participant cooperates fully with the Trust's service and fiscal
agents, attorneys, claims adjusters and any other agents or employees
of the Trust with respect to the investigation, defense and settlement of
the claims.
G. Each participant designates a person to be responsible for all contacts
with the Trust.
H. Each participant provides any information to the Administrator or
Board of Trustees as may be required to effect the purposes and
objectives of the Trust.
I. Each participant complies with all applicable statutes and regulations
governing the payment of workers' compensation claims, including but
not limited to the Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation Act21 and any
regulations promulgated thereunder.
21.Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
§ 38-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-7
1:49
following conditions, subject to the right of arbitration as provided in the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Agreement:
§ 38-8. Effective date of participation.
Participation of Towamencin Township in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust will be effective upon final approval of the Trust permit
application by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry Bureau
of Workers' Compensation or upon any other date determined by the
Department.
§ 38-9. Contributions and assessments.
All contributions and assessments paid by Towamencin Township shall be
made with funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors of Towamencin
Township for that purpose.
§ 38-10. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees, an Administrator, claims administration/loss control consultant(s)
and various service agents appointed by the Board of Trustees in
accordance with the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust
Agreement and any bylaws adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 38-11. Provisions of funds.
As set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust
Agreement, the funds required for the creation and operation of the Trust
A. An opinion is rendered by the Trust certified actuary that withdrawal
will not result in the number of participants falling below the minimum
required to assure the fiscal and actuarial soundness of the Trust itself.
B. The withdrawing participant is not then in default of its obligation to
pay premiums, contributions or assessments.
C. The withdrawing participant shall pay the full amount of a termination
contribution or any additional assessments as determined by the Board
of Trustees in accordance with the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement and Bylaws.
D. The Board of Trustees shall have received a certification from the Trust
actuary that the withdrawal of the participant will not impair the
actuarial soundness of the Trust and, if any municipal debt has been
incurred by the participants to finance any portion of the Trust
reserves, an opinion is obtained from bond counsel that such
withdrawal will not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of any
interest paid and any debt incurred by the participants or any legal
entity created for the purpose of incurring such debt. As used herein,
the term "debt" shall include any municipal bonds, certificates, letters
of credit or other instruments of municipal indebtedness.
§ 38-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 38-11
1:50
shall be provided by the participating municipalities through annual
appropriations.
§ 38-12. Contracts.
The Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust is empowered to enter
into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits,
including social security, for any of its employees.
§ 38-13. Responsibilities of Township.
As a condition of participating in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust, Towamencin Township agrees to:
§ 38-14. Statutory authority.
This chapter is being enacted pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law.22
A. Pay all annual contributions or assessments as may be required by the
Board of Trustees.
B. Appoint a representative to sit on the Board of Trustees and designate a
contact person for the purpose of communicating with the Trust or its
representatives.
C. Not withdraw from the Trust for a period of two years following its
admission to the Trust, subject to the terms and conditions of the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement.
D. Withdraw from the Trust only upon satisfaction of the conditions set
forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement.
E. Perform all covenants contained in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement and delegate to the Board of Trustees
the powers and authorities enumerated in that Agreement.
F. Comply with all the conditions set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement governing the handling and payment of
claims, including the defense and settlement thereof.
G. Appropriate the funds needed to pay all its contributions and
assessments as may be required by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement.
H. Cooperate with the Trust, its agents or employees and provide the Trust
with all information it needs for the operation of the Trust, including
any underwriting or claims data which may be requested by the Board
of Trustees or their designee.
22.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 2301 et seq.
§ 38-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-14
1:51
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 44
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 76.
§ 38-14 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 38-14
1:52
ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 7-15-1980 by Ord. No. 80-4]
§ 44-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Towamencin Township
False Alarm and Police and Fire Notification Control Ordinance."
§ 44-2. Policy.
Whereas the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Towamencin has
determined that the receipt of false alarms and false notifications to the
Police Department or Volunteer Fire Company that emergencies exist or
situations exist wherein police or fire assistance or investigation is required
is detrimental to the welfare and safety of the citizens of Towamencin
Township and the members of the Police Department and the Volunteer Fire
Company, and that the receipt of said false alarms and notifications by the
Police Department and/or the Fire Company detracts from the efficiency of
said Department and Company in discharging their responsibilities to the
citizens of Towamencin Township, it is hereby declared to be the policy to
safeguard and protect the citizens of Towamencin Township, the members
of the Police Department and the members of the Volunteer Fire Company,
present and future, from such hazards or risks.
§ 44-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
article, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
ALARMS — Any mechanical or electronic signals reporting by means
of telephone cables or other means of transmission, which signals are
monitored by or transmitted to the Police Department of Towamencin
Township or the Volunteer Fire Company at its communications center,
or audible alarm which is heard and/or called in by another, and which
signals, upon receipt or upon activation, indicate to the Department
or Company that an emergency exists at the sounding location. Said
alarms shall include those types installed to indicate robberies,
burglaries and fires at the sounding location.
FALSE NOTIFICATION — Any report or request for police and/or fire
service or assistance directed to the Police Department and/or Fire
Company by any means of any communication wherein the situation,
condition, incident or emergency as the subject of the report or request
for police and/or fire service or assistance did not or does not exist.
FIRE COMPANY — The Towamencin Volunteer Fire Company or any
other volunteer fire company and/or ambulance corps which may
operate in Towamencin Township in the future.
FIRE MARSHAL — The Fire Marshal of Towamencin Township.
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-3
1:53
§ 44-4. Enforcement.
The Police Department shall have the power and the duty to enforce the
provisions of this article. Enforcement shall be through the issuance of a
summary citation under the jurisdiction of the local District Court.
§ 44-5. False alarms prohibited.
After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person or
persons, as above defined, including but not limited to an owner or lessee
of any building in which a fire, holdup or burglar alarm has been installed:
§ 44-6. Exceptions.
Unavoidable false alarms received by the Police Department or Fire
Company are not subject to the provisions of this article. "Unavoidable
alarms" are defined herein as those acts not coming under human,
mechanical or electronic control, such as rain, lightning or windstorms, or
cutoff of the electric company power supply to any person.
§ 44-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-26-1992 by Ord. No.
92-5]
Any person, as above defined, including but not limited to the owner and/
or lessee of any building in which a fire, holdup or burglar alarm has been
installed, violating any of the provisions of this article shall, after the first
offense in any given calendar year, be mailed written notice of said violation.
Upon subsequent violations and upon conviction thereof by any District
Justice, such person shall be subject to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $300, together with the costs of prosecution. Each instance of
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, company, firm,
trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Towamencin Township Police
Department or any other police department which responds at the
request of the Towamencin Township Police Department.
B. Word usage. The singular of any word used in this article shall be
deemed to include the plural.
A. To cause, suffer, allow or permit the accidental or purposeful
transmission of a false alarm signal from any public or private place in
the Township of Towamencin to the Police Department of or Fire
Company in the Township of Towamencin.
B. To cause, suffer, allow or permit to be made any report or request for
police or fire service or assistance by any means of communication
wherein the situation, condition, incident or emergency as the subject
of the report or request for police or fire service or assistance did not
and does not exist.
§ 44-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 44-7
1:54
violation shall constitute a separate offense. In default of the payment of
any fine, the defendant may be sent to the Montgomery County Prison for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 44-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-7
1:55

ARTICLE II
Automatic Protection Devices
[Adopted 10-13-1981 by Ord. No. 81-4]
§ 44-8. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Towamencin Township
Emergency Police and Fire Alarm Ordinance."
§ 44-9. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article:
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER — Any person, firm or corporation who
sells or leases or installs automatic protection devices.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees in
attendance at all times receive prerecorded voice messages from automatic
protection devices reporting an emergency at a stated location and have the
duty to relay immediately by live voice any such emergency message over a
designated or direct trunk line to the communications center of the Police
Department or Fire Company.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible outside
the building and designated to attract attention when activated by criminal
act or other emergency requiring police to respond.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — An electrically-operated instrument
composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which automatically
transmits a prerecorded voice alarm over regular telephone line, by direct
or indirect connection to the Police Department or Fire Company, upon
receipt of a stimulus from a sensory apparatus that has detected a physical
force or condition inherently characteristic of a fire or intrusion.
CENTRAL STATION PROTECTIVE SYSTEM — A protective system or group
of such systems operated privately for customers by a person, firm or
corporation which maintains supervisors and accepts recorded messages
from automatic protection devices at a central station having trained
operators and guards in attendance at all times that have the duty to
take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message, including
the relaying of messages by designated or direct trunk line to the
communications center of the Police Department or Fire Company.
CHIEF OF FIRE COMPANY — The Chief of the Towamencin Volunteer Fire
Company.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Towamencin Township
Police Department.
DESIGNATED TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the
communications center of the Police Department or Fire Company that is
for the primary purpose of handling emergency messages which originate
§ 44-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-9
1:57
from automatic protection devices and are transmitted directly or indirectly
through an intermediary.
DIRECT TRUNK LINE — A nonlisted, directly connected telephone line
leading from an intermediary to the communications center of the Police
Department or Fire Company that is for the primary purpose of handling
emergency messages on a person-to-person basis.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection device,
any audible alarm or any kind of direct or indirect signal given the police or
fire communications center to which police or fire personnel respond and
which is not the result of a burglary, robbery, fire or similar emergency.
FIRE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The fire communications room and
other rooms which house auxiliary communications equipment.
FIRE COMPANY — The Fire Company located within the Township of
Towamencin.
INTERMEDIARY — A central station protective system or an answering
service as herein defined.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message
either directly or indirectly by an automatic protection device.
PERMIT — Written permission duly granted to an applicant by the Township
of Towamencin upon payment of the required fee.
POLICE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The police communications room
or other rooms which house auxiliary communications equipment.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Towamencin Township Police Department.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the communications
center of the Police or Fire Department that is for the purpose of handling
emergency calls on a person-to-person basis and which line is identified by
a specific listing among the white pages in the telephone directory.
SECONDARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the
communications center of the Police or Fire Department that is for the
purpose of handling administrative and other calls on a person-to-person
basis and which line is identified by a specific listing among the white pages
of the telephone directory issued by the Bell Telephone Company.
SECRETARY — The designated Secretary of the Township of Towamencin.
§ 44-10. Timing mechanisms required; exceptions.
Except as provided in Subsections A and B of this section, after the
enactment of the article, users must equip audible alarms with timing
mechanisms that will disengage the audible alarm after a maximum period
of 15 minutes. Audible alarms without such timing mechanisms shall be
unlawful in the Township of Towamencin and must be disconnected by the
user within 60 days from the effective date of this article. The following shall
be excepted from the provisions of this section:
§ 44-9 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 44-10
1:58
§ 44-11. Direct keying.
§ 44-12. Registration of installations.
A. Audible fire alarm signals provided for the evacuation of occupants of
industries, institutions and other similar premises.
B. Audible signals provided to indicate water flow in an automatic fire
sprinkler system.
A. No automatic protection device installed after the effective date of this
article shall be keyed to a primary or secondary trunk line.
B. After the effective date of this article, all automatic protection devices
that transmit recorded messages directly to the Police Department or
Fire Company shall be keyed to the designated trunk line.
C. Within 60 days from the effective date of this article, existing automatic
protection devices in the Township shall be disconnected from primary
and secondary trunk lines.
D. Automatic protection devices disconnected as provided in Subsection C
above may be keyed to the designated trunk line with the approval of
the Towamencin Township Police Department.
A. Within 90 days from the effective date of this article, every person,
corporation, institution or company who has keyed an automatic
protection device in the Township of Towamencin to the designated
trunk line shall furnish to the Chief of Police a registration of such
installation which shall include the following information:
(1) The name, residence and telephone number of the user.
(2) The address where the device is installed and the telephone
number of that address.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of a central station
protective system or any other person or firm who is authorized to
respond to an emergency and gain access to the address where the
device is installed.
(4) The name and telephone number of the alarm equipment supplier
and of any person other than the alarm equipment supplier who is
responsible for the maintenance and repair of the automatic
protective device.
B. All information furnished pursuant to this section shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the use of the Police Department and the
Fire Company only.
§ 44-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-13
1:59
§ 44-13. Operational requirements.
Automatic protection devices installed in the Township that are keyed to
designated trunk lines shall meet the following requirements:
§ 44-14. Technical information.
Each supplier of alarm equipment who sells or leases an automatic
protection device in the Township of Towamencin after the effective date of
this article which is keyed to a designated trunk line shall furnish operating
instructions, a circuit diagram and maintenance manual to the user.
§ 44-15. Repair service.
§ 44-16. Disconnection of devices.
When messages evidencing failure to comply with the operational
requirements set forth in § 44-13 are received by the Police Department
or Fire Company and the Chief of that particular Department or Company
A. The type and content of recorded messages must be intelligible and in a
format approved prior to installation by the Chief of Police.
B. No more than one call shall be made over a designated trunk line to the
Police Department or Fire Company as a result of a single activation of
the automatic protection device.
C. The time for transmitting each recorded message shall not exceed 15
seconds.
D. Recorded messages may be repeated during one call but the interval
between each recorded message shall be no less than eight nor more
than 12 seconds.
E. The sensory mechanism used in connection with an automatic
protection device must be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire
or intrusion so that the device will not be actuated by impulses due to
fleeting pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, the
rattling or vibrating of doors and windows, vibrations to the premises
caused by the passing of vehicles or any other force not related to
genuine alarms.
F. All components comprising such a device must be maintained by the
user in good repair to assure maximum reliability of operation.
A. Each user of alarm equipment in the Township which is keyed to a
designated trunk line shall arrange for repair service to be available
directly or through an agent on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis to
repair any malfunctions that may occur to the device.
B. The alarm user shall be responsible for having the device disconnected
or repaired as quickly as possible after notice that the automatic
protection device is not functioning properly.
§ 44-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 44-16
1:60
concludes that the automatic protection device sending such messages
should be disconnected in order to relieve the particular Department or
Company of the burden of responding to false alarms, he is authorized
to demand that the user of the device or his representative disconnect
the device until it is made to comply with the operational requirements.
If disconnection of the defective device is not accomplished promptly and
the Chief of the Department or Company concerned determines that the
malfunctioning device is repeatedly sending false alarms without any
intermittent valid alarms, he may then take any steps necessary to
disconnect the defective automatic protection device; any expenses so
incurred by the Township shall be promptly reimbursed by the owner or
lessee of the defective device.
§ 44-17. Testing.
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an automatic
protection device without first obtaining permission from the Police
Department where the equipment is keyed through an intermediary. No
such permission is necessary unless the alarm or signal is to be relayed to
the Police Department or the Fire Company of the Township of Towamencin.
§ 44-18. Fees.
Users shall pay such connection and annual fees as the Township shall set
by resolution from time to time. The Township may set permit fees and
adopt regulations to implement this article from time to time.23
§ 44-19. Authority to inspect devices.
For the purpose of enforcing this article, it shall be a condition to installing
and maintaining an automatic protection device that the Building Inspector
or the Chief of the Police Department or Fire Company may enter upon a
user's premises within the Township of Towamencin at such reasonable time
and upon reasonable notice to inspect the installation or operation of an
automatic protection device; each user shall cooperate with such officials in
every reasonable manner to permit such inspections.
§ 44-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1988 by Ord. No.
88-15]
A. Failure of any person to comply with the requirements of written notice
of a violation of any provision hereof within three days of receipt of such
notice, exclusive of Saturdays and Sundays and holidays, shall
constitute an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $300, together with costs of prosecution, to be collectible before
any District Justice as like fines and costs are now collectible by law.
23.Editor's Note: By Resolution 81.9 adopted October 13, 1981, fees for users of automatic
protection devices were established as follows: (1) Twenty dollars annually when the
automatic protection device is connected to a designated trunk line. (2) Ten dollars
annually when the automatic protection device is connected to an answering service or
central station protective system.
§ 44-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-20
1:61
Such notice shall continue in force and effect until full compliance
with the requirements stated therein, and each and every failure to
comply with such notice within 24 hours after the three days allowed
for compliance shall constitute a separate offense. In default of the
payment of a fine and costs, the defendant shall be punishable by
imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for not more than 30
days.
B. Any person found guilty of misuse, continual accidental activation or
false activation of an automatic protection device shall be liable for a
fine of not less than $25 and not more than $300, plus the cost of
prosecution for each activation, to be collectible before any District
Justice as like fines and costs are now collectible by law. In default of
the payment of a fine and costs, the defendant shall be punishable by
imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for not more than 30
days.
§ 44-20 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 44-20
1:62
Chapter 46
BLASTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading and excavating - See Ch. 87. Subdivision and land development - See Ch.
136.
§ 46-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, all blasting material, components, and operations
shall be as defined by the International Fire Code as adopted by
Towamencin Township, Chapter 211 of The Pennsylvania Code, 25 Pa Code
§ 211.1 et seq., and all other applicable federal, state, and local regulations.
§ 46-2. Permit requirements.
A. Required. No person or organization shall perform blasting within the
Township without first obtaining a permit from the Township.
B. Permit applications shall be made to the Code Enforcement Department
and shall include all requirements as set forth in this chapter and
applicable provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted. All
permit applications will be reviewed by the Fire Marshal and Code
Enforcement Officer for compliance with all regulations. The permit
application shall be rejected if it fails to provide all documentation.
Permit applications shall contain the following information:
(1) Detailed plans and specifications shall be submitted of the blasting
area and all blasting procedures to be utilized. The plans shall also
show all natural and man-made features, buildings, roads, utilities
and property owners within 1,000 feet of the blasting area property
line. This shall include all areas outside of the Towamencin
Township boundaries.
(2) The following permits must be submitted by the contractor and all
individuals involved with the blasting:
(a) PA blasting license.
(b) PA-DEP explosives purchase permit.
(c) PA-DEP magazine storage license.
(d) PA-DEP blasting activity permit.
(e) U.S. Department of Transportation hazardous materials
certification of registration.
§ 44-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:63
§ 46-3. Appeals.
An appeal of a denial by the Office of the Fire Marshal or Code Enforcement
Department for a blasting permit shall be taken to the Board of Supervisors.
A request for appeal shall be in writing to the Township Manager and shall
be heard before the Board of Supervisors during a public meeting.
§ 46-4. Notification to public and inspections of adjacent property.
(3) A notification list of all property owners and public utility
companies within 1,000 feet of the blasting area property line as
specified by § 46-4 of this chapter, including all property owners
outside the boundaries of Towamencin Township.
(4) A certificate of insurance, naming Towamencin Township as an
additional insured party, shall be submitted, to compensate for
damage to all public and private property. The insurance certificate
shall not be less than $2,000,000. An insurance certificate shall
also be submitted for an amount not less than $2,000,000 to cover
bodily injury damage. The Township Fire Marshal or Code Officer
may request an increase with the amount of insurance it is deemed
necessary to adequately protect the safety and property of all
persons and property.
(5) The permit application shall also include a list of all contact
personnel. The individuals must be available on a twenty-four-hour
basis.
(6) A report prepared by a professional geologist or engineer licensed
to practice in the State of Pennsylvania must be submitted,
containing specific recommendations for blasting and certifying
that the blast plan will not produce a peak particle velocity greater
than allowed by federal, state or local regulations. The report shall
also include the effects the blasting operation will have on adjacent
structures or utilities within 500 feet and the details of the fieldmonitoring
system to be used during the blasting. If the report
should show potential damage to existing structures or
improvements, the Township may deny the permit request.
(7) A permit fee for the blasting permit must be paid at time of
application as set forth in the Towamencin Township fee schedule,
as adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
A. All property owners and public utility companies within 1,000 feet of all
sides of the blasting area property line must be notified a minimum of
two weeks prior to the start of blasting operations. All property owners
within 500 feet of all sides of the blasting area must also be notified of
an offer to inspect the property and all structures free of charge. The
owners must be given ample time to review the results and contest the
findings. The results of each survey and owners' response must be
submitted with the permit application.
§ 46-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 46-4
1:64
§ 46-5. General rules and regulations.
§ 46-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 and the costs
of prosecution, through the issuance of a summary citation. In default of
the payment of any fine or penalty imposed by any District Justice under
the provisions of this chapter, the person, persons, firm or corporation so
violating may be committed to the Montgomery County Prison for a period
to be determined by the District Justice, not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 49
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 104. Property maintenance — See Ch. 117.
B. All notifications must at a minimum include the area of blasting, day
and times of the blast, and overall anticipated duration.
C. The pre-blast survey shall make accommodations for the pre and post
testing of all private water supplies if requested by the individual
property owner.
D. The provisions of this section shall in no way supercede any other state
or federal requirements concerning public notification or pre-blast
inspections.
A. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, applicants must adhere
to all other applicable federal, state or local regulations.
B. The blasting shall be limited to between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays.
No blasting is permitted on Sundays or holidays.
C. The blasting operation may not interfere or impede normal school bus
routes or pickup or dropoff areas. The contractor shall be responsible to
maintain safe traffic control during the blasting.
D. Overnight storage of explosives on the construction site is prohibited.
E. Proper notification to individuals in the immediate vicinity of the
blasting area shall be provided by way of horns, whistles or other
approved devices. All sides of the blasting area shall be clearly posted
at appropriate distances.
§ 46-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-1
1:65
§ 49-1. Certain weeds declared nuisances.
Any weed such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other
weeds of a like kind, found growing in any lot or tract of land in Towamencin
Township, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to
permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place.
§ 49-2. Height of weeds. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-08]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants other
than trees, bushes, flowers, crops or other ornamental plants to grow to a
height exceeding 12 inches within 100 feet of any property line or right-ofway
within Towamencin Township; any such plants or weeds exceeding such
height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. This shall not apply to riparian
corridor buffers, wetlands, woodlands, floodplains, steep slopes, detention
or retention basins, and open space deemed a meadow by the Township.
§ 49-3. Barberry bushes prohibited.
It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or permit the growth of the
bush of the species of tall, common or European barberry, further known
as Berberis vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties within the Township of
Towamencin.
§ 49-4. Duty of property owners.
It shall be the duty of all owners of property within Towamencin Township to
cut all such weeds, grass or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers or other
ornamental plants with such frequency as to prevent the same from growing
to a height exceeding 12 inches or at least once each year, whichever shall
be more frequent.
§ 49-5. Notice to abate nuisance.
The Township Manager and/or the Township Zoning Officer and/or the Chief
of Police shall have the right and power to serve or cause to be served
a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or
plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter
and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within 10 days.
§ 49-6. Abatement by Township; expenses.
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within 10 days, the
Township Manager may proceed to cause such nuisance to be abated,
keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall
be charged and paid by such owner or occupant.
§ 49-7. Lien for costs of removal.
A. Charges for such weed removal shall be a lien upon the premises.
Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for 60 days after it has
§ 49-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 49-7
1:66
§ 49-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1988 by Ord. No.
88-15]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for not more than
30 days. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues, and any repetition of a
violation shall be deemed a new offense.
Chapter 52
(RESERVED)
Chapter 54
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 49.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 80.
Parks — See Ch. 107.
§ 54-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall cause, allow, permit or maintain outdoor burning of the
following on a street or on public or private property, whether in connection
with any building operation, in an open dump or otherwise, except as
otherwise permitted by this chapter:
been rendered, the Solicitor may file with the Prothonotary in the Court
of Common Pleas of Montgomery County a statement of municipal
claim for lien under and by virtue of the Acts of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania relating to the filing of municipal claims and liens, their
supplements and amendments. This municipal claim shall contain a
short description of the premises and a deed book and page reference
to a deed wherein a more precise description may be found, the
expenses and costs incurred and the date the weeds were cut and a
notice that the Township claims a lien for this amount.
B. The Solicitor is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the Township, in any court having
jurisdiction over such matter, against any property if such bill has
remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered.
A. Garbage.
§ 49-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-1
1:67
§ 54-2. Exceptions. [Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-11]
B. Household, business or industrial trash or similar waste products of
every kind or nature.
C. Recycling material as listed under the Pennsylvania Recycling Act of
1988, or Act 101. [Amended 4-27-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02;
6-22-2011 by Ord. No. 11-06]
A. Exceptions for one- and two-family residential dwelling units only:
[Amended 4-27-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02; 6-22-2011 by Ord. No.
11-06]
(1) The open burning of yard waste other than leaves shall be
permitted on the premises only at a distance not less than 50 feet
(17 meters) from any structure and so placed as to prevent the
spread of fire to within 50 feet (17 meters) of any structure, vehicle,
or fuel tank, and the fire shall be set not closer than 25 feet (nine
meters) to any property line nor shall be set within the right-of-way
of any street, subject to the following restrictions:
(a) The burning of yard waste other than leaves is permitted only
on Saturdays and Sundays throughout the year and daily
during the months of April, May, October, and November, but
these time periods may be extended if in the opinion of the Fire
Marshal inclement weather during the permitted months has
resulted in an inadequate opportunity for yard cleanup.
(b) Prior to any burning, the resident shall be required to notify
the Township Police Department.
(c) No such burning shall be permitted prior to 8:00 a.m. of any
day, and all fire shall be completely extinguished, including
smoldering embers, prior to dusk on the same day during
which it is ignited.
(d) Such burning shall be constantly attended by a responsible
person. During such burning, a water hose attached to an
operable water faucet or equipment capable of covering the
fire with earth must be in immediate readiness for use in
extinguishing the fire. A water hose, if used, must be of
sufficient length to extend at least 15 feet (five meters) beyond
the site of the burning.
(e) The pile size shall not exceed five feet by five feet by three feet
high. If additional piles exist, only one pile may be burning at
time.
(f) Flammable liquids may not be used to accelerate the burning
of the pile.
§ 54-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 54-2
1:68
§ 54-3. Hazardous conditions.
Burning shall not be permitted during periods of high winds, drought or
weather inversion (i.e., hazardous air quality conditions) or during or in any
other situation deemed hazardous by the Fire Marshal.
§ 54-4. Violations and penalties.
Any persons who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine or penalty not exceeding $1,000 and the cost of prosecution for
each offense, to be collected as like fines or penalties and costs due by law
collectible.
Chapter 56
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 56-1. Permit required; prerequisites for issuance.
(2) The open burning of yard waste other than leaves shall not be
permitted under this section with any other use other than one- and
two-family residential dwelling units.
B. Burning shall be permitted for Fire Company training and exhibitions.
C. Burning shall be permitted for recreational and entertainment purposes
such as bon fires and campfires. Permission for such fires is required by
the Fire Marshal at least 48 hours prior to the event. Contact the Fire
Marshal's office during normal business hours, Monday through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. for approval.
D. Burning shall be permitted in conjunction with the production of
agricultural commodities in their unmanufactured state on the
premises of the farm operation.
E. There are no other exceptions to the Outdoor Burning Chapter except
as otherwise expressly stated in this section.
A. No parade, athletic event, street fair, art and craft show, carnival, block
party, soap box derby, rally and other special events or activities that
occur on or in a Township park, a Township street, sidewalk, or other
street right-of-way which obstruct, delay or interfere with the normal
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and/or do not comply with traffic
laws and controls shall be conducted in Towamencin Township without
a permit obtained from the Township Manager, acting on behalf of the
Board of Supervisors. Such events shall also mean indoor or outdoor
concerts, expositions, displays, fairs, carnivals and athletic events
occurring on private property that are designed to attract large crowds,
interfering with the normal traffic flow.
§ 54-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:69
§ 56-2. Time schedule.
§ 56-3. Permit fee.
The fee for the issuance of such permit shall be as set by the Fee Schedule24
as approved by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Upon application for such permit, the Township Manager or his duly
authorized representative shall make an investigation of the proposed
conduct of such event, including but not limited to an investigation as to
the safety and sanitation of the operation and the possibility of
ecological disturbances, including noise. No permit shall be issued until
the Township Manager is satisfied that the owner and/or operator of
such event has purchased suitable insurance, liability and otherwise,
with respect to the operation of such place of public entertainment or
display. Sanitation shall include the prescribed number of lavatory
facilities, waste disposal and controlled eating facilities as required and
regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
C. All applications shall be submitted not less than 30 days nor more than
90 days before the event date(s).
D. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, the applicant must
provide written authorization to host the event from the property owner
where the event is to be held as well as the owner of any ancillary
property used such as parking and transportation facilities.
E. Special events may not be hosted in the location of any required
parking areas for any business that is operational during the event. The
applicant shall provide proof of adequate parking facilities for the
event.
F. Upon a showing of good cause, the Township may consider an
application that is filed after the filing deadline if there is sufficient time
to process, investigate the application, and obtain police services for
the event. The applicant can demonstrate good cause by showing that
the circumstances that gave rise to the permit application did not
reasonably allow the participant to file within the time prescribed.
A. Events shall be held within the following hours:
(1) Monday to Thursday: 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(2) Friday and Saturday: 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(3) Sunday: 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
B. No more than four special events per year are permitted. Multiday
events such as carnivals shall be considered a single event.
24.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 56-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 56-4
1:70
§ 56-4. Exemptions.
A special event permit is not required for the following:
§ 56-5. Traffic and event control fees.
If an event requires special police services, fees for those services shall be
at the rate in the Fee Schedule25 as approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Fees for special police services are due at the time of application or at the
time that the that Township staff determines that such services are required
with a minimum of four hours per officer.
§ 56-6. Indemnification agreement.
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit applicant and
an authorized officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, must sign an
agreement to reimburse Towamencin Township for any costs incurred by
it in repairing damage to Township property occurring in connection with
the permitted event proximately caused by the actions of the permittee, its
officers, employees or agents or any person who was under the permittee's
control insofar as permitted by law. The agreement shall also provide that
the permittee shall defend the Township against and indemnify and hold
the Township harmless from any liability to any persons resulting from any
damage or injury, including attorney's fees, occurring in connection with the
special event.
A. Funeral processions.
B. Parades involving a total of 40 or fewer pedestrians marching along a
parade route that is restricted to marching on sidewalks and crossing
streets only at pedestrian crosswalks in accordance with traffic
regulations and controls. Pedestrians participating in the parade shall
cross at crosswalks in units of 15 or fewer and shall allow vehicles to
pass between each unit.
C. Parades, athletic events or other special events that occur exclusively
on Township property, public streets or school district property and are
sponsored by the Township or by the school district.
D. Normal day-of-worship religious services, youth-oriented summer
programs, and vacation bible schools.
E. Events held at Township parks that are covered by a park rental
reservation.
F. Routine evangelical events.
G. Special events held at hotel venues that are attended by fewer than 200
people.
25.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 56-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-7
1:71
§ 56-7. Insurance requirements.
A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance, along with all necessary
endorsements, must be filed with the Township no less than 10 days before
the date of the event unless the Township for good cause waives the
filing deadline. The special event permit shall not be valid until after the
insurance policy or certificate of insurance along with necessary
endorsements has been filed by the applicant and approved by the Township
Manager.
§ 56-8. Revocation of permit.
The Township Manager for any violation of any law or ordinance may revoke
any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 56-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for not more than
30 days. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 56-10. Appeals.
Chapter 59
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Automatic protection devices — See Ch. 44,
Art. II.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Rental unit occupancy — See Ch. 119.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
§ 59-1. Application; inspection; smoke detector and sewer trap and
vent required; recycling plan.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Township
Board of Supervisors within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township Board of
Supervisors relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the
Montgomery County Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the
Board of Supervisors' decision.
§ 56-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 59-1
1:72
A. No structure, building, or any part thereof, nor any dwelling unit shall
be occupied or used until an application has been submitted to the
Township, on forms provided by the Township.
B. The Township shall, after notification of a change in occupancy by the
owner or the agent of the owner of the premises to be occupied has
been made on forms provided for such purpose by the Township,
inspect the property for compliance to the following:
(1) The provisions of the applicable section(s) of the Township
administrative codes as referenced in § 133-30.
(2) The requirements as outlined on the change of occupancy
application form.
C. All residential dwelling units shall be provided with a minimum of one
single-station smoke detector on each habitable floor level including the
basement. The smoke detection system must adhere to the
requirements of the building codes in use at the time of construction.
When activated, the smoke detector shall provide an audible alarm to
warn the occupants within the individual room or unit. If an individual
detector or system of detectors is found to be defective, they shall be
replaced with the same type of detector and system that was required
when the unit was built. If the dwelling unit is equipped throughout
with an electronic system that provides for both security and smoke
detection, the system must have the capability of continued smoke
detection consistent with the requirements of the building codes in use
at the time the unit was constructed. The smoke detection capabilities
must be maintained in the event that the security portion of the system
is abandoned. The smoke detectors on this system must have internal
testing capabilities, or an agent must provide a current test and
certificate of operation prior to the approval of any change of
occupancy.
D. All buildings connected to the public sewer system must have a building
sewer trap and vent as detailed in the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code. No stormwater from sump pumps or roof drains is
permitted to be connected to the public sewer system.
E. In the case of change of ownership, occupancy, tenant, or use of a
nonresidential building or structure or change of ownership of a
multifamily building or structure, a recycling plan in accordance with
the requirements of Ordinance Number 90-09, as last amended,26 must
be submitted to the Township.
26.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 84, Garbage and Other Solid Waste.
§ 59-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-2
1:73
§ 59-2. Contents of application; responsibility for obtaining
approval.
The application shall state the use to which the structure, building, or
dwelling unit is to be put. No change in the use or the ownership of a
residential dwelling unit or change in the use, ownership, or tenant of any
nonresidential structure or building shall be made until the application has
been signed and approved by the Township acknowledging compliance in
accordance with § 59-1 hereof. It shall be the duty of any person who shall
change the use of, sell, or otherwise transfer ownership of any structure,
building or residential dwelling unit or, in the case of the change of tenant of
a nonresidential structure or building, to apply for and obtain the approval
of the change of occupancy required by this chapter prior to such transfer of
ownership or change of use or failure on the part of such seller, transferor,
or owner to obtain such approval shall not excuse the purchaser, transferee,
or nonresidential tenant from the requirements of this chapter.
§ 59-3. Revocation.
Any change of occupancy applied for hereunder may be denied or revoked
in the event that the structure, building, or dwelling unit is determined to
be unsafe or uninhabitable, or that a condition exists that is in violation
of any ordinances of the Township, or that the actual use is in violation of
any ordinances of the Township. In the event that the change of occupancy
is approved subject to conditions, such approval may be revoked if such
conditions remain unsatisfied within the time limit provided for at the time
of issuance of such conditional approval.
§ 59-4. Fee.
The applicant for a change of occupancy shall pay, at the time of application,
a fee to the Township in an amount established by the Board of Supervisors
by a fee schedule adopted by resolution from time to time. Such fee shall
be nonrefundable in the event that the Township shall refuse to approve a
change of occupancy after review.
§ 59-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, corporation or association who or which shall occupy or
use any structure, building, or dwelling unit without obtaining approval
of the change of occupancy shall be in violation of this chapter and
shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be guilty of a
summary offense and subject to payment of a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $300 and the costs of prosecution, including reasonable
attorney's fees of the Township and, in default thereof, to imprisonment
in Montgomery County Prison as provided by law.
B. Each and every day that occupancy or use of any structure, building, or
dwelling unit shall continue without the approval required by this
chapter after notice to cease and desist such occupancy or use shall
§ 59-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 59-5
1:74
Chapter 61
COLLECTION BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and other solid waste — See Ch. 84.
Littering — See Ch. 93.
Nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 117.
Streets, curbs and sidewalks — See Ch. 133.
§ 61-1. Permit required.
No property owner shall place or allow any person to place any collection
bins within the Township without first having obtained a permit as herein
provided.
§ 61-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLOTHING/MATERIALS COLLECTION BIN (BIN) — Any enclosed
receptacle or container made of metal, steel or a similar product and
designed or intended for the donation and the temporary storage of clothing
or other materials. Collection bins shall serve registered nonprofit
organization only. Collection bins shall not be placed to profit any business
or property owner.
§ 61-3. Permit application; term of permit.
have been given shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable
as such.
A. An application for a permit for used clothing and materials collection
bins shall be required. Said application shall be upon a form provided
by the Towamencin Township Code Enforcement Office and shall
contain at least the following information verified by oath or
affirmation:
(1) The full name of the applicant, local address and telephone number,
if any.
(2) Permanent address and telephone number.
(3) The address at which the applicant will receive notice under this
chapter.
(4) The name of the organization for which the collections are made.
§ 59-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-3
1:75
§ 61-4. Fees.
No permit shall be issued under this chapter until a fee is paid to the
Township for transmittal to the Township Treasurer for the general use of
the Township. The fee shall be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
from time to time.
§ 61-5. Location.
(5) The nature of the purpose of the donations and method for
distribution of the items collected.
(6) Dates and locations within the Township where the collection bins
are to be located.
(7) Method and schedule of collections and emptying of bins, including
name, address and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for collections.
(8) Affirmation that the bin(s) are for use by a duly registered nonprofit
organization.
(9) The proper types of bin(s) are being used as described by this
section.
(10) The bin(s) are being placed in a proper location as described by this
section.
(11) Name, address and phone number of the nonprofit organization
displayed on each bin.
B. Attached to the application shall be a signed statement by the property
owner involved granting permission for the placement of the collection
bins, specifying the number of bins permitted and indicating by way of a
sketch drawing the permitted location.
C. Permits will be issued for a period of one year.
A. The placement of collection bins shall be permitted as accessory to the
following uses as defined by the Towamencin Township Zoning Code:
E-9 Place of Worship, E-12 School, and C18 Shopping Center.
B. Donation bins are prohibited within the Village Overlay District.
C. Premises may have no more than one collection bin per property.
D. The bin(s) shall be appropriately located so as not to interfere with sight
triangles, on-site circulation, required setbacks, landscaping, parking,
and any other requirements that may have been imposed as part of the
site plan approval for the premises and shall be placed on a concrete
surface. No bin shall be placed within a required setback.
§ 61-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 61-5
1:76
§ 61-6. Suspension or revocation of permits.
Any permit issued for the purpose of placing collection bins may be denied,
suspended or revoked at any time upon proof that:
§ 61-7. Violations and penalties.
E. The bin(s) shall be of the type that are enclosed by use of a receiving
door and locked so that the contents of the bin(s) may not be accessed
by anyone other than those responsible for the retrieval of the contents.
F. Each bin shall not cover a ground surface area in excess of five feet by
five feet nor be more than six feet in height.
G. Each bin must be regularly emptied of its contents so that it does not
overflow, resulting in used clothing and other items being strewn about
the surrounding area.
H. If items, trash, or debris accumulates outside of the bin or if the bin
becomes deteriorated due to lack of proper maintenance, the bin shall
be considered junk and debris and the applicant will be subject to
suspension or revocation of the permit. No permit for a donation bin
shall be issued or renewed to any applicant with any pending complaint
or a suspended permit or to any applicant whose permit for a donation
bin has been revoked.
I. All bins shall have the name and telephone number of both the
permittee and the person or company responsible for emptying the bins
printed or posted on the bins.
J. There shall be no advertising of any kind on the bin except for the
identity of the charitable organization and the purpose of the donation
effort.
K. No bin shall be located on property that does not currently have a
permanent business in operation on the same property.
A. The application for the permit contains false information;
B. The permittee has been convicted of a crime of fraud or a felony or a
crime involving moral turpitude;
C. The permittee has failed to comply with any rules of conduct prescribed
in this chapter; or
D. Clothing or other articles or objects are left outside of the bins.
A. Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, of not more than
$600 and, in default of payment of said fine, shall be imprisoned in the
county prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 61-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-7
1:77
Chapter 62
CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 49.
Burning, outdoor — See Ch. 54.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 59.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 80.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 117.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
B. In addition to any other legal remedies available to the Township in the
event that collection bins are located within the Township without a
permit or are left in place after a permit has been denied, suspended or
revoked, the Township may confiscate the collection bins and cause it or
them to be removed to a place of storage. All costs of removal and
storage shall be the responsibility of the permittee or the person or
entity owning or leasing the collection bins or the person or entity at
whose direction the bins were placed within the Township.
§ 61-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 61-7
1:78
ARTICLE I
Residential Code
[Adopted 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-9]
§ 62-1. Adoption of code.
Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Towamencin, being marked and designated
as the "International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings,
2000 Edition," including Appendixes A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, and K, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the code of the Township of Towamencin for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
building, mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems in one- and twofamily
dwellings and townhouses in the Township of Towamencin and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2000
edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of
the Township of Towamencin, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes presented in § 62-2 of this article.
§ 62-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section R101.1, insert "Towamencin Township" for the name of
jurisdiction. Further, insert last sentence as follows: "Towamencin
Township is hereinafter referred to as `the Township.'"
(2) Section R104.10.1, delete heading and paragraph in its entirety
and insert the following:
104.10.1 Areas prone to flooding. All construction activity
within any floodplain area limits shall be regulated per the
requirements of the Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance and
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance27 as well as the
requirements of this code.
(3) Section R105.2, delete under the category entitled "building"
section numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5.
(4) Section R105.5, delete heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning, and Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
§ 62-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-2
1:79
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official
under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and
become null and void if the building or work authorized by such
permit is not commenced within 180 days from the issue date of
the permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced
for a period of 180 days. Before work can resume a new permit
shall be obtained to do so. If a permittee wishes to renew a permit
that has expired due to suspended or abandoned work for more
than 180 days, the permittee may apply in writing to the Building
Official for a one-time renewal of the permit for 1/2 of the original
permit fee. A permittee holding an unexpired permit in which work
has not commenced may apply in writing to the Building Official
for a one-time extension of 180 days provided that he can show
good and satisfactory reasons, beyond his control, that the work
cannot be commenced within the one-hundred-eighty-day period
from the issue date. No additional fee is required for this one-time
extension. In order to renew work on a permit after it has expired,
the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.
(5) Section R106.1.
(a) Delete the first sentence of the first paragraph in its entirety
and insert the following sentence: "Construction documents,
special instructions, and structural observation programs and
other data shall be submitted in two sets with each application
for a permit."
(b) Add the following sentence after the "exception" paragraph:
"Construction drawings for an alteration, renovation, or
addition onto an existing one- and two-family dwelling do not
have to be prepared by a registered design professional so long
as the drawings contain enough information for the Building
Official to review per the requirements of this code."
(6) Section R106.1.3, delete heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
106.1.3 Information for construction and areas prone to
flooding. For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas as
established by the Flood Insurance Maps, construction documents
shall include all requirements as outlined in the Towamencin
Township Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, and this code.28
(7) Section R108.3, add the following sentence after the paragraph:
"The value of electric, plumbing, and HVAC work and equipment
may be deducted from the value of the building permit fee if a
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning, and Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
§ 62-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-2
1:80
separate electric, plumbing, or HVAC permit is required and
obtained for the permit project."
(8) Section R110.6, insert this new section after Section R110 .5: "All
certificate of occupancy permits shall conform to this section and
the requirements of Towamencin Township Ordinance No. 99-13."29
(9) Section R112, delete heading, section and all subsections in their
entirety and insert the following:
SECTION R112
MEANS OF APPEALS
R112.1 Means of appeal. An appeal from any decision of the
Building Official may be taken to the Board of Supervisors. Such
appeal shall be made in writing, verified by an affidavit, within 10
days after such decision has been made, and shall be filed with
the Township Secretary. The appellant or his representative shall
have the right to appear and be heard by the Board. The Board
shall render a prompt decision on such appeal. In making the
decision, the Board may vary or modify any provision of this code,
where there are practical difficulties in the way of executing the
strict letter of the code, or to permit the use of innovative
procedures or materials, provided that the spirit of the code shall
be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done.
Such variation or modification shall be the minimum necessary in
order to grant relief. Every action of the Board on such appeals
shall be by resolution, copies of which shall be certified to the
Building Official and the appellant. The decision of the Board
shall in such cases be final.
(10) Section R113.2, delete heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Certificates of Occupancy.
§ 62-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-2
1:81
R113.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official shall serve
a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the
erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, use
or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the
provisions of this code, or in violation of a detail statement or a
plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct
the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the
abatement of the violation within a period of 10 days from the date
of notification, unless otherwise specified. In the event that the
action or condition presents such a threat to the health, safety, or
welfare of an individual or the community, the abatement period
may be reduced by the Building Official.
If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the
Building Official shall request the legal counsel of the Township
to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure in
violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction
made pursuant thereto.
(11) Section R113.4, delete heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person, partnership, firm or
corporation who or which shall violate a provision of this code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
or which shall use, erect, construct, alter or repair a building or
structure in violation of an approved plan or of a directive of the
Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be liable to fines and penalties not
exceeding $500.00, which fines and penalties may be collected by
suit or summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township
before any District Justice, or recovered as debts of a like amount
are now by law recoverable. Proceedings for the violation of this
code and for the collection of fines and penalties imposed thereby
may be commenced by warrant, or by summons, at the discretion
of the District Justice before whom the proceeding is begun. All
fines and penalties collected for the violation of this code shall
be paid over to the Township Treasury. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the legal counsel of the Township from instituting
appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct,
business or use of a building or structure on or about any
premises.
§ 62-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-2
1:82
B. Chapter 2.
(1) Section R202, add the following definitions in alphabetical order:
BOARD or BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The governing body for
Towamencin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
NFPA. The National Fire Protection Association.
C. Chapter 3.
(1) Table R301.2(1). The following design criteria is hereby added to
the table and is part of this code:
ROOF SNOW LOAD - 30 pounds per square foot.
WIND PRESSURE (SPEED) - 90 mph.
SEISMIC CONDITION - Zone D1.
WEATHERING - Severe.
FROST LINE DEPTH - 36 inches.
TERMITE - Moderate to heavy.
DECAY - Slight to moderate.
WINTER DESIGN TEMPERATURE - 10.
FLOOD HAZARDS - Per the requirements of the Towamencin
Township Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, and this code30.
(2) R301.2.4 Floodplain construction. In the "exception" paragraph,
insert after the words "International Building Code," the words:
"and the Towamencin Township Zoning and Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinances."31
(3) Section R302.1, delete heading and first paragraph in its entirety
and insert the following:
R302.1 Exterior walls. Exterior walls with a fire separation
distance of less than 4 feet (1,524 mm) shall have not less than
a two-hour fire-resistive masonry wall, as detailed in this section
and Sections R321.1, R321.2.2, and R321.2.3. If both buildings
on each side of the fire separation line are fully sprinklered per
the requirements of NFPA 13, then the exterior walls can be
constructed with no less than a one-hour fire-resistive rating with
exposure from both sides. Projection shall not extend beyond the
distance determined by the following two methods, whichever
results in the lesser projections.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning, and Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning, and Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
§ 62-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-2
1:83
(4) Section R302.2, delete "3 feet (914 mm)" and replace with "4 feet
(1219 mm)." Under the "exception" paragraph Subsection 1, insert
prior to the period at the end of the sentence the following: "...
provided that no opening is within 2 feet of the common firewall.
The aggregate of all openings shall not be more than 25 percent of
the total protected exterior wall required in Sections R302. 1 and
321.1."
(5) Section R302.3, while retaining the "exception" paragraph, delete
the main heading and paragraph in its entirety and insert the
following:
R302.3 Penetrations. Penetrations located in the exterior wall
of the dwelling with a fire separation distance less than 4 feet
(1,524 mm) shall be protected in accordance with Section
R321.3.
(6) Section R309.1, delete the second sentence in the first paragraph
and insert the following: "Other openings between the garage and
residence shall be equipped with a solid wood or honeycomb core
steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) thick which provides
a minimum one-hour fire rating."
(7) Section R309.2, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety
and insert the following:
R309.2 Separation required. The garage shall be separated
from the residence and its attic area by not less than 5/8 inch
(15.99 mm) Type X fire-rated drywall applied to the garage side.
Where the separation is a floor-ceiling assembly, the floor-ceiling
assembly as well as the structure supporting the separation also
shall be protected by not less than 5/8 inch (15.99 mm) Type X firerated
drywall. All beams, posts, or columns shall also be protected
by a minimum one-hour rated enclosure of 5/8 inch (15.99 mm)
Type X fire-rated drywall.
(8) R309.5 Flood hazard areas. Add new Subsection 3 to list at end of
this section as follows:
"3. Must meet the requirements of Towamencin Township Zoning
Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance32."
(9) Section R321.1, delete heading and paragraph, including
"exception" paragraph, in their entirety and insert the following:
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning, and Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
§ 62-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-2
1:84
R321.1 Two-family dwellings. Adjoined dwelling units
constructed under the provisions of this code, which adjoin other
dwelling units, shall be completely separated from the adjacent
dwelling unit with a two-hour fire-rated assembly. The vertical
separation of all dwelling units shall be a two-hour-rated eightinch-
thick masonry firewall. The firewall shall be constructed from
the foundation to the roof assembly as detailed in Sections
R321.2.2 and R321.2.3. The common firewall shall also extend the
full length of all attached elements of the buildings to include
all enclosed areas and open roof structures. Any fire-rated floorceiling
assembly shall also be constructed with a two-hour rating.
The floor-ceiling assembly shall be constructed to extend and be
tight against the exterior walls and firewalls and be rated from
both sides.
All dwelling units which share a common exterior wall along the
same vertical plane shall be provided with a minimum one-hourrated
wall assembly for a distance of 4 feet on each side of the
firewall. The wall shall be rated from both sides. If the exterior
walls of the dwelling unit on each side of the firewall are offset
from each other, than the offsets shall be constructed to provide
the same two-hour rating as the firewall for a distance of 4 feet out
from the common firewall, and the exterior wall will not need to be
rated. If the offsets are less than 4 feet from the common firewall,
the offsets shall be of the same two-hour rated construction as the
firewalls and the exterior walls shall be provided with a one-hour
rating for a distance of 4 feet as detailed in this section.
Exception: If the dwelling units on each side of the fire-rated
assembly are fully sprinklered per the requirements of NFPA13,
then the vertical firewalls may be constructed with any approved
noncombustible material, provided that no less than a two-hourrated
assembly is maintained. All floor-ceiling assemblies may
be constructed as a one-hour-rated assembly. The one-hour-rated
assembly shall be rated from both sides. The fire rating of the
exterior walls and offset requirements detailed in this section shall
not apply.
(10) Section R321.2, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety
and insert the following:
R321.2 Townhouses. Townhouses shall be constructed to meet
the requirements of Section R321.1.
(11) Section R321.2.1, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety
and insert the following:
"Reserved. See Sections R321.1, R321.2, R321.2.2, R321.2.3."
(12) R321.2.2 Parapets.
(a) Delete the first paragraph and insert the following:
§ 62-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-2
1:85
R321.2.2 Parapets. Parapets constructed in accordance
with Section R321.2.3 shall be provided for townhouses and
all other dwelling units as an extension of the common
firewall in accordance with the following:
(b) Include paragraphs 1 and 2 of the list, but delete the entire
"exception" paragraph following list number 2 and replace
with the following:
"Exception: A parapet is not required in the two cases above
when the roof is covered with an approved minimum C roof
covering and the roof decking is of approved noncombustible
materials, or of an approved two-hour-rated assembly for a
distance of 4 feet out from each side of the firewall. If the
dwelling units on each side of the firewall, including the attic
space below the roof sheathing, or deck is fully sprinklered to
meet the requirements of NFPA 13, then the requirements for
parapets and this section shall not apply."
(c) Delete paragraph 3 of the list in its entirety and insert the
following as new number 3: "If roof surfaces adjacent to the
firewall are at different elevations, the common two-hour-rated
firewall shall extend a minimum 30 inches above the lower
roof. If the wall above the lower roof is more than 30 inches
above the lower roof, the remaining wall above the initial
thirty-inch firewall shall be permitted to be constructed of an
approved one-hour-rated assembly to the underside of the
upper roof provided that the wall is rated for one hour from
both sides. If the dwelling units on both sides of the firewall,
including the attic spaces below the roof sheathing, or decks
are fully sprinklered to meet the requirements of NFPA 13,
then the requirements of this section shall not apply."
(13) R321.2.3 Parapet construction. Insert the following words after the
first sentence in the first paragraph: "and Section R321.2.2."
(14) R327.1 General. Insert at the end of the first paragraph the
following: "and the requirements of the Towamencin Township
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance33."
(15) Add new section R328, as follows:
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning, and Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
§ 62-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-2
1:86
§ 62-3. Savings clause.
Nothing in this article or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing,
under any act of ordinance hereby repealed by this article, nor shall any just
or legal right or remedy of any character be lost.
R328.1 Automatic sprinkler system. All structures over 5,000
square feet constructed under the provision of this code shall be
equipped with an automatic residential sprinkler system to meet
the requirements of NFPA 13. The square footage shall include
the basement, living areas on all floor levels, garage, storage and
mechanical areas. The sprinkler system shall be installed in all
basement, attic, garage, living and storage areas of the building.
D. Chapter 12.
(1) Section M121.1, insert after the words "Chapter 12 through 24" the
following: "and the 2000 International Mechanical Code and 2000
International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by Towamencin Township
34."
E. Chapter 25.
(1) Section P2501.1, insert after the words "this chapter," the
following: "and the 2000 International Plumbing Code as adopted
by Towamencin Township35."
F. Appendix E.
(1) AE303 Permit issuance. Delete all paragraphs in this section in
their entirety and insert: "Refer to Section R105."
(2) AE304 Fees. Delete all paragraphs in this section in their entirety
and insert "Refer to Section R108."
G. Appendix G.
(1) AG1O5.2 Outdoor swimming pools. Insert after the words "comply
with" the following in the first paragraph: "the Pool Fence
Ordinance36, as adopted by Towamencin Township, and."
34.Editor's Note: See Art. VI, Mechanical Code, and Art. V, Fuel Gas Code.
35.Editor's Note: See Art. VII, Plumbing Code.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 139, Swimming Pools.
§ 62-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-3
1:87

ARTICLE II
Building Code
[Adopted 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-10]
§ 62-4. Adoption of building code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Towamencin, being marked and designated
as "The International Building Code, 2000 Edition," as published by the
International Code, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of
the Township of Towamencin in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building
Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in § 62-5 of this article.
§ 62-5. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the International Building Code, 2000 Edition,
adopted herein, are hereby amended and revised to read as follows:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section 101.1, insert "Towamencin Township" as the name of the
jurisdiction. Further, insert at end of paragraph: "Towamencin
Township is hereinafter referred to as `the Township.'"
(2) Section 105.2, delete under the category entitled "building," the
following subsections: 1,2,3,4, 5, 6, 9, and 10.
(3) Section 105.5, delete the heading and this paragraph in its entirety
and insert the following:
§ 62-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-5
1:89
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official
under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and
become null and void if the building or work authorized by such
permit is not commenced within 180 days from the issue date of
the permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced,
for a period of 180 days. Before work can resume a new permit
shall be obtained to do so. If a permittee wishes to renew a permit
that has expired due to suspended or abandoned work for more
than 180 days, the permittee may apply in writing to the Building
Official for a one-time renewal of the permit for 1/2 of the original
permit fee. A permittee holding an unexpired permit in which work
has not commenced may apply in writing to the Building Official
for a one-time extension of 180 days provided that he can show
good and satisfactory reasons, beyond his control, that the work
cannot be commenced within the one-hundred-eighty-day period
from the issue date. No additional fee is required for this one-time
extension. In order to renew work on a permit after it has expired,
the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.
(4) Section 106.1.
(a) Delete the first sentence of the first paragraph and insert the
following sentence: "Construction documents, special
inspection and structural observation programs and other data
shall be submitted in two sets with each application for a
permit."
(b) Insert the following sentence at the end of the first paragraph:
"The permit document(s) shall also bear the approval seal of
the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry as
required by the state codes."
(5) Section 110.1, insert at the end of the first sentence the following
wording: "and the requirements of Towamencin Township
Ordinance No. 99-13 for the issuance of certificates of
occupancy37."
(6) Section 112, delete section, including all subsections, in its entirety
and insert the following:
SECTION 112
MEANS OF APPEAL
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Certificates of Occupancy.
§ 62-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-5
1:90
112.1 Procedure. An appeal from any decision of the Building
Official may be taken to the Board of Supervisors. Such appeal
shall be made in writing, verified by an affidavit, within 10 days
after such decision has been made, and shall be filed with the
Township Secretary. The appellant or his representative shall have
the right to appear and be heard by the Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors shall render a prompt decision on such
appeal. In making the decision, the Board may vary or modify
any provision of this code where there are practical difficulties in
the way of executing the strict letter of this code, or to permit
the use of innovative procedures or materials, provided that the
spirit of this code shall be observed, public safety secured and
substantial justice done. Such variation or modification shall be
the minimum necessary in order to grant relief. Every action of the
Board on such appeals shall be by resolution, copies of which shall
be certified to the Code Official and the appellant. The decision of
the Board of Supervisors shall in such cases be final.
(7) Section 113.2, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
113.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official shall serve a
notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the
erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal,
demolition, use or occupancy of a building or structure in violation
of the provisions of this code, or in violation of a detail statement
or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order
shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition
and the abatement of the violation within a period of 10 days from
the date of notification, unless otherwise specified. In the event
that the action or condition presents such a threat to the health,
safety, or welfare of an individual or the community, the abatement
period may be reduced by the Building Official.
If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the
Building Official shall request the legal counsel of the Township
to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure in
violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction
made pursuant thereof.
(8) Section 113.4, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
§ 62-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-5
1:91
113.4 Violation penalties. Any person, partnership, firm or
corporation who or which shall violate a provision of this code
or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who or which shall use, erect, construct, alter or repair a building
or structure in violation of an approved plan or of a directive of
the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be liable to fines and penalties not
exceeding $500, which fines and penalties may be collected by
suit or summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township
before any District Justice, or recovered as debts of a like amount
are now by law recoverable. Proceedings for the violation of this
code and for the collection of fines and penalties imposed thereby
may be commenced by warrant, or by summons, at the discretion
of the District Justice before whom the proceeding is begun. All
fines and penalties collected for the violation of this code shall
be paid over to the Township Treasury. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the legal counsel of the Township from instituting
appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct,
business or use of a building or structure on or about any
premises. Further the remedies as set forth herein shall not be
exclusive, and the Township shall have the right to avail itself
of any other remedy at law or equity which it may deem to be
applicable.
B. Chapter 2.
(1) Section 202, add the following definition:
BOARD or BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The governing body for
Towamencin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
C. Chapter 3.
(1) Section 302.3.3, under exception number 2, delete the following:
"1/2 inch (12.7 mm)" and replace with "5/8 inch (15.99 mm) Type X
fire-rated drywall." Also, under "exception," subsection 2, delete
the second sentence and replace with the following sentence:
"Door openings between the garage and the residence shall be
equipped with a minimum one-hour-rated steel door in compliance
with Section 714.2.3." Delete "exception," Subsection 4 in its
entirety.
(2) Section 310.1, under R-2 use group, add the following word to the
list: "condominium."
D. Chapter 7.
§ 62-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-5
1:92
(1) Section 708.3, under the "exception" section, delete Subsection 2
and insert the following wording: "Dwelling units and guest room
separations in buildings of Type 2B, 3, 4, and 5 construction,
including corridor walls that serve the dwelling units and guest
rooms, shall have fire-resistant ratings of not less than one hour in
buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The walls must be rated from
both sides."
E. Chapter 9.
(1) Section 903.2.1.1, change "12,000 square feet (1,116m2)" to read
"5,000 square feet (465m2)."
(2) Section 903.2.1.2, change "5,000 square feet (465m2)" to read
"2,500 square feet (232m2)."
(3) Section 903.2.1.3, change "12,000 square feet (1,116m2)" to read
"5,000 square feet (465m2)."
(4) Section 903.2.1.4, change "12,000 square feet (1,116m2)" to read
"5,000 square feet (465m2)."
(5) Section 903.2.1.5, change "1,000 square feet (93m2)" to read "500
square feet (47m2)."
(6) Section 903.2.2, change "20,000 square feet (1,858m2)" to read
"5,000 square feet (465m2)." Delete the "exception" section in its
entirety.
(7) Section 903.2.3, delete the heading and insert "Group F." Change
"12,000 square feet (1,115m2)" to read "5,000 square feet (465m2)"
in the first part of the paragraph, and change "24,000 square feet
(2,230m2)" to read "10,000 square feet (930m2)" in the last part of
the paragraph.
(8) Section 903.2.3.1, delete in its entirety.
(9) Section 903.2.6, delete the heading and insert "Groups M and B."
Change "12,000 square feet (1,116m2)" to read "5,000 square feet
(465m2)" in the first part of the paragraph, and "24,000 square feet
(2,230m2)" to read "10,000 square feet (930m2)" in the second part
of the paragraph.
(10) Section 903 .2.7, delete "exception" Subsection 1 in its entirety.
(11) Section 903.2.8, delete the paragraph and heading and insert the
following: "Group R-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout all buildings with an R-2 fire area."
§ 62-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-5
1:93
(12) Section 903.2.9, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety
and insert the following: "Group R-4. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings with an R-4 fire area."
(13) Section 903.2.10, change "12,000 square feet (1,116m2)" to read
"5,000 square feet (465m2)" in the first part of the paragraph, and
"24,000 square feet (2,230m2)" to read "10,000 square feet
(930m2)" in the second part of the paragraph.
(14) Section 903.2.10.1, under Subsection 1 of the list, change "10,000
square feet (930m2)" to read "5,000 square feet (465m2)." Under
Subsection 2 of the list, change "12,000 square feet (1,116m2)" to
read "5,000 square feet (465m2)."
(15) Section 903.2.10.2, change "20,000 cubic feet (566m3)" to read
"5,000 cubic feet (142m3)."
(16) Section 903.2.12, under the "exception" add the following wording
after "Section 101.2": "as required in the International Residential
Code, 2000 Edition."
(17) Section 905.3.1, delete both "30 feet (9,144 mm)" references and
insert "20 feet (6,096 mm)" at both locations.
(18) Section 907.2.1, in the first paragraph, delete the following:
"having an occupant load of 300 or more."
(19) Section 907.2.2, in the first paragraph delete the following: "having
an occupant load of 500 or more persons or more than 100 persons
above or below the lowest level of exit discharge."
(20) Section 907.2.3, under the "exception" section, delete Subsection
1.
(21) Section 907.2.4.
(a) Delete the heading and insert the following heading: "Groups
F, S, U, and Miscellaneous."
(b) Delete the following in the first paragraph: "that are two or
more stories in height and have an occupant load of 500 or
more above or below the lowest level of exit discharge."
(22) Section 907.2.7, delete the following from the first paragraph:
"having an occupant load of 500 or more persons or more than 100
persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge."
(23) Section 907.2.8, delete the "exception" section and list in its
entirety.
§ 62-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-5
1:94
§ 62-6. Savings clause.
Nothing in this article or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act of ordinance hereby repealed by this
article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this article.
(24) Section 907.2.9, delete the heading paragraph, including the
"exceptions" section and list in its entirety, and insert the following:
"Group R-2, R-3, and R-4. A fire alarm system shall be installed in
all Groups R-2, R-3, and R-4."
F. Chapter 10.
(1) Section 1003.2.11.2.
(a) Delete list number 1 and insert the following: "Exit access
corridors, passageways, aisle and rooms, interior rooms and
spaces over 100 square feet without glazing that would permit
natural or artificial light to enter the area in the event of a
power failure. This includes all mechanical, electrical, and
sprinkler control rooms regardless of size."
(b) Under list number 2, delete the wording: "required to have two
or more exits."
(c) Under list number 3, delete the wording: "required to have two
or more exits."
(d) Under list number 4, delete the wording: "required to have two
or more exits."
G. Chapter 33.
(1) Add new Section 3303.7 as follows:
3303.7 Certificate of rodent exterminator. Prior to the
issuance of a demolition permit, the applicant shall furnish to the
Township a certificate from a reputable rodent exterminator which
states that the building or structure to be demolished has been
inspected and found to be free of rodents, or that the building
or structure to be demolished has been properly treated for the
eradication of all rodents in and about the premises.
§ 62-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-6
1:95

ARTICLE III
Electrical Code
[Adopted 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-11]
§ 62-7. Adoption of code.
Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Towamencin, being marked and designated as
the "National Electrical Code, 1999 Edition," as published by the National
Fire Protection Association, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the code of
the Township of Towamencin for regulating the design, construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such
National Electrical Code, 1999 edition, on file in the office of the Township
of Towamencin are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this article.
§ 62-8. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. In Article 90 Introduction, add new Sections 90-10, 90-11, 90-12, 90-13,
90-14, 90-15, 90-16, and 90-17, as follows:
90-10. Permit fees. Applicants for permits under this code shall pay
at the time of application to the Township the fees set forth on the
then-current fee schedule which shall have been adopted by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors. When a permit fee is based on cost
of construction, the valuation of the subject work shall be the fair
market value of all of the construction work. The Code Official shall be
satisfied as to the accuracy of the estimate both initially and at final
completion should changes occur as the work progresses.
90-11. Registration required. On or after the passage of this code,
it shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to
do electrical work or electrical inspections within the boundaries of
Towamencin Township until such person or organization has been duly
registered and issued a license by the Township. No license shall be
issued until the applicant provides proper credentials evidencing the
qualifications and or the degree of expertise in electrical work in which
the license is sought. Any firm or corporation intending to carry on
the business of electrical work must have each person it intends to
employ within the boundaries of the Township registered and licensed
hereunder. Nothing in this code shall be construed to prohibit the
employment of a journeyman or apprentice, provided that all work
performed shall be under the direction and control of a duly registered
and licensed master electrician. At a minimum, all electrical inspectors
must provide credentials, testing, or certifications equal to that of a
master electrician. [Amended 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
§ 62-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-8
1:97
90-12. Registration fees. Any person or persons, firm or corporation
engaged or engaging in electrical work or electrical inspections in the
Township shall pay into the Township Treasury for the use of said
Township such initial and renewal registration fees as the Board of
Supervisors shall establish from time to time by resolution. [Amended
12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
90-13. Expiration of registration. At the expiration of each calendar
year, said registration or license shall be null and void. A licensed
master electrician, journeyman electrician, or electrical inspector
desiring to continue in the business of electrical work or electrical
inspections for the ensuing year shall, before the 31st day of December
of each year, surrender said certificate or license for the current
year to the Township, and reregister his or their name or names and
business or home address upon such form or forms as may from time
to time be furnished by the Township. [Amended 12-19-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-13]
90-14. Registration may be revoked. The license granted under this
code may be suspended or revoked by the Township when a master
electrician, electrical inspector, firm or corporation, or the registered
representative thereof, shall violate any of the rules and regulations of
the National Electrical Code and shall refuse or neglect to make the
necessary corrections to work not approved by the Township, within
a reasonable time after notification thereof, or who shall permit the
use of his, their or its name by a person or persons for the purpose
of obtaining a permit or permits to do electrical work. [Amended
12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-13]
90-15. Notice of violation. The Code Official shall serve a notice
of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition, use or
occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of
this code, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved
thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of
the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation within
a period of 10 days from the date of notification, unless otherwise
specified. In the event that the action or condition presents such
a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of an individual or the
community, the abatement period may be reduced by the Code Official.
If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Code
Official shall request the legal counsel of the Township to institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
such violation or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
use of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
§ 62-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-8
1:98
90-16. Violation penalties. Any person, partnership, firm or
corporation who or which shall violate a provision of this code or shall
fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who or which
shall use, erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or of a directive of the Code Official, or
of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall
be liable to fines and penalties not exceeding $500, which fines and
penalties may be collected by suit or summary proceeding brought in
the name of the Township of Towamencin before any District Justice,
or recovered as debts of a like amount are now by law recoverable.
Proceedings for the violation of this code and for the collection of fines
and penalties imposed thereby may be commenced by warrant, or by
summons, at the discretion of the District Justice before whom the
proceeding is begun. All fines and penalties collected for the violation
of this code shall be paid over to the Township Treasury. Each day that
a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude
the legal counsel of the Township from instituting appropriate action
to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building
or structure on or about any premises.
90-17. Inspection and tests.
1. During installation. During the installation of electrical systems and
equipment, the builder or electrical contractor of the builder shall
arrange for the inspection of such electrical systems and equipment by
an underwriter or electrical inspection service to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this code.
2. Concealing work. Work in connection with an electrical system shall
not be covered or concealed until it has been inspected and permission
to conceal has been granted in writing by the underwriter or electrical
inspection service.
3. Final inspection and test. On completion of the work, the
underwriter or electrical inspection service shall inspect the work
and cause tests to be made of the operation of the entire system to
insure compliance with all requirements. The underwriter or electrical
inspection service shall certify that such inspection and tests have
been made, and shall post such certificate on the premises for review
by the Code Official.
B. In Article 100.A General, add the following definitions in alphabetical
order:
§ 62-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-8
1:99
§ 62-9. Savings clause.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any actions required, or liability incurred,
or any cause or causes of action incurred or existing, under any act or
ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be
lost, impaired, or affected by this article.
BOARD or BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The governing body of
Towamencin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
CODE OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged
with the administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly
authorized representative.
TOWNSHIP. The Township of Towamencin, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 62-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-9
1:100
ARTICLE IV
Fire Code
[Adopted 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-12]
§ 62-10. Adoption of fire prevention code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Towamencin, being marked and designated
as the "International Fire Code, 2000 Edition," as published by the
International Code Conference, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, E,
F, and G, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the
Township of Towamencin for the control of buildings, structures and
premises as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said International Fire Code, 2000
Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in § 62-11 of this article.
§ 62-11. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section 101.1, insert "Towamencin Township" as the name of the
jurisdiction.
(2) Section 105.3.1, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety
and insert the following:
105.3.1 Expiration. An operational permit shall remain in effect
until reissued, renewed, or revoked for such a period of time
as specified in the permit. Construction permits shall follow the
requirements of the adopted building codes of Towamencin
Township.
(3) Section 105.3.2, delete the paragraph in its entirety and insert the
following: "Permits shall meet the requirements of the adopted
building codes of Towamencin Township."
(4) Section 105.6, insert at the end of the sentence: "as required by the
Code of Towamencin Township."
(5) Section 105.6.16, delete the words "An operational permit" and
replace with "Permission from the North Penn Water Authority."
(6) Section 105.6.16, in the "exception" paragraph, delete the words "A
permit" and replace with "Permission."
(7) Section 109.3, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
§ 62-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-11
1:101
109.3 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision
of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure
in violation of the approved construction documents or directive
of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed
by law.
(8) Section 111.4, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop-work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation
or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by
law.
B. Chapter 2.
(1) Section 202, add the following definition:
BOARD or BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The governing body for
Towamencin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
C. Chapter 3.
(1) Section 307.1, insert at the end of the paragraph: "and Towamencin
Township Ordinance 93-638."
(2) Section 307.2.1, insert the following sentence at the beginning of
the paragraph: "Open burning shall be permitted in accordance
with Towamencin Township Ordinance No. 93-0639."
D. Chapter 5.
(1) Section 506.1, add the following sentence at the beginning of the
paragraph: "All newly constructed buildings, except residential
structures constructed under the provisions of the International
Residential Code, shall have a key box."
(2) Add new Section 506.2.1 as follows:
506.2.1 Key box contents. The key box shall contain the
following:
1. Keys to locked points of egress, interior, or exterior or such
buildings.
2. Keys to mechanical rooms.
3. Keys to elevator rooms.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 54, Burning, Outdoor.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 54, Burning, Outdoor.
§ 62-11 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-11
1:102
506.2.1 Key box contents. The key box shall contain the
following:
4. Keys to elevator controls.
5. Keys to any other areas that may be required by the Fire
Marshal.
6. A card containing the emergency contact persons and phone
numbers for the building.
(3) Section 507 Hazards to fire fighters, shall be amended to include
the following after Section 507.3: [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-12]
507.4 Identifying emblems for structures with truss
construction.
507.4.1 Truss construction markings. Identifying emblems
shall be permanently affixed to the front of structures with truss
construction, or at a location approved by the Fire Marshal or
Code Official.
507.4.2 Emblem description. Emblem shall be bright and
reflective in color. The shape of the emblem shall be an isosceles
triangle and the size shall be 12 inches horizontally by 6 inches
vertically. The following letters shall be 3 inches in size, bold print
and black in color to make the letters conspicuous. These letters
shall be painted on the emblem.
507.4.2.1 "F" to signify a floor with truss construction.
507.4.2.2 "R" to signify a roof with truss construction.
507.4.2.3 "F/R" to signify both a floor and roof with truss
construction.
507.4.3 Emblem location. The emblem shall be permanently
affixed to the left of the main entrance door at a height between
4 and 6 feet above ground level, or at a location approved by the
Fire Marshal or Code Official, and shall be provided, installed, and
maintained by the owner of the building.
507.4.4 Real estate developments. Individual structures and
dwelling units with truss construction that are part of a planned
real estate development shall not be required to have an
identifying emblem if there is an emblem affixed at the entrance of
the development, or at a location approved by the Fire Marshal or
Code Official. Detached one- and two-family residential structures
with truss construction are required to have the identifying
emblem either attached to the building premise or at a location
approved by the Fire Marshal or Code Official.
E. Chapter 9.
§ 62-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-11
1:103
(1) Section 903.2.1.1, in item number 2 on the list, delete "12,000
square feet (1116m2)" and replace with "5,000 square feet
(465m2)."
(2) Section 903.2.1.2, in item number 2 on the list, delete "5,000
square feet (465m2)" and replace with "2,500 square feet (232m2)."
(3) Section 903.2.1.3, in item number 2 on the list, delete "12,000
square feet (1116m2)" and replace with "5,000 square feet
(465m2)."
(4) Section 903.2.1.4, in item number 2 on the list, delete "12,000
square feet (1,116m2)" and replace with "5,000 square feet
(465m2)."
(5) Section 903.2.1.5, delete "1,000 square feet (93m2)" and replace
with "500 square feet (47m2)."
(6) Section 903.2.2, delete "20,000 square feet (1858m2)" and replace
with "5,000 square feet (465m2)."
(7) Section 903.2.3, delete "12,000 square feet (1116m2)" and replace
with "5,000 square feet (465m2)," and delete "24,000 square feet
(2230m2)" and replace with "10,000 square feet (930m2)."
(8) Section 903.2.3.1, delete the words "in excess of 2,500 square feet
in area (232m2)."
(9) Section 903.2.4.3, delete the words "in quantities exceeding 100
pounds (45 kg)."
(10) Section 903.2.6, delete "12,000 square feet (1116m2)" and replace
with "5,000 square feet (465m2)," and delete "24,000 square feet
(2230m2)" and replace with "10,000 square feet (930m2)."
(11) Section 903.2.8, delete the words "where more than two stories in
height, including basements, or where having more than 16
dwelling units."
(12) Section 903.2.9, delete the words "with more than eight
occupants."
(13) Section 903.2.10, delete "12,000 square feet (1116m2)" and replace
with "5,000 square feet (465m2)," and delete "24,000 square feet
(2230m2)" and replace with "10,000 square feet (930m2)."
(14) Section 903.2.10.1.
§ 62-11 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-11
1:104
(a) In item number 2 on the list, delete "10,000 square feet
(930m2)" and replace with "5,000 square feet (465m2)."
(b) Under item number 2 on the list, delete "12,000 square feet (11
16m2)" and replace with "5,000 square feet (465m2)."
(c) Delete item number 3 on the list in its entirety.
(15) Add new section 907.1.3 as follows:
907.1.3 Supervision and maintenance. All fire alarm systems
shall be supervised by an approved central station and are
required to be maintained in proper working order at all times.
Exception: One- and two-family residential dwellings.
(16) Add new section 907.1.4 as follows:
907.1.4 Addressable systems. All fire alarm systems installed
shall be an addressable system which communicates each alarm
device individually at the alarm panel and at the remote panel.
(17) Section 907.2.1, delete the words "having an occupant load of 300
or more."
(18) Section 907.2.1.1, in the first paragraph, delete the following: "with
an occupant load of 1,000 or more."
(19) Section 907.2.2, in the first paragraph delete the following: "having
an occupant load of 500 or more persons or more than 100 persons
above or below the lowest level of exit discharge."
(20) Section 907.2.3, under the "exception" section, delete Subsection 1
on the list of exceptions.
(21) Section 907.2.4.
(a) Delete the heading and insert the following heading: "Groups
F, S, U, and Miscellaneous."
(b) Delete the following in the first paragraph: "that are two or
more stories in height and have an occupant load of 500 or
more above or below the lowest level of exit discharge."
(22) Section 907.2.7, delete the following from the first paragraph:
"having an occupant load of 500 or more persons or more than 100
persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge."
(23) Section 907.2.9, delete the heading, paragraph, including the
exceptions, and insert the following: "Group R-2, R-3, and R-4. A
fire alarm system shall be installed in all Groups R-2, R-3, and R-4."
F. Chapter 25.
§ 62-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-11
1:105
(1) Section 2505.1, delete "5,000 square feet (464.5m2)" and replace
with "2,500 square feet (232m2)," and delete "50,000 cubic feet"
(1416m3) and replace with "12,500 cubic feet (354m3)," and delete
"10 feet (3048 mm)" and replace with "5 feet (1524 mm)."
(2) Section 2505.7, delete the heading and entire paragraph and insert
"Volume: 25,000 cubic feet maximum. The maximum allowable
storage of waste tires is 25,000 cubic feet (354 m3). No more than
two 12,500 cubic feet (177m3) piles per location."
(3) Section 2505.8, insert the following at the end of the paragraph:
"Storage of waste tires is not permitted within any building."
(4) Section 2509, delete entire section, including all subsections.
G. Chapter 32.
(1) The jurisdictions specified in Sections 3204.3.1.1, 3404.2.9.5.2,
3406.2.4.4, and 3804.2 are set forth and limited to those areas
where storage of the specified materials are permitted by the
Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance.40
H. Appendix A. Delete Appendix A in its entirety and insert the following:
APPENDIX A
BOARD OF APPEALS
Means of appeal. An appeal from any decision of the Code Official
may be taken to the Board of Supervisors. Such appeal shall be made
in writing, verified by an affidavit, within 10 days after such decision
has been made, and shall be filed with the Township Secretary. The
appellant or his representative shall have the right to appear and be
heard by the Board. The Board shall render a prompt decision on
such appeal. In making the decision, the Board may vary or modify
any provision of this code where there are practical difficulties in the
way of executing the strict letter of the code, or to permit the use
of innovative procedures or materials, provided that the spirit of the
code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. Such variation or modification shall be the minimum necessary
in order to grant relief. Every action of the Board on such appeals shall
be by resolution, copies of which shall be certified to the Code Official
and the appellant. The decision of the Board shall in such cases be
final.
I. Appendix B.
(1) Section B103.1, delete "fire chief" and replace with "Code Official."
(2) Section B103.2, delete "fire chief" and replace with "Code Official."
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 62-11 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-11
1:106
§ 62-12. Savings clause.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any actions required, or liability incurred,
or any cause or causes of action incurred or existing, under any act or
ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be
lost, impaired, or affected by this article.
J. Appendix C.
(1) Section C105.1, delete "fire chief" and replace with "Code Official."
§ 62-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-12
1:107

ARTICLE V
Fuel Gas Code
[Adopted 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
§ 62-13. Adoption of international fuel gas code, 2000 edition.
Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Towamencin, being marked and designated as
"International Fuel Gas Code, 2000 Edition," including Appendixes A, B, C
and D, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby
adopted as the code of the Township of Towamencin for regulating the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances and providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fuel Gas Code on file
in the office of the Township of Towamencin are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article with the additions,
insertions, deletions, and changes prescribed in § 62-14 of this article.
§ 62-14. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1, insert "Towamencin Township" for name of jurisdiction.
Add last sentence as follows: "Towamencin Township is referred to
hereinafter as `the Township.'"
B. Section 106.4.3, delete the heading and section and insert the
following:
106.4.3 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Code Official under
the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null
and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within 180 days from the issue date of the permit, or if the
building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned
at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days.
Before work can resume a new permit shall be obtained to do so. If a
permittee wishes to renew a permit that has expired due to suspended
or abandoned work for more than 180 days, the permittee may apply
in writing to the Code Official for a one-time renewal of the permit
for 1/2 of the original permit fee. A permittee holding an unexpired
permit in which work has not commenced may apply in writing to
the Code Official for a one-time extension of 180 days provided that
he can show good and satisfactory reasons, beyond his control, that
the work cannot be commenced within the one-hundread-eighty-day
period from the issue date. No additional fee is required for this onetime
extension. In order to renew work on a permit after it has expired,
the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.
§ 62-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-14
1:109
C. Section 106.5.2, delete the paragraph in its entirety and insert the
following:
106.5.2 Fee schedule. Applicants for permits under this code shall pay
at the time of application to the Township the fees set forth on the
then-current fee schedule which shall have been adopted by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors. When a permit fee is based on cost
of construction, the valuation of the subject work shall be the fair
market value of all of the construction work. The Code Official shall be
satisfied as to the accuracy of the estimate both initially and at final
completion should changes occur as the work progresses.
D. Section 106.5.3, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety.
E. Section 108.2, delete the paragraph in its entirety and insert the
following:
108.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official shall serve a notice
of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, use or occupancy
of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or
in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in
violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation within a period of 10 days
from the date of notification, unless otherwise specified. In the event
that the action or condition presents such a threat to the health, safety,
or welfare of an individual or the community, the abatement period
may be reduced by the Code Official.
If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Code
Official shall request the legal counsel of the Township to institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
such violation or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
use of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
F. Section 108.4, delete the paragraph in its entirety and insert the
following:
§ 62-14 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-14
1:110
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person, partnership, firm or
corporation who or which shall violate a provision of this code or shall
fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who or which
shall use, erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or of a directive of the Code Official, or
of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall
be liable to fines and penalties not exceeding $500, which fines and
penalties may be collected by suit or summary proceeding brought in
the name of the Township before any District Justice, or recovered as
debts of a like amount are now by law recoverable. Proceedings for
the violation of this code and for the collection of fines and penalties
imposed thereby may be commenced by warrant, or by summons, at
the discretion of the District Justice before whom the proceeding is
begun. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this code
shall be paid over to the Township Treasury. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude
the legal counsel of the Township from instituting appropriate action
to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building
or structure on or about any premises.
G. Section 108.5, insert "$50" for the first amount and "$500" for the
second amount.
H. Section 109.1, delete section, including all subsections, in its entirety
and insert:
SECTION 109 (IFGC)
MEANS OF APPEAL
109.1 Procedure. An appeal from any decision of the Code Official
may be taken to the Board of Supervisors. Such appeal shall be made
in writing, verified by an affidavit, within 10 days after such decision
has been made, and shall be filed with the Township Secretary. The
appellant or his representative shall have the right to appear and be
heard by the Board. The Board shall render a prompt decision on
such appeal. In making the decision, the Board may vary or modify
any provision of this code, where there are practical difficulties in the
way of executing the strict letter of the code, or to permit the use
of innovative procedures or materials, provided that the spirit of the
code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. Such variation or modification shall be the minimum necessary
in order to grant relief. Every action of the Board on such appeals shall
be by resolution, copies of which shall be certified to the Code Official
and the appellant. The decision of the Board shall in such cases be
final.
I. Section 202, add the following definition:
§ 62-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-14
1:111
§ 62-15. Savings clause.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any actions required, or liability incurred,
or any cause or causes of action incurred or existing, under any act or
ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be
lost, impaired, or affected by this article.
BOARD or BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The governing body of
Towamencin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 62-14 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-15
1:112
ARTICLE VI
Mechanical Code
[Adopted 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-14]
§ 62-16. Adoption of code.
Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Towamencin, being marked and designated as
the "International Mechanical Code, 2000 Edition," including Appendix A,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the code of the Township of Towamencin for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
mechanical systems and providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms of such International Mechanical Code, 2000 Edition, published
by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the Township of
Towamencin, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and
changes presented in § 62-17 of this article.
§ 62-17. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1, insert "Towamencin Township" for name of jurisdiction
and add final sentence as follows: "Towamencin Township is referred to
herein as `the Township.'"
B. Section 106.4.3, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
106.4.3 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Code Official under
the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null
and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within 180 days from the issue date of the permit, or if the
building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned
at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days.
Before work can resume a new permit shall be obtained to do so. If a
permittee wishes to renew a permit that has expired due to suspended
or abandoned work for more than 180 days, the permittee may apply
in writing to the Code Official for a one-time renewal of the permit
for 1/2 of the original permit fee. A permittee holding an unexpired
permit in which work has not commenced may apply in writing to the
Code Official for a one-time extension of 180 days provided that he
can show good and satisfactory reasons, beyond his control, that the
work cannot be commenced within the one-hundred-eighty-day period
from the issue date. No additional fee is required for this one-time
extension. In order to renew work on a permit after it has expired, the
permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.
§ 62-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-17
1:113
C. Section 106.5.2, delete the paragraph in its entirety and insert the
following:
106.5.2 Fee schedule. Applicants for permits under this code shall
pay at the time of application to the Township the fees set forth on the
then-current fee schedule which shall have been adopted by resolution
by the Board of Supervisors. When a permit fee is based on cost
of construction, the valuation of the subject work shall be the fair
market value of all of the construction work. The Code Official shall be
satisfied as to the accuracy of the estimate both initially and at final
completion should changes occur as the work progresses.
D. Add new Section 106.5.2.1 as follows:
106.5.2.1 Registration required. On or after the passage of this
code, it shall be unlawful for any person or organization to work as
a HVAC contractor as defined in this code, within the boundaries of
Towamencin Township, until such person or organization has been
duly registered and issued a license by the Township. No license shall
be issued until the applicant provides proper credentials evidencing
the qualifications and/or the degree of expertise in HVAC work in
which the license is sought. Any organization intending to carry on the
business of HVAC must have each person it intends to employ within
the boundaries of the Township registered and licensed hereunder.
Nothing in this code shall be construed to prohibit the employment of
a journeyman or apprentice provided that all work performed shall be
under the direction and control of a duly registered and licensed HVAC
contractor.
E. Add new Section 106.5.2.2 as follows:
106.5.2.2. Expiration of registration. At the expiration of each
calendar year, said registration or license shall be null and void. A
licensed master HVAC contractor or journeyman/apprentice desiring
to continue in the business of electrical work for the ensuing year shall,
before the 31st day of December of each year, surrender said certificate
or license for the current year to the Township, and reregister his or
their name or names and business or home address upon such form or
forms as may from time to time be furnished by the Township.
F. Add new Section 106.5.2.3 as follows:
106.5.2.3. Certificates may be revoked. The license granted under
this code may be suspended or revoked by the Township when a
HVAC contractor, firm or corporation, or the registered representative
thereof, shall violate any of the rules and regulations of this code and
shall refuse or neglect to make the necessary corrections to work not
approved by the Township, within a reasonable time after notification
thereof, or who shall permit the use of his, their or its name by a person
or persons for the purpose of obtaining a permit or permits to do HVAC
work.
§ 62-17 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-17
1:114
G. Section 106.5.3, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety.
H. Section 108.2, delete the heading and paragraph in it its entirety and
insert the following:
108.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official shall serve a notice
of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition, use or
occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of
this code, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved
thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of
the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation within
a period of 10 days from the date of notification, unless otherwise
specified. In the event that the action or condition presents such
a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of an individual or the
community, the abatement period may be reduced by the Code Official.
If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Code
Official shall request the legal counsel of the Township to institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
such violation or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
use of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
I. Section 108.4, delete the heading and paragraph in it its entirety and
insert the following:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person, partnership, firm or
corporation who or which shall violate a provision of this code or shall
fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who or which
shall use, erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or of a directive of the Code Official, or
of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall
be liable to fines and penalties not exceeding $500, which fines and
penalties may be collected by suit or summary proceeding brought in
the name of the Township of Towamencin before any District Justice,
or recovered as debts of a like amount are now by law recoverable.
Proceedings for the violation of this code and for the collection of fines
and penalties imposed thereby may be commenced by warrant, or by
summons, at the discretion of the District Justice before whom the
proceeding is begun. All fines and penalties collected for the violation
of this code shall be paid over to the Township Treasury. Each day that
a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude
the legal counsel of the Township from instituting appropriate action
to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a
building or structure on or about any premises.
§ 62-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-17
1:115
§ 62-18. Savings clause.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any actions required, or liability incurred,
or any cause or causes of action incurred or existing, under any act or
ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be
lost, impaired, or affected by this article.
J. Section 108.5, insert "$50" for the first amount and "$500" for the
second amount.
K. Section 109, delete section, including all subsections in its entirety and
insert the following:
SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEAL
109.1 Procedure. An appeal from any decision of the Code Official
may be taken to the Board of Supervisors. Such appeal shall be made
in writing, verified by an affidavit, within 10 days after such decision
has been made, and shall be filed with the Township Secretary. The
appellant or his representative shall have the right to appear and be
heard by the Board. The Board shall render a prompt decision on
such appeal. In making the decision, the Board may vary or modify
any provision of this code where there are practical difficulties in the
way of executing the strict letter of the code, or to permit the use
of innovative procedures or materials, provided that the spirit of the
code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. Such variation or modification shall be the minimum necessary
in order to grant relief. Every action of the Board on such appeals shall
be by resolution, copies of which shall be certified to the Code Official
and the appellant. The decision of the Board shall in such cases be
final.
L. Section 202, add the following definition:
BOARD or BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The governing body for the
Township of Towamencin, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 62-17 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-18
1:116
ARTICLE VII
Plumbing Code
[Adopted 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-15]
§ 62-19. Adoption of plumbing code.
Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Towamencin, being marked and designated
as the "International Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition," including Appendixes
E and F, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the code of the Township of Towamencin for regulating the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
plumbing systems and providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms of such International Plumbing Code, 2000 edition, published
by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the Township of
Towamencin, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and
changes presented in § 62-20 of this article.
§ 62-20. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Chapter 1.
(1) Section 101.1, insert "Towamencin Township" for the name of
jurisdiction. Further, insert as last sentence: "Towamencin
Township is hereinafter referred to as `the Township.'"
(2) Section 106.5.3, delete the heading and its paragraph in its entirety
and insert the following:
§ 62-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-20
1:117
106.5.3 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Code Official
under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and
become null and void if the building or work authorized by such
permit is not commenced within 180 days from the issue date of
the permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced
for a period of 180 days. Before work can resume a new permit
shall be obtained to do so. If a permittee wishes to renew a permit
that has expired due to suspended or abandoned work for more
than 180 days, the permittee may apply in writing to the Code
Official for a one-time renewal of the permit for 1/2 of the original
permit fee. A permittee holding an unexpired permit in which work
has not commenced may apply in writing to the Building Official
for a one-time extension of 180 days provided that he can show
good and satisfactory reasons, beyond his control, that the work
cannot be commenced within the one-hundred-eighty-day period
from the issue date. No additional fee is required for this one-time
extension. In order to renew work on a permit after it has expired,
the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.
(3) Section 106.6, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety,
including Subsections 106.6.1, 106.6.2, and 106.6.3 and insert the
following:
106.6 Fees. Applicants for permits under this code shall pay
at the time of application to the Township the fees set forth on
the then-current fee schedule which shall have been adopted by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. When a permit fee is based
on cost of construction, the valuation of the subject work shall be
the fair market value of all of the construction work. The Code
Official shall be satisfied as to the accuracy of the estimate both
initially and at final completion should changes occur as the work
progresses.
106.6.1 Registration required. On or after the passage of this
code, it shall be unlawful for any person or organization to work
at the business of plumbing as defined in this code, within the
boundaries of Towamencin Township, until such person or
organization has been duly registered and issued a license by the
Township. No license shall be issued until the applicant provides
proper credentials evidencing the qualifications and or the degree
of expertise in plumbing work in which the license is sought. Any
organization intending to carry on the business of plumbing must
have each person it intends to employ within the boundaries of the
Township registered and licensed hereunder. Nothing in this code
shall be construed to prohibit the employment of a journeyman
or apprentice provided that all work performed shall be under
the direction and control of a duly registered and licensed master
plumber.
§ 62-20 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-20
1:118
106.6.2 Expiration of registration. At the expiration of each
calendar year, said registration or license shall be null and void.
A licensed master plumber or journeyman plumber desiring to
continue in the business of plumbing work for the ensuing year
shall, before the 31st day of December of each year, surrender
said certificate or license for the current year to the Township,
and reregister his or their name or names and business or home
address upon such form or forms as may from time to time be
furnished by the Township.
106.6.3 Certificates may be revoked. The license granted
under this code may be suspended or revoked by the Township
when a master plumber, firm or corporation, or the registered
representative thereof, shall violate any of the rules and
regulations of this code and shall refuse or neglect to make the
necessary corrections to work not approved by the Township,
within a reasonable time after notification thereof, or who shall
permit the use of his, their or its name by a person or persons for
the purpose of obtaining a permit or permits to do plumbing and
drainage work.
(4) Section 108.2, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert:
108.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official shall serve a notice
of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition,
use or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the
provisions of this code, or in violation of a detail statement or a
plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct
the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the
abatement of the violation within a period of 10 days from the date
of notification, unless otherwise specified. In the event that the
action or condition presents such a threat to the health, safety, or
welfare of an individual or the community, the abatement period
may be reduced by the Code Official.
If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Code
Official shall request the legal counsel of the Township to institute
the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination
of the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
(5) Section 108.4, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert:
§ 62-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-20
1:119
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person, partnership, firm or
corporation who or which shall violate a provision of this code
or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who or which shall use, erect, construct, alter or repair a building
or structure in violation of an approved plan or of a directive of
the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be liable to fines and penalties not
exceeding $500, which fines and penalties may be collected by
suit or summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township
before any District Justice, or recovered as debts of a like amount
are now by law recoverable. Proceedings for the violation of this
code and for the collection of fines and penalties imposed thereby
may be commenced by warrant, or by summons, at the discretion
of the District Justice before whom the proceeding is begun. All
fines and penalties collected for the violation of this code shall
be paid over to the Township Treasury. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the legal counsel of the Township from instituting
appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct,
business or use of a building or structure on or about any
premises.
(6) Section 108.5, insert "$50" for the first amount and "$500" for the
second amount.
(7) Section 109, delete section, including all subsections, in its entirety
and insert the following
§ 62-20 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-20
1:120
SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEAL
109.1 Procedure. An appeal from any decision of the Code
Official may be taken to the Board of Supervisors. Such appeal
shall be made in writing, verified by an affidavit, within 10 days
after such decision has been made, and shall be filed with the
Township Secretary. The appellant or his representative shall have
the right to appear and be heard by the Board. The Board shall
render a prompt decision on such appeal. In making the decision,
the Board may vary or modify any provision of this code, where
there are practical difficulties in the way of executing the strict
letter of this code, or to permit the use of innovative procedures or
materials, provided that the spirit of this code shall be observed,
public safety secured and substantial justice done. Such variation
or modification shall be the minimum necessary in order to grant
relief. Every action of the Board on such appeals shall be by
resolution, copies of which shall be certified to this Code Official
and the appellant. The decision of the Board shall in such cases be
final.
(8) Section 202, add the following definition:
BOARD or BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The governing body for
Towamencin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
(9) Section 305.6, delete the last sentence of the paragraph and insert
the following: "Water service and building sewer pipes shall be
installed no less than 36 inches (915mm) below grade."
(10) Section 305.6.1, insert "36" for number and "915" before "mm" at
both locations.
(11) Section 306.2, delete the third sentence of the paragraph and
insert the following: "The pipe shall be continuously supported with
sand or crushed stone no larger than a 2A or 2B material."
(12) Section 306.2.1.
(a) Delete the words "with sand or fine gravel" and replace with
the following: "with sand or crushed stone no larger than a 2A
or 2B material."
(b) Insert at the end of the paragraph: "No less than 12 inches
(305 mm) of sand or crushed stone no larger than a 2A or 2B
material shall be installed over all pipes."
(13) Section 306.2.2, insert in the first sentence after the word "sand,"
"or crushed stone no larger than a 2A or 2B material."
(14) Section 306.2.3, insert in the first sentence after the words
"crushed stone" the following: "no larger than a 2A or 2B material."
§ 62-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-20
1:121
(15) Section 306.3, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
306.3 Backfilling. All pipe trenches shall be backfilled with sand
or crushed stone no larger than a 2A or 2B material, a minimum
12 inches over the top of the piping. The remainder of the trench
shall be filled with loose earth free from rocks, broken concrete,
frozen chunks, and other rubble. All pipe trenches under floors,
driveways, roads, or other permanent structures or buildings shall
have the trench backfilled to the top of the subgrade with
compacted material to meet the design load requirements.
B. (Reserved)41
C. Chapter 7.
(1) (Reserved)42
(2) (Reserved)43
(3) Table 702.3.
(a) Insert after "building sewer pipe:" "a".
(b) (Reserved)44
(c) (Reserved)45
(d) Insert at the bottom of the table: "Note a: All building sewer
pipes and fittings shall have gasketed joints meeting ASTM
F477. Solvent welded joints shall not be used for the building
sewer pipe or fittings."
D. Chapter 9.
(1) Section 904.1, insert "12" for the number and "305" prior to "mm."
E. Chapter 10.
(1) Section 1002.6, insert at the end of the paragraph: "All relief vents
shall be installed a minimum of 10 feet from any building wall in
which operable doors and windows are located. Each and every
building connected to the public sewer system shall be provided
with a building trap and vent as detailed in this section."
41.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, pertaining to Chapter 6, was repealed 6-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-02.
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), pertaining to Chapter 7, was repealed 6-23-2004
by Ord. No. 04-02.
43.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2), pertaining to Chapter 7, was repealed 6-23-2004
by Ord. No. 04-02.
44.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3)(b), pertaining to Table 702.3, was repealed
6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02.
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3)(c), pertaining to Table 702.3, was repealed
6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02.
§ 62-20 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-20
1:122
§ 62-21. Savings clause.
Nothing in this article or in the Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act of ordinance hereby repealed by this
article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost.
F. (Reserved)46
46.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, pertaining to Chapter 11, was repealed 6-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-02.
§ 62-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-21
1:123

ARTICLE VIII
Energy Conservation Code
(12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-16)
§ 62-22. Adoption of code.
Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of Towamencin, being marked and designated as
the "International Energy Conservation Code, 2000 Edition," as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of
the Township of Towamencin for regulating the design, construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the building envelope,
mechanical, lighting and power systems in the Township of Towamencin
and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of
such International Energy Conservation Code, 2000 Edition, published by
the International Code Council, on file in the office of the Township of
Towamencin and hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and
changes prescribed in § 62-23 of this article.
§ 62-23. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised:
§ 62-24. Savings clause.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any actions required, or liability incurred,
or any cause or causes of action incurred or existing, under any act or
ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be
lost, impaired, or affected by this article.
A. Section 101.1, insert "Towamencin Township" for the name of the
jurisdiction.
B. Section 202, add the following definition:
BOARD or BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The governing body for
Towamencin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 62-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-24
1:125

ARTICLE IX
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02]
§ 62-25. Election to enforce Pennsylvania Construction Code.
Towamencin Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended, and its regulations.
§ 62-26. Adoption of Uniform Construction Code.
The Uniform Construction Code contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of Towamencin
Township.
§ 62-27. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Pennsylvania Construction Code
Act, as amended, and its regulations, within Towamencin Township shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by Board of
Supervisors from time to time by resolution:
§ 62-28. Establishment of a Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of Board of
Supervisors in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, as amended, and its regulations,
and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and
administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities,
said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the
participating municipalities.
A. By the designation of an employee of Towamencin Township to serve as
the municipal code official to act on behalf of the Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Towamencin Township;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Code through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of Towamencin
Township;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 62-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-29
1:127
§ 62-29. Effect of adoption of code on prior ordinances.
§ 62-30. Fees.
Fees assessable by Towamencin Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, as amended, and its regulations shall be established
by Board of Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
§ 62-31. Modification of standards.
Pursuant to 34 Pa. Code § 403.102(I)(8) Towamencin Township hereby
modifies 34 Pa. Code § 403.62(c)(1) by deleting the following exemptions
from the permitting requirements listed therein:
(xi) Replacement of existing roof material that does not exceed 25% of the
total roof area performed within any twelve-month period.
(xiii) Replacement of existing siding.
(xiv) Repair or replacement of any part of a porch or stoop which does not
structurally support a roof located above the porch or stoop.
(xvii) Installation of an uncovered deck where the floor of the deck is no
more than 30 inches above grade.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Towamencin Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act, as amended, and its regulations, shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and
its regulations, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act, as amended, and its regulations are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, as amended, and its regulations.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Towamencin
Township not governed by the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, as
amended, and its regulations shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 62-29 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 62-31
1:128
Chapter 64
DOGS
§ 64-1. Noise disturbances.
Any owner, person, firm, association or corporation utilizing the services of
a dog or dogs for security purposes or possessing a dog as a pet shall be
responsible for the quieting of said dog or dogs from barking and/or howling
and disturbing the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighbors.
§ 64-2. Running at large.
§ 64-3. Defecation and urination.
§ 64-4. Exceptions.
The prohibitions and regulations set forth in this chapter shall not apply to
any legally operated commercial activity involving the breeding, boarding
or grooming of dogs.
§ 64-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in custody or control of any
dog to allow the dog to run at large upon public property or upon the
private property of another other than the owner or person in custody
or control. Said dog must be under positive control by leash.
B. It shall be the duty of every police officer of the Township to seize and
detain any dog which is found running at large, either upon the public
property of the Township or the highways of the commonwealth or upon
the property of persons other than the owner of such dog and
unaccompanied by the owner or keeper.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in custody or control of any
dog to allow such dog to defecate or urinate upon the public property of
the Township, the highways of the commonwealth and the private
property of another other than the owner or keeper of said dog.
B. If such dog shall defecate upon property other than that of the owner or
keeper of the dog, the owner or keeper must immediately clean up the
feces and make proper disposition of it so as not to endanger the health
and safety of the public.
C. If a dog shall defecate upon the property of the owner or keeper of such
dog, the owner or keeper must clean up the feces and make proper
disposition of it within a reasonable period of time so as not to endanger
the health and safety of the public.
§ 62-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-5
1:129
than $1,000 and costs of prosecution, or upon default in payment of the fine
and costs, by imprisonment for not more than five days. Any repetition of a
violation shall be deemed a new offense.
Chapter 67
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading — See Ch. 87. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 133.
§ 64-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 64-5
1:130
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 67-1. Construction permit required.
On or after the passage of this chapter, it shall not be lawful for any
person to construct or reconstruct any driveway or alter the grade, line
or width of any shoulder within the right-of-way of Township roads until a
permit to perform such construction or reconstruction has been issued by
Towamencin Township.
§ 67-2. Short title; purpose.
§ 67-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
to meet the above-stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or
regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater
restrictions than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
ordinance or regulation shall prevail.
§ 67-4. Terminology.
An "access driveway" is any means for passage of vehicles between property
abutting on a Township highway and the highway. It shall be deemed to
include that part of the driveway that lies within the established rightof-
way limits of the Township highway. It will also include such drainage
structures as may be necessary for the proper construction and
maintenance thereof.
§ 67-5. Filing of plans; issuance of permit; fee.
A. Short title. This chapter shall be known as the "Township Driveway
Ordinance."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the construction
of access driveways and abutting graded areas in such a manner as to
facilitate the safe and unobstructed movement of vehicular traffic.
A. Plans and specifications. All construction, grading or planting within
the right-of-way of Township roads shall be executed in accordance with
plans and specifications showing all proposed work in a manner
satisfactory to the Township. Such plans may be part of or included in
plans prepared for building, zoning, subdivision or sewage applications.
B. Permits. A permit will be issued in writing when a plan is deemed
satisfactory to the Township. Under no circumstances whatever shall a
verbal approval or permission given by anyone be considered a
justification for any deviation from the approved plans or for the
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-5
1:131
§ 67-6. Supervision of work.
§ 67-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable,
upon conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $1,000 and costs of
prosecution for each and every offense or, upon default in payment of the
fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for not
more than 30 days, and whenever such person shall have been notified by
the Township Zoning Officer or by service of a summons in a prosecution
or other written notice, that he is committing such violation of this chapter,
each day that he shall continue such violation after such notification shall
constitute a separate offense, punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such fines
or penalties shall be collected as like fines and penalties are now by law
collected.
violation of any of the rules and regulations governing construction
within the right-of-way of Township highways.
C. Fees. The applicant requesting a permit to construct shall pay to the
Township at the time of application the fees set forth in the then-current
fee schedule which shall have been adopted by resolution by the Board
of Supervisors.47
A. Supervision. It shall be the duty of the Township Roadmaster or his
representatives to inspect all work within the right-of-way of the
Township highway for conformity with the ordinances of the Township.
B. Notice. Notice must be given to the Township when the work is
sufficiently advanced for inspection, when it shall be the duty of the
proper officer to inspect the same within two working days after receipt
of said notification.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Fees.
§ 67-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 67-7
1:132
ARTICLE II
Construction Regulations
§ 67-8. Definitions.
A. Any word, term or phrase used in this chapter, but not specifically
defined herein, shall be defined as set forth in the Towamencin
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as last
amended.48
B. The following words and phrases, when used in these regulations, shall,
for the purpose of these regulations, have the following meanings,
respectively, except in those instances where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
CORNER CLEARANCE — The distance, at an intersection of two
highways, between the near edge of the access driveway approach
and the point of intersection of the pavement edges or the curbline
extended.
INTERMEDIATE ISLAND — That section of the roadway right-of-way
between the pavement edge or curb and the property line, which occurs
between driveways.
PAVEMENT EDGE — The edge of the main traveled portion of any
street or highway, exclusive of shoulder or berm.
PERMANENT-TYPE CONSTRUCTION — Plain or reinforced concrete,
bituminous concrete or macadam of required thickness.
PROPERTY LINE CLEARANCE — The distance measured along the
pavement edge or curb between the property frontage boundary line
and the edge of the driveway.
RADIUS CURB — That section of curb forming an arc beginning at end
of driveway and continuing to throat of driveway.
RURAL AREA — An area where roadways have been built to typical
rural highway standards without sidewalks and curbs.
SHOULDER LINE — The intersection of the shoulder slope with the
side slope or ditch slope.
SIDEWALKS — A permanent hard paved walkway, continuous for a
reasonable distance and an integral part of the highway development,
solely for use of pedestrians.
STABILIZED MATERIAL — Any aggregate such as gravel, stone, slag
or mixtures of such aggregates with soil, placed in such a manner as
to provide a smooth, stable, all weather surface, not subject to undue
raveling.
URBAN AREA — An area where the roadways have been built to typical
city street standards, including sidewalks and curbs.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 67-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-8
1:133
§ 67-9. Location, design and construction.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway.
A. All driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere or be inconsistent with the design,
maintenance and drainage of the highway.
B. Access driveways shall be located in such manner so that they will not
cause interference with the traveling public, a hazard to the free
movement of normal highway traffic, nor areas of undue traffic
congestion on the highway. In accordance with this principle, driveways
should be located where the highway alignment and profile are
favorable, i.e., where there are no sharp curves or steep grades and
where sight distance in conjunction with the driveway access would be
adequate for safe traffic operation.
C. Access driveways should not be located at interchanges, ramp areas or
locations that would interfere with the placement and proper
functioning of highway signs, signals, detectors, lighting or other
devices that affect traffic control. The location of a driveway near a
signalized intersection that has an actuated traffic signal may include a
requirement that the permittee provide, without expense to the
Township, additional detectors for the control of traffic movement from
his establishment or for the relocation of existing detectors.
D. Where highway curbs exist, driveway approaches shall be installed 11/2
inches above the adjacent highway or gutter grade to maintain the
proper drainage.
E. Maintenance of grade line.
(1) Where highway curbs do not exist, driveways shall be constructed
in such a manner as not to interfere with the drainage grade line of
shoulders. If, in the opinion of the Roadmaster, a pipe is required to
maintain the grade line, the permittee shall install such pipe, at his
expense, parallel to the pavement edge and at a minimum distance
of 10 feet therefrom and on the grade line as directed by the
Roadmaster (unless advised to the contrary by the Township
Engineer).
(2) Where a pipe is placed in the shoulder line, the driveway may slope
away from the roadway at a lesser gradient than the normal
shoulder slope but not less than 1/4 inch per foot from the paving
edge to the pipe.
(3) The minimum pipe length shall be equal to the width of the
driveway plus eight feet.
§ 67-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 67-10
1:134
§ 67-10. Number and arrangement of access driveways.
The permissible number, arrangement and width of driveways shall be
governed in part by the highway frontage of abutting private property. The
number of driveways permitted shall be the minimum number required to
serve adequately the needs of the abutting property. Frontages of 50 feet or
less shall be limited to one driveway. Normally not more than two driveways
need to be provided to any single property tract or business establishment.
Exception may be made where the frontage exceeds 300 feet in length or
where the frontage is along a divided highway. In such instances, requests
for additional driveways shall require prior approval from the Township.
§ 67-11. Approaches to driveways.
§ 67-12. Standards and specifications.
A. The location and angle of an access driveway approach in relation to
the highway intersection shall be such that a vehicle entering the
driveway may do so in an orderly and safe manner and with a minimum
of interference with through highway traffic and a vehicle leaving the
driveway may enter safely into the lane of traffic moving in the desired
direction.
B. Where the access driveway approach and highway pavement meet,
flaring of the approach may be necessary to allow safe, easy turning of
the vehicle when entering or departing from the driveway.
C. No part of any access driveway shall be constructed outside of the
applicant's frontage.
D. Each roadside business establishment shall provide sufficient parking
or storage space off the right-of-way to prevent the storage of vehicles
on the driveway or the backing up of traffic on the traveled roadway.
E. No part of the highway right-of-way shall be used for servicing of
vehicles, displays or conducting a private business. The area between
the edge of the pavement and the right-of-way line shall be kept clear of
all buildings, sales exhibits, business signs, parking areas, service
equipment, etc., excluding mailboxes.
F. Improvements on private property adjacent to the right-of-way shall be
so located that parking, stopping and maneuvering of vehicles on the
right-of-way will not be necessary in order for vehicles or patrons to be
served properly.
A. Angle of access driveway approach.
(1) Control dimensions.
(a) Single driveway: as near 90° as site conditions permit.
(b) Two driveways.
§ 67-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-12
1:135
[1] Two-way operation: as near 90° as site conditions permit.
[2] One-way operation: 75° minimum.
(2) Single access driveway approaches shall be positioned at right
angles [90°] to the highway or as near thereto as site conditions
permit. When two access driveways are constructed on the same
property frontage and used for one-way operations, each of these
driveways may be placed at less than a right angle, but not less
than 75° to the highway.
B. Corner clearance.
(1) Control dimensions.
(a) Rural: 30 feet minimum.
(b) Urban: 20 feet minimum.
(2) Corner clearance shall be a minimum of 100 feet for all
nonresidential uses and 40 feet for residential uses.
C. Intermediate island between multiple driveways.
(1) Control dimensions: 200 feet minimum.
(2) An intermediate island shall separate all multiple driveways
opening upon the same highway. The island area shall extend from
the shoulder line, ditch line or curbline to the right-of-way line.
(3) The intermediate island area shall be clearly defined.
D. Radius curb.
(1) Control dimensions. The maximum and minimum lengths for radius
curbs shall be as follows:
(a) Residential: five feet minimum; 20 feet maximum.
(b) Nonresidential: 25 feet minimum; 50 feet maximum.
E. Width of access driveway approaches.
(1) The width of driveways shall be as specified in the Towamencin
Township Engineering Standards, as last amended.
(2) The width of access driveways shall not exceed the above
dimensions when measured at right angles to the center line of
driveway. Where a commercial access driveway approach and the
highway pavement meet, flaring of the driveway shall be required
to allow safe and easy turning of the vehicle either into or out of a
commercial development.
F. Curb.
(1) All curb must be of a permanent type.
§ 67-12 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 67-12
1:136
(2) In areas where no curb exists, an eight-inch-high vertical face curb
shall be used.
(3) Where the property abutting the highway right-of-way will be used
for parking area, the Township may require curb to be placed. This
curb will be required to confine the traffic movement to the access
driveway and to prohibit encroachment upon sidewalks or shoulder
area.
G. Sight distance.
(1) Access driveways shall be located at a point of optimum sight
distance along the highway within the property frontage limits. The
profile of the driveway and the grading of the right-of-way area
shall provide a maximum sight distance so that the operator of a
vehicle departing from such a driveway will have optimum visibility
in either direction along the highway.
(2) Where adequate sight distances cannot be attained, the location of
the driveway will be at the discretion of the Township Engineer.
H. Slope of access driveway.
(1) All driveways shall be constructed in such a manner as not to
impair drainage within the highway right-of-way, alter the stability
of the roadway subgrade or materially change the drainage of
adjacent areas. Where open shoulders or berms exist, the grade of
a paved access driveway(s) shall slope away from the highway
pavement at the same rate as the existing shoulder (unless advised
to the contrary by the Township Engineer) for the width of the
shoulder. The gradient of a driveway beyond this point (within the
highway right-of-way) shall not be less than 1/4 inch per foot.
(2) Driveway ramps may extend from the face of the curb up to the
outer edge of the sidewalk area in those cases where a planted area
occurs between multiple driveways. The rate of slope for such
driveway ramps preferably should not exceed one inch per foot.
Where conditions are such that one inch per foot of slope is not
obtainable, the sidewalk area of the driveway may be lowered
sufficiently to obtain the allowable ramp slope and the sidewalk
may be warped up to meet the normal sidewalk grade at a rate of
slope not to exceed 3/8 inch per foot.
(3) Where a drainage ditch or swale exists, adequate pipe shall be
installed under the driveway (by the permittee) in accordance with
Township specifications. Minimum diameter of such drainage pipe
shall be 15 inches (or eleven-inch-by-eighteen-inch arch) unless
otherwise specified by the Township Engineer.
I. Access driveway pavement. Access driveways shall be appropriately
surfaced between the traveled road and the business or service area
with a stabilized material when specified by the Township Engineer.
§ 67-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-12
1:137
§ 67-13. Maintenance.
All driveways, adjacent areas and areas between such driveways, including
channelization, paving, drainage, etc., installed by the permittee shall be
maintained by the property owner in such a manner as not to interfere or
be inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of the highway
or the safe and convenient passage of traffic upon the highway. The term
"adjacent area" shall apply only to that area within the permittee's property
line extended.
§ 67-14. Continuing effect.
These rules and regulations shall become effective on the 31st day of
December 1969 and shall continue in full force and effect thereafter until
amended, modified, revoked or rescinded by the Township.
J. Deceleration and acceleration lanes.
(1) The shoulder or berm area leading to the entrance driveway of a
business establishment or other roadside developments in rural
areas may be paved for a suitable distance to permit vehicles to
decelerate or accelerate in safety when entering or leaving the
property. Such paving shall be limited to the area in front of the
abutting property and shall be done by the property owner, at his
expense, in accordance with Township specifications.
(2) Special attention will be given to permit requests for the
construction of access driveways to large business establishments,
shopping centers, outdoor theaters, etc., particularly when the
volume of traffic generated may necessitate acceleration and
deceleration lanes, standby lanes, jughandles, channelization, etc.
In all such cases, the permittee will be advised that costs incident
to the construction of such additional roadway improvements shall
be at no expense to the Township. Such work shall be constructed
under the supervision and inspection of the Township.
§ 67-12 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 67-14
1:138
Chapter 69
(RESERVED)
Chapter 72
(RESERVED)
Chapter 76
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 44.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 59.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Driveways — See Ch. 67.
Grading — See Ch. 87.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
124.
Signs and posters — See Ch. 130.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 133.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 139.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
§ 67-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-14
1:139

ARTICLE I
Annual Fee Schedule
(The Annual Fee Schedule of the Township of Towamencin, as adopted by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors from time to time, is on file at the
Township office.)
§ 76-1. through § 76-10. (Reserved)
§ 76-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-1
1:141

ARTICLE II
Impact Fee
[Adopted 12-18-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1349
§ 76-11. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Towamencin Township Impact Fee
Ordinance."
§ 76-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish an impact fee program to ensure
that the transportation system is available and adequate to support new
growth and development. To advance this objective, there is hereby created
an impact fee payable to the Township at the time of building permit
issuance.
§ 76-13. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby finds and declares that:
A. The conditions and standards for the determination and imposition of
the impact fee set forth herein are those set forth in Act 209 of 1990,50
and any and all amendments thereto (hereinafter the "Act"), and consist
of the following as if set forth fully at length in this article and are
hereby incorporated by reference:
(1) The recitals set forth above.
(2) The analysis, advice and recommendations of the Impact Fee
Advisory Committee.
(3) The Land Use Assumptions, as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors.
(4) The Roadway Sufficiency Analysis, as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors.
(5) The Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, as adopted by the
Board of Supervisors.
(6) Such other conditions and standards as the Board of Supervisors
may by resolution identify from time to time as being relevant and
material to the imposition of an impact fee and consistent with the
provisions of the Act and any amendments thereto.
B. The collection, disbursement and accounting of impact fees shall be
administered by the office of the Township Manager or Finance
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that impact fees imposed by this ordinance are
retroactive to the extent permissible by law. ]
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq.
§ 76-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-13
1:143
§ 76-14. Definitions.
The terms and definitions set forth in § 502-A of the Act51 are hereby
adopted and incorporated in this article by reference.
§ 76-15. Imposition.
There is hereby enacted an impact fee to be imposed upon new development
for the purpose of off-site public transportation capital improvements
authorized by the Act and as described in the program adopted by the
Board of Supervisors. Said impact fee shall apply to all new developments
or subdivisions within each of the transportation service areas identified
herein and shall be a condition precedent to final approval of a development
or a subdivision plan or issuance of a building permit.
§ 76-16. Uses.
Impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall be expended for costs
incurred for improvements attributable to new development and designated
in the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan adopted by the Board of
Supervisors in Resolution No. 91-34 for improvements within each of the
transportation service areas in which the new development will be located.
Additionally, such fees may be used for the acquisition of land and rightsof-
way, engineering, legal and planning costs and all other costs, including
debt service related to road improvements within the designated service
area, and including such proportionate amount of the Roadway Sufficiency
Analysis as is allowed under the provisions of the Act.52
§ 76-17. Documents adopted.
The following documents, previously adopted by the Board of Supervisors,
are hereby incorporated by reference in this article:
Director, subject to review, oversight and control by the Board of
Supervisors.
C. The time, method and procedure for payment of impact fees shall be as
set forth in § 76-27 of this article.
D. The procedure for credits against or refunds of impact fees shall be as
set forth in § 76-28 of this article.
A. Land Use Assumptions, as adopted by the Township.
B. Roadway Sufficiency Analysis, as adopted by the Township.
C. The Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, as adopted by the
Township.
51.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10502-A.
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq.
§ 76-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 76-17
1:144
§ 76-18. Special traffic studies.
§ 76-19. Applicability.
This article shall be uniformly applicable to all development that occurs
within a designated service area.
§ 76-20. Fee required before issuance of building permit
No building permit shall be issued for a development in a designated
transportation service area, as herein defined, unless the applicant therefor
has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated pursuant to this article.
§ 76-21. (Reserved)
§ 76-22. Calculation of fees.
D. The Impact Fee Schedule, as established by the Township.
E. Designation of transportation districts as set forth on the
Transportation Service Area Map identified as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by reference.53
A. Where intended to assist in determining the appropriate amount of
traffic impact fees, the Township may require the preparation of special
transportation studies to determine the traffic generation or circulation
patterns in new nonresidential developments only; provided, however,
that no studies may be required where the proposed development will
not require a deviation from the land use assumptions used to create
the program.
B. Any such studies required by the Township shall be submitted prior to
the imposition of the impact fee and shall be considered in the
determination of the fee.
A. The impact fee for the transportation capital improvements shall be
based upon the total costs of the road improvements included in the
adopted Transportation Capital Improvements Plan within a given
transportation service area attributable to and necessitated by new
development within the service area, as defined, divided by the number
of anticipated peak-hour trips generated by all new development
consistent with the adopted Land Use Assumptions and calculated in
accordance with the Trip Generation Manual published by the Institute
of Transportation Engineers, Fourth or subsequent editions, which is
hereby adopted by the Township, to equal a per-trip cost for
transportation improvements within the service area.
B. The specific impact fee for a specific new development or subdivision
within the service area for road improvements shall be determined as of
53.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 76-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-22
1:145
§ 76-23. Establishment of transportation service areas.
§ 76-24. Establishment of per-trip cost.
The per-trip cost for each transportation service area shall be as set forth in
Exhibit B55 and attached hereto and made part hereof. It is understood that
Exhibit B shall be modified without any further legislative act automatically
by applying annual escalation based on the Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index to the underlying cost assumptions made regarding
cost of the improvements contemplated herein and the effect that has on
the calculations as set forth in Exhibit B.
the date of preliminary land development or subdivision approval by
multiplying the per-trip cost established for the service area as
determined in § 76-24 hereof by the estimated number of trips to be
generated by the new development or subdivision using generally
accepted traffic engineering standards.
C. The Board of Supervisors may authorize or require the preparation of a
special transportation study in order to determine traffic generation or
circulation for a new nonresidential development to assist in the
determination of the amount of the transportation fee for such
development or subdivision.
A. Transportation service areas are established as shown on the
Transportation Service Area Map, attached hereto as Exhibit A54 and
incorporated herein by reference.
B. Additional transportation district subareas or combinations of
transportation district subareas may be designated by the Board of
Supervisors from time to time, consistent with the procedure set forth
in this article and in consideration of the following factors:
(1) The Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Any standards for adequate public facilities incorporated in the
program.
(3) The projected build-out and timing of development area.
(4) The need for and cost of unprogrammed transportation
improvements necessary to support projected development.
(5) Such other factors as the Board of Supervisors may deem relevant.
C. Fees collected from development in each of the transportation district
subareas will be used exclusively to fund transportation improvement
projects scheduled for that district.
54.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
55.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 76-22 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 76-25
1:146
§ 76-25. Nonbinding impact fee estimate.
Prior to making an application for a building permit, an applicant may
request a nonbinding impact fee estimate from the Township, which shall
be based upon the maximum development potential of the site pursuant to
existing zoning regulations, unless the applicant specifies a lesser use of
development.
§ 76-26. Administration.
§ 76-27. Method of payment.
Payment of the transportation capital improvements impact fee shall be
made by the traffic generator prior to the issuance of a building permit by
the Township to the traffic generator for development on the applicable site.
§ 76-28. Credit.
Any applicant who shall perform, at his own expense and with the consent
and agreement of the Board of Supervisors, off-site improvements, as herein
defined, shall be eligible for a credit from the impact fee otherwise due in
the amount of the actual cost of such off-site improvements as approved
by the Township Engineer. Such credit shall not exceed the amount of the
impact fee.
A. Collection of impact fee. Impact fees due pursuant to this article shall
be collected by the Township in the manner or manners prescribed
herein prior to the issuance of a building permit.
B. Establishment of fund. Upon receipt of impact fees, the Township
Manager's office shall be responsible for the separate and proper
accounting of such fees. All such fees shall be deposited in interestbearing
accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits of the
Township funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to
that account and shall be used solely for the purpose specified for funds
of such account.
C. Establishment and maintenance of accounts. The Township Manager's
office shall establish appropriate trust fund accounts and shall maintain
records whereby impact fees collected can be segregated for each
transportation district area.
D. Maintenance of records. The Township Manager's office shall maintain
and keep adequate financial records for each such account which shall
show the source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account
for all moneys received and which shall ensure that the disbursement of
funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the
provision of projects specified in the program for the particular
transportation district area.
A. If the applicant makes such improvements, he must enter into an
agreement with the Board of Supervisors prior to the issuance of any
§ 76-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-28
1:147
§ 76-29. Refunds.
Refunds of impact fees collected pursuant to this article.
building permit. The agreement must establish the estimated cost of
the improvement, the schedule for initiation and completion of the
improvement, a requirement that the improvement be completed to
Township and Pennsylvania Department of Transportation standards
and design criteria and such other terms and conditions as deemed
necessary by the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors must
review the improvement plan, verify costs and time schedules,
determine if the improvement is an eligible improvement and
determine the amount of the applicable credit for such improvement to
be applied to the otherwise applicable impact fee prior to issuance of
any building permit. In no event shall the Board of Supervisors provide
a credit which is greater than the applicable impact fee. If, however, the
amount of the credit is calculated to be greater than the amount of the
impact fee due, the applicant may use such excess credit toward the
impact fees imposed on other building permits for development on the
same site and in the same ownership, provided that any such applicant
shall be required to supply financial security sufficient, in the judgment
of the Township, to cover the cost of any such improvement installed by
the applicant for which credit is sought.
B. An applicant shall be entitled as a credit against impact fees an amount
equal to the value of any road improvement construction which is
contained in the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan and which
was performed at the applicant's expense.
A. Impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall be refunded,
together with interest earned thereon, to the payor of the fees under
the following circumstances:
(1) In the event that the Township completes or terminates the capital
improvements plan and there remain undisbursed funds, the
respective payors shall be entitled to a share of the fund balance in
the same proportion as the payor's impact fee payment, plus
interest earned, bears to the total impact fees collected, plus
interest.
(2) In the event that any specific road improvement project is
completed at a cost to the Township of less than 95% of the
budgeted cost of the road project, the Township shall refund an
amount equal to the excess budgeted cost over actual cost to the
payors, pro rats, plus accumulated interest.
(3) In the event that the Township fails to commence construction
within three years of the scheduled construction date of the project
as set forth in the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, the
Township shall refund the portion of the fee paid by any payor
making written request therefor which is attributable to said
§ 76-28 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 76-29
1:148
§ 76-30. Effect of fee on other regulations.
This article shall not affect in any manner the permissible use of property,
density of development, previously adopted design and improvement
standards and requirements or any other aspect of the development of land
or provision of public improvements which remain subject to applicable
zoning, subdivision and PRD regulations of the Township, which shall be
operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect
to all such development.
§ 76-31. Fees to be additional and supplemental.
The impact fee is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution
of, any other requirements imposed by the Township on the development of
land or the issuance of building permits. Nothing herein contained shall be
deemed to alter or affect the Township's existing ordinances and regulations
regarding on-site improvements. In no event shall a property owner be
obligated to pay for transportation capital improvements in an amount in
excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this article; provided, however,
that a property owner may be required to pay, pursuant to Township
ordinances, regulations or policies, for other public facilities in addition to
the impact fee for transportation improvements as specified herein.
§ 76-32. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to effectively carry
out its purposes which are hereby found and declared to be furtherance of
the public health, safety, welfare and convenience. Included herein shall be,
project with accumulated interest, provided that no refund shall be
paid with respect to any project actually begun prior to the receipt
of such refund request.
(4) In the event that the development for which impact fees were paid
has not commenced prior to the expiration of the building permit
issued therefor, the impact fees paid with accumulated interest
shall be refunded to the payor upon written request therefor made
within one year from the date of expiration of the applicable
permit. Further, if a building permit after issuance is altered in
such a way as to reduce the indicated impact fee, the difference
between the amount indicated and the amount actually paid shall
be refunded. The payor, at his option, may roll over the impact fees
attributable to an expired building permit to cover fees incurred by
a renewal of said expired permit.
B. With respect to refunds arising out of Subsection A(1) or (2) hereof, any
funds unclaimed within one year after notice as required by law shall be
transferred to the general account of the Township, and the payor's
entitlement to said refund shall lapse. It is the responsibility of the
payor to provide the Township with the current address of his place of
business.
§ 76-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-32
1:149
as part of the interpretation of this article, that the Township has adopted
all powers as set forth in Act 209 Of 1990 as if set forth herein at length.
§ 76-33. Impact fee for Service Area East. [Added 10-23-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-11]
The impact fee for Service Area East shall be $2,197.56 per peak afternoon
hour trip.
§ 76-32 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 76-33
1:150
ARTICLE III
Attorneys' Fees for Municipal Claims
[Adopted 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3]
§ 76-34. Attorneys' fees.
In any action to collect delinquent taxes, sewer rents, assessments, other
utility fees, or any other municipal claim, an additional 10% of the total
amount of the claim shall be added for payment of attorneys' fees associated
with collection of the claim.
§ 76-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-34
1:151

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Fees
[Adopted 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-08]
§ 76-35. Fee for development of areas tributary to the common
municipal stormwater management facility in the Towamencin
Village Overlay District.
§ 76-36. Fee for public art related to development in the
Towamencin Village Overlay.
§ 76-37. Fee for tapping or connecting to the Towamencin Township
public sewer.
A fee shall be charged, as set by the Annual Fee Schedule, for tapping or
connecting to the Towamencin Township public sewer.
A. Fee. A fee, as set by the Annual Fee Schedule, shall be imposed for
every gross acre developed in those acres tributary to the common
municipal stormwater management facility. For any development of a
site of less than one gross acre, the fee shall be prorated (e.g.,
development of a one-half gross acre site = 1/2 times applicable fee).
B. Time of payment; establishment of separate account. Such fees shall be
payable at the time of final approval of the development plan. All
monies paid under the provisions of this section shall be set aside in a
separate account to be used to fund the common municipal stormwater
management facility.
A. Fee. For each residential unit (regardless of the type of unit, singlefamily,
townhouse, multifamily, apartment, etc.), the applicant shall pay
a fee as set by the Annual Fee Schedule. The applicant shall also pay a
fee for each gross square foot of nonresidential space as set by the
Annual Fee Schedule.
B. Time of payment; establishment of separate account. Such fees shall be
payable at the time of final approval of the development plan. All
monies paid under the provisions of this section shall be set aside in a
separate account to be used to fund the Public Art Program of the
Towamencin Village Overlay District.
§ 76-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-37
1:153
Chapter 79
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fireworks — See Ch. 81.
§ 79-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BACKSTOP — A sufficiently steep earthen berm, bank, hillside, or other
structure intended safely to stop and contain projectiles fired at targets on
a target range.
BULLET TRAP — An angled metal plate trap, snail trap, or other device
intended safely to stop and contain projectiles fired at targets placed in
front of it.
FIREARM — A shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver, or other gun or implement
of any caliber, mechanism or kind which impels a bullet, slug, single or
multiple pellets, or other projectile(s) of any sort by the combustion,
explosion or ignition of a propellant powder, "gunpowder," or other chemical
compound. The term "firearm" as used in this chapter does not include nail
guns and similar powder-actuated construction tools that use 0.22 blanks
or other blank cartridges, when used for their intended purpose of driving
nails, rivets, and other fasteners into solid materials, and not for the firing
of nails, rivets, pellets or other projectiles through the air in the nature of a
conventional firearm.
FIREARMS TARGET RANGE — Any outdoor or outdoor site, location or
facility for the firing of firearms in target practice, marksmanship training,
shooting competition or recreation, rather than for hunting or other uses
specifically permitted in this chapter.
INCENDIARY AMMUNITION — Ammunition containing a compound that
burns upon being fired or upon striking a target, designed to cause fires.
LOW-POWERED NON-POWDER GUN — So-called "paintball guns" and
"airsoft guns" which propel paint marking, powder marking, or plastic
projectiles, intended to be fired at people wearing suitable personal
protective equipment, where the projectiles are propelled at velocities not
exceeding 400 feet per second by the force of compressed air, compressed
gas, or spring force and not by the combustion, explosion or ignition of a
propellant powder, "gunpowder," or other chemical compound, as well as
traditional spring-powered and other BB guns firing spherical metal BBs at
velocities less than 350 feet per second.
MINOR — Any individual less than 18 years of age.
§ 76-37 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 79-1
1:154
NON-POWDER GUN — Air rifles, air pistols, spring guns, spring pistols,
BB rifles, BB pistols, or similar devices which are not firearms as defined
in this chapter, which impel a pellet (whether spherical, conical, waisted,
dart-shaped, or of any other kind), BB, slug, bullet, dart, or other projectile,
by means of force produced by compressed air, compressed gas (including
CO2, nitrogen, "green gas" or any other gas), compressed spring force,
piston force, or any other mechanism, that can reasonably be expected to
cause bodily harm if the projectile strikes a person. The term "non-powder
gun" shall not include:
NON-POWDER GUN TARGET RANGE — Any outdoor or partially outdoor
site, location or facility for the firing of non-powder guns firing projectiles
at not more than 1,000 feet per second muzzle velocity, and not exceeding
0.25 caliber (0.25").
PYROTECHNIC AMMUNITION — Ammunition including but not limited to
"dragon's breath" and similar rounds that, upon being fired, is designed to
emit more than the usual amount of flame, spark, or muzzle flash from the
firearm's muzzle, in the nature of fireworks.
SIDE BERMS OR WALLS — Earthen berms, dirt banks, masonry walls, or
other structures extending from the backstop in the direction of the firing
line or firing point(s), for the purpose of safely containing any projectiles or
projectile fragments that might ricochet or glance off the backstop, targets
or target frames.
TARGET RANGE or RANGE — A firearms target range and/or non-powder
gun target range.
TRACER AMMUNITION — Ammunition having a combustible compound in
the base of the projectile which burns in flight, in order to permit visual
observation of the projectile's flight path.
So-called "paintball guns" which propel paint marking or powder
marking projectiles, or "airsoft" guns which propel spherical plastic
projectiles, intended to be fired at people wearing suitable personal
protective equipment, where the projectiles are propelled at velocities
not exceeding 400 feet per second by the force of compressed air or
compressed gas, and not by the combustion, explosion or ignition of a
propellant powder, "gunpowder," or other chemical compound;
A.
Traditional spring-powered and other BB guns firing spherical metal
BBs at velocities less than 350 feet per second; or
B.
CO2 powered, pneumatic or similar nail guns or other construction
tools when used for their intended purpose of driving nails, rivets,
and other fasteners into solid materials, and not for the firing of nails,
rivets, or other fasteners or projectiles through the air in the nature of
a conventional firearm.
C.
§ 79-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-2
1:155
§ 79-2. Discharge prohibited; exceptions authorized.
Except as herein otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful and it is hereby
prohibited for any person or persons to fire or discharge any firearm within
the Township of Towamencin, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 79-3. Exceptions for defense or target range use.
No person shall, except in defense of person or property or on an approved
target range under adult supervision, fire or discharge any firearm within
the Township of Towamencin.
§ 79-4. Exceptions for hunting and other lawful uses.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the use of:
§ 79-5. Target ranges.
A. A shotgun or other firearm when used for lawful hunting purposes in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Game
Commission;
B. The use of any type of firearm or non-powder gun on an approved target
range under adult supervision;
C. In the R-200 District and to the extent permitted by law and
Pennsylvania Game Commission rules and regulations, the control or
elimination of agricultural pests and other animals causing property
damage or nuisance by use of a shotgun firing multiple spherical pellets
not exceeding the size of No. 3 buckshot (0.25"), or a 0.22 caliber
rimfire rifle, or a non-powder gun;
D. The discharge of a firearm or non-powder gun in lawful self-defense; or
E. The discharge of firearms by law enforcement officers in practice,
training or qualification firing approved by their law enforcement
agency, at a firearms target range approved by the Township.
A. Permits for target ranges. The Township Manager is hereby authorized
to issue a permit to a property owner for an outdoor firearms target
range or non-powder gun target range, after the inspection and
approval of the range location and completed range by the Board of
Supervisors and/or its designated representative(s). The cost of the
permit for any range shall be $100. The conditions of the permit,
specifications of the range, and conditions under which range may be
used, other than as specified in the following subsections, may be
determined and required by the Board of Supervisors.
B. The Township shall not regulate ranges and locations for the firing of
low-powered non-powder guns, which may be used in accordance with
Pennsylvania and federal law, anywhere the firing of such guns does not
cause a nuisance, and does not alarm or endanger others.
§ 79-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 79-5
1:156
C. The applicant for a firearms target range permit or non-powder gun
target range permit shall submit a written application on a form
provided by the Township Manager, detailing the location, orientation,
and specifications of the range and the manner in which the range will
be used. If the permit is granted, the use of the range shall be in
accordance with the details provided in the written application, the
provisions of this Code section, and any additional conditions required
by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Firearms target ranges otherwise complying with applicable
restrictions shall be permitted in the R-200 District. Non-powder gun
target ranges otherwise complying with applicable restrictions shall be
permitted in the R-200, R-180, and R-175 Districts.
E. Firearms target ranges shall have backstops of the type recommended
by the National Rifle Association in the then-current edition of its Range
Source Book and appended materials.
F. No part of any firearms target range, including its firing point(s), its
backstop (measured from the highest point of any man-made earthen
berm or other structure used as its backstop), its targets or target
frames, and any point along the trajectory of any projectiles fired at the
targets from the firing point(s), shall be closer than 150 yards (450 feet)
from the property line of the property on which the range is located.
G. Non-powder gun target ranges shall have backstops or bullet traps
adequate to ensure that no projectiles fired at targets on the target
range leave the property on which the target range is located. No part
of any non-powder gun target range, including its firing point(s), its
backstop (measured from the highest point of any man-made earthen
berm used as its backstop) or bullet trap, its targets or target frames,
and any point along the trajectory of any projectiles fired at the targets
from the firing point(s), shall be closer than 75 yards (225 feet) from the
property line of the property on which the range is located, except that
the Township may, in its discretion, allow such a range to be situated
closer in consideration of natural or man-made structures or conditions
on the range property or adjoining properties.
H. Target ranges shall be oriented in the safest reasonable direction,
taking into account the topography and other conditions of the location,
and the existing or likely development and use of adjoining and nearby
properties.
I. Target ranges shall not be oriented in a manner that results in lead or
other toxic projectiles being fired into any body of water, or into a dirt
backstop, dirt bank, hillside, or other natural structure close to any
body of water such that the water may be affected by the toxic material
of the projectiles.
J. The Township, in its reasonable discretion, may require a firearms
target range or non-powder gun target range to have side berms or side
walls, overhead or side baffles or other limiting structures, fencing and/
§ 79-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-5
1:157
or signage to prevent the inadvertent ingress of individuals into the
downrange danger zone of the range, or such other features as the
Township, or its designated representatives, may reasonably deem
necessary for the safe operation of the range.
K. No firing at any aerial target, including clay pigeons fired at with
shotguns and birdshot, is permitted anywhere in the Township of
Towamencin.
L. No firing at any exploding target, including but not limited to Tannerite,
ammonium nitrate and other exploding target materials, is permitted
anywhere in the Township of Towamencin.
M. Firing at any range is permitted only when the holder of the range
permit is present on the range itself, and is directly supervising all
firing that is taking place. Firing is permitted only by adults, and by
minors under the direct supervision of an adult. An adult may supervise
no more than one minor firing at any time.
N. No more than two individuals (whether adults or minors) may actually
be firing at any time.
O. No fully automatic firearms (machine guns), Gatling guns and Gatlingtype
guns, and simulated fully automatic firearms (including firearms
fitted with "bump stocks," "hellfire" trigger actuators, and similar
devices) are permitted to be fired at any target range in the Township of
Towamencin.
P. Firing on a firearms target range shall not begin earlier than 8:30 a.m.,
and shall not continue beyond 8:30 p.m., or 30 minutes before sunset,
whichever is earlier.
Q. Firing on firearms target ranges shall not be permitted on Sundays,
except with the advance written permission of all other property
owners whose property lines are within 1,000 feet of any part of the
range as specified in Subsection E above. As a condition of such
advance written permission to use the range on one or more Sundays,
other property owners may require that the firearms target range not
be used on some other day(s) of the week.
R. Firing on a non-powder gun target range, or firing on non-powder guns
on a firearms target range, is permitted on any day not earlier than 8:30
a.m., and not later than 8:30 p.m., or 30 minutes before sunset,
whichever is earlier.
S. The sound of gunshots from any firearms target range or non-powder
gun target range shall not exceed the decibel level permitted by the
Township of Towamencin Noise Ordinance as found in Chapter 103 of
the Township Code.
§ 79-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 79-5
1:158
T. No firearms target range may be used for firing during a period that
continues for more than three hours on more than two days on any
Monday-through-Sunday calendar week.
U. The use of all ranges shall be restricted to private use by the property
owner, property owner's family members, relatives, and personal
friends. Use of the range shall not be open to the general public. No
commercial use shall be made of the range, with the exception that
firearms training classes conducted by paid firearms instructors other
than the property owner or any member of the property owner's family
may be conducted for no more than four trainees in any class with the
advance written permission of the Township Manager, such classes not
to be conducted more than twice in any calendar year. The basis for
approval or disapproval of such classes by the Township Manager shall
be the impact any such class is likely to have on the enjoyment and use
of the neighboring properties by their owners, family members,
relatives, employees and invitees.
V. Handling and use of firearms on any range permitted by the Township
shall be in accordance with rules and procedures for the safe handling
of firearms and non-powder guns generally accepted in the firearms
and non-powder gun fields, including but not limited to the rules
promoted by the National Rifle Association in its written materials or
taught in its firearms and airgun classes. Grounds for the Township
Manager's or Township Supervisors' immediate revocation of any range
permit include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Unsafe gun handling practices, in violation of the standards
described in this section;
(2) Projectiles fired on the range which fall beyond the property lines
of the property on which the range is located;
(3) Firing on the range at times, or in duration, prohibited by this
chapter;
(4) Any use of incendiary, tracer, or pyrotechnic ammunition on the
range, or use of any exploding targets;
(5) Any use of the range that violates the provisions of this chapter, or
the conditions on which the range permit was issued; or
(6) Any use of the range that endangers human life, or poses an
unreasonable hazard to others or to the property of others.
W. The Township Manager, Board of Supervisors, or their designated
representative(s) shall be permitted to inspect the range once per year
upon reasonable notice to the property owner, to ensure that the
backstop and other range structures and conditions are being
maintained in compliance with the applicable standards and
requirements. In addition, the property owner agrees that the range
may be inspected upon any complaint of an unsafe condition or unsafe
§ 79-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-5
1:159
§ 79-6. Seizure of firearms.
Any Township police officer lawfully engaged in his law enforcement duties
within the Township of Towamencin is hereby authorized to seize, for
evidentiary purposes, any firearm, as defined herein, which shall be fired or
discharged within the limits of the Township of Towamencin in violation of
this chapter.
§ 79-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $300 and the
costs of prosecution, through the issuance of a summary citation. In default
of the payment of any fine or penalty imposed by any District Justice under
the provisions of this chapter, the person or persons so violating may be
committed to the Montgomery County Prison for a period determined by the
District Justice, not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 80
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
False alarms — See Ch. 44, Art. I.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 54.
Certificate of occupancy inspections — See
Ch. 59.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Fireworks — See Ch. 81.
use, including but not limited to projectiles landing or causing damage
beyond the property lines of the property on which the range is located,
or causing injury to humans or animals at any location.
X. The issuance of a range permit by the Township, the specifying of
conditions or requirements for the range, and the initial, periodic, or
other inspection of the range or approval for use of the range by the
Township or its designated representatives, do not constitute an
acceptance of liability by the Township for any damages, injuries,
mishaps, or other legal or equitable claims arising from the use of the
range, for which the owner and users of the range shall remain
completely liable.
§ 79-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 79-7
1:160
ARTICLE I
Fire, Life Safety and Emergency Equipment Inspections
[Adopted 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-08]
§ 80-1. Program established for certain facilities.
A program of fire, life safety and emergency equipment inspections is
authorized for the following facilities located in Towamencin Township:
residential rental units, industrial facilities, commercial facilities, retail
businesses, banks and all other retail and wholesale facilities, educational
and day-care facilities, and places of worship.
§ 80-2. Cooperative nature of program.
The program will be a cooperative endeavor between the Township and
the community under the jurisdiction of the Fire Marshal, the Deputy Fire
Marshals and the Code Enforcement Department of Towamencin Township.
§ 80-3. Inspection requirements.
The inspections will be completed per the requirements of the BOCA
National Building Code, the International One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Code, the BOCA Fire Prevention Code, the BOCA Plumbing Code, the
International Property Maintenance Code, and any other applicable
Township codes or ordinances, during normal working hours (9:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.) and will include, but will not be limited to, the following items, in
applicable circumstances:
A. Fire protection and fire suppression systems.
B. Fire alarm systems.
C. Means of egress.
D. Fire Department access.
E. Electric service and panels.
F. Gas service.
G. Room occupancy loads.
H. Special exhausting and ducting equipment.
I. Elevator equipment and systems.
J. Hazardous materials storage and information.
K. Special hazards.
L. Truss identification emblems. [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No.
01-11]
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-4
1:161
§ 80-4. Fees. [Amended 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-11]
The biennial fees for the fire, life safety and emergency equipment
inspections are as established in the Towamencin Township Fee Schedule
as adopted, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.56
§ 80-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, or association in violation of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be guilty of a summary offense
and subject to payment of a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $300
and the costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorney's fees of the
Township, and in default thereof to imprisonment in Montgomery County
Prison as provided by law.
§ 80-6. Pending suits or proceedings.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any actions required, or liability incurred,
or any cause or causes of action incurred or existing, under any act or
ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be
lost, impaired, or affected by this article.
56.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 80-4 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 80-6
1:162
Chapter 81
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms — See Ch. 79.
§ 81-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings set forth herein:
FIREWORKS — Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance
or combination of substances or any article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion or detonation,
and shall include but not be limited to firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets,
Roman candles, aerial fireworks or other fireworks of like construction, and
any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound or other
device containing an explosive substance, but shall not include sparklers or
caps containing 0.25 grain or less of explosive compound enclosed in paper
or "toy cannons" using a mixture of less than 0.1 ounce of calcium carbide
and water.
PERSON — Any natural person or persons, firm or corporation.
§ 81-2. Statutory authorization; compliance required.
Pursuant to the authority granted under the provisions of 35 P.S. § 1272 and
the provisions of the Second Class Township Code to prevent nuisances and
the danger of fire and injuries to persons and property,57 no person shall
discharge, explode or fire any fireworks within or over any property within
the Township of Towamencin, except as provided herein.
§ 81-3. Permit required for display; application.
The discharge or display of fireworks shall be permitted only in conjunction
with a permit granted by the Chief of Police of Towamencin Township after
an application on forms provided by the Township providing the following:
A. The application for the discharge of fireworks shall be made not less
than 15 days prior to the date proposed for the discharge or display.
B. The application shall specify the location of the discharge or display
and, in the event that the applicant is not the owner of the property,
shall include a statement of consent for such discharge or display by the
owner of the property.
57.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66534.
§ 80-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-3
1:163
§ 81-4. Inspection of premises; issuance of permit.
The Chief of Police, in conjunction with the Chief of the Fire Department,
shall inspect the location of the proposed discharge or display to determine
whether such location and proposed type of discharge and display would
be hazardous to persons and property and that the operator is competent
to carry out such discharge and display. After the inspection and
determination, the Chief of Police shall issue the permit for the display,
subject to the condition that the applicant shall notify all surrounding
property owners within 300 feet of the property lines of the premises where
the discharge is to occur not less than five days prior to the date of the
proposed discharge by regular mail.
§ 81-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to
conviction for a summary offense and, upon such conviction, shall pay a fine
of not less than $300.
Chapter 82
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
C. The application shall set forth the name and address of the operator
who will conduct the discharge or display, including written evidence of
competence to conduct the discharge or display.
D. The application shall state the number and sizes of fireworks to be
discharged.
E. The applicant shall submit with the application evidence of insurance
covering both personal injury and property damage in an amount of not
less than $1,000,000 and shall submit a bond in an amount of not less
than $500 conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be
caused, whether directly or indirectly, to persons or property arising
out of the discharge or display.
F. The applicant shall agree that all explosions of the fireworks to be
discharged shall be confined to the premises or the air space
immediately above it.
§ 81-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 81-5
1:164
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 82-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,58 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Towamencin Township does hereby order
as follows.
58.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 82-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-1
1:165

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 82-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is as follows:
§ 82-3. Applicability.
A. Protect areas of the floodplain necessary to contain floodwaters.
B. To permit only those uses in the floodplain that are compatible with
preserving natural conditions and stream flow.
C. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community by
preventing development in areas prone to flooding.
D. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
E. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
F. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
G. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. The Floodplain Conservation District is defined and established as a
district applicable to those areas of the Township subject to inundation
by the waters of the 1% annual chance flood (one-hundred-year flood)
consisting of the following specific areas:
(1) Areas delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, as prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, dated March 2, 2016, and
subsequent revisions thereto. Said floodplain areas shall consist of
the following specific areas:
(a) Floodway.
(b) A Zone.
(c) AE Zone without Floodway.
(d) AE Zone adjacent to defined Floodway.
(2) Soils with a frequency of flooding of 1% or greater per year, as
delineated by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture Web-Based Soil Survey (available
online at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/), including the
following soils:
§ 82-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:167
§ 82-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in the Floodplain Conservation District. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 82-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 82-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Bowmansville (Bo)
Knauers (Bo)
Gilbraltar (Gc)
Hatboro (Ha)
Rowland (Rt)
Rowland (RwA)
Rowland (RwB)
Urban Land Occasionally Flooded (UIA)
B. In lieu of the above, the Township may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Township.
C. The Floodplain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay on any
zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any lot.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Floodplain Conservation District
unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
E. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
§ 82-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-6
1:168
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside the Floodplain Conservation District or that
land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 82-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-6
1:169

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 82-7. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 82-8. Specific Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"1% annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The BFE is
also shown on the FIS profile, and can be determined for Zone A Floodplains
and areas with the soils identified in § 82-3A(2).
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to subdivision of land; construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or
other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other
paving; utilities; fill; grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling
operations; or storage of equipment or materials.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be
§ 82-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-8
1:171
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC) as
meeting the criteria for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Pennsylvania Historical
and Museum Commission (PHMC) as contributing to the historical
significance of a National Register historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the PHMC to be eligible to qualify for
listing in the National Register; or
B.
Designated as historic by a municipal ordinance:
Identified individually or as part of a local historic district by
a zoning ordinance under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code or
(1)
C.
§ 82-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-8
1:172
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It includes the area identified as the Special Flood
Hazard Area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study
and the areas with the soils identified in § 82-3.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the date of enactment of this chapter, and includes
any subsequent improvements thereto. Any construction started after July
2, 1980, and before the effective start date of this floodplain management
chapter is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was
issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
Located in a local historic district that has been certified by the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission as meeting the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Historic District Act.
(2)
§ 82-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-8
1:173
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the59 onepercent
frequency flood," or the "base flood," as defined by FEMA in the
Flood Insurance Study for the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, copartnership, corporation,
company, association, joint stock association or body politic, including a
trustee, a receiver, an assignee or a similar representative thereof or any
other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial FIRM dated July 2, 1980, whichever is later, and, as
such would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the NFIP.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial FIRM dated July 2, 1980, and, as such would not be
required to be compliant with the regulations of the NFIP.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — A census tract or group of census tracts
eligible for the Montgomery County Revitalization Program and identified
in the adopted municipal revitalization plan.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation to which development
is regulated for purposes of elevation and/or dry floodproofing. It is equal to
the base flood elevation (BFE) plus a freeboard of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is
shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL FLOODPLAIN AREA — The areas identified as Zone A or AE in the
Flood Insurance Study, where one-hundred-year flood elevations have been
provided, but no floodway has been delineated.
59.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “essentially dry space,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06. See now Ch. 82,
Floodplain Management.
§ 82-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-8
1:174
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the surface.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
A.
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement must comply with all ordinance
B.
§ 82-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-8
1:175
TOWNSHIP — Towamencin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure. See § 82-24F.
§ 82-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-8
1:176
ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 82-9. Identification.
§ 82-10. Description and special requirements of Floodplain
Conservation District.
The Floodplain Conservation District shall consist of the following specific
areas/districts:
A. The Floodplain Conservation District shall be any areas of the Township
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated March 2, 2016, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study.
B. The Floodplain Conservation District shall also include areas with soils
listed in §§ 82-3A(2) and 82-10D.
C. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Township and declared to
be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area/District shall be those areas identified as Floodway
on the FIRM as well as those floodway areas which have been identified
in other available studies or sources of information for those special
floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS. The
floodway represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial Improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
§ 82-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-10
1:177
(1) The AE Area/District adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA and for which base flood elevations have been provided in
the FIS but no floodway has been delineated.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
C. The A Area/District shall be the areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
source shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the elevation shall be determined by using
the elevation of a point on the boundary of the Floodplain Conservation
District which is nearest the construction site.
(1) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
D. Soils with a frequency of flooding of 1% or greater per year, as
delineated by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture Web-Based Soil Survey (available
online at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/), including the following
soils:
Bowmansville (Bo)
Knauers (Bo)
Gilbraltar (Gc)
§ 82-10 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-10
1:178
§ 82-11. Changes in identification of area.
The Floodplain Conservation District may be revised or modified by the
Board of Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified
agency or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior
to any such change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally,
as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the
changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 82-12. Boundary disputes.
§ 82-13. Corporate boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
Hatboro (Ha)
Rowland (Rt)
Rowland (RwA)
Rowland (RwB)
Urban Land Occasionally Flooded (UIA)
A. In the case of any dispute concerning the boundaries of an FP
Floodplain Conservation District, the initial determination shall be
made by the Township Engineer.
B. Any party aggrieved by such decision of the Township Engineer as to
the boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation District as defined
above, which may include the grounds that the FIRM is or has become
incorrect because of changes due to natural or other causes, or
corrections indicated by additional detailed hydrologic and hydraulic
studies, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in
Chapter 153, Article XI, § 153-1107E. The burden of proof shall be on
the applicant.
C. Insofar as changes in various natural conditions, including the
Floodplain Conservation District as herein defined, may change, such
changes may be validated by detailed on-site survey techniques and
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. A determination of
whether or not a proposed use is within the FP Floodplain Conservation
District shall, upon appeal from the decision of the Township Engineer,
be made by the Zoning Hearing Board upon receipt of the findings of
the detailed on-site survey by the applicant. The Board may consider, in
addition to other evidence and standards, the recommendations of the
Planning Commission and the validation of FEMA and/or other
governmental agencies.
§ 82-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-13
1:179
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 82-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-13
1:180
ARTICLE V
Uses Permitted in the Floodplain Conservation District
§ 82-14. Uses permitted by right.
The following uses are permitted by right in the Floodplain Conservation
District in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the
Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance including the Environmental
Performance Standards (§ 153-616):
A. Agricultural uses, including the cultivation and harvesting of crops,
pasture and grazing land and the growing of plant stock or an orchard,
conducted in compliance with methods prescribed in the latest version
of the Department of Environmental Protection's Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Manual.
B. Open space uses that are primarily passive in character, with no
structures, shall be permitted to extend into the floodplain including:
(1) Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest preserves, fishing
areas, and reforestation.
(2) Passive areas of public and private parklands, including trails and
golf courses (not miniature golf).
(3) Streambank stabilization approved by the Township Engineer and
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
C. Piers and docks along a waterway with approval from the appropriate
state agencies.
D. Forestry, lumbering and reforestation reviewed by the Montgomery
County Conservation District.
E. Public sewer and/or water lines and public utility transmission lines
running along the corridor. Sealed public water supply wells and
sanitary sewer pump stations with approval of the Township Engineer
and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
F. Up to half of any required yard setback area on an individual lot may
extend into the Floodplain Conservation District.
G. The following floodplain crossings are permitted, provided disturbance
to any existing woodlands and degradation of water quality are
minimized to the greatest extent practicable, with approval of
applicable state agencies:
(1) Agricultural crossings by farm vehicles and livestock.
(2) Driveways serving single-family detached dwelling units.
(3) Roadways, recreational trails, railroads, and utilities.
§ 82-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-14
1:181
§ 82-15. Additional requirements for permitted uses.
§ 82-16. Uses prohibited in Floodplain Conservation District.
Any use or activity not authorized within § 82-14, herein, shall be prohibited
within the Floodplain Conservation District and the following activities and
facilities are specifically prohibited, except for as part of a redevelopment
project in compliance with § 82-14G herein:
H. Development of elevated and flood-proofed buildings on brownfield
sites in redevelopment areas encouraging economic revitalization, in
compliance with Article VII.
A. All permitted uses are subject to the floodproofing requirements in
Article VII of this chapter.
B. No structure shall be permitted within 20 feet of the delineated
Floodplain Conservation District unless otherwise provided for by this
chapter. Exceptions: Fencing shall be allowed within the Floodplain
Conservation District considering it meets the following requirements:
(1) No stockade fences or solid fencing of any kind shall be allowed to
be constructed within the Floodplain Conservation District.
(2) Post and rail and split rail fences shall be permitted within the
flood-fringe of the Floodplain Conservation District and shall not be
constructed in a manner which will impede the water flow.
(3) Allowable fence types shall be constructed in a manner which does
not allow for floodwater to rise in height, pool or change the natural
direction of the floodway.
(4) Wire mesh will be allowed but must be maintained regularly as to
not collect debris.
(5) Require applicants to sign a liability waiver making them aware
they assume all responsibility for damages caused by their fence
during a flood event; furthermore, the applicant is aware that in the
event his or her fence is damaged during a flood event, the owner
shall have the fence repaired or removed within 10 days from the
time the damage occurred. This document shall be recorded with
the Montgomery County Recorder of Deeds office.
A. No new construction, alteration, or improvement of buildings and any
other type of permanent structure.
B. Placement of fill, construction of retaining walls or grading with the
exception of culverts or bridges required for floodplain crossings as
identified in § 82-14.
C. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse.
§ 82-14 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-16
1:182
§ 82-17. Banned uses.
The following uses shall be banned in any Floodplain Conservation District
and no variance shall be granted:
D. Clearing of all existing vegetation, except where such clearing is
necessary to prepare land for a use permitted under § 82-14, herein,
and where the effects of these actions are mitigated by reestablishment
of vegetation.
E. Use of fertilizers, herbicides, and/or other chemicals in excess of
prescribed industry standards.
F. Parking lots, private roads or driveways except for permitted floodplain
crossings as identified in § 82-14.
G. Subsurface sewage disposal areas.
H. Sanitary landfills, dumps, junkyards, outdoor storage of vehicles and
miscellaneous materials or storage of any buoyant, toxic or dangerous
materials.
I. Private water supply wells.
J. Sod farming.
K. Removal of topsoil, ground cover, vegetation or trees within the
floodway or 50 feet from top of bank, if no floodway is defined.
L. Stormwater basins, including necessary berms and outfall facilities.
A. Development which may endanger human life. In accordance with the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,60 and the regulations
adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development
as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure
which will be used for the production or storage of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances; or will be used for any activity
requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or
other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances on the premises; or will involve the production, storage,
or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be subject to the
provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions.
The following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
60.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 82-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-17
1:183
§ 82-18. Nonconforming structures and uses in Floodplain District.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 82-24 of this chapter
and Article IX of the Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance61 shall apply.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
C. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, placement of a new manufactured home or
substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home or
manufactured home park or subdivision.
D. Recreational vehicles.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 82-17 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-18
1:184
ARTICLE VI
Variances
§ 82-19. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of
the requirements.
§ 82-20. Variance procedures.
§ 82-21. Standards for granting variances.
A. Applications for approval of variances in the FP Floodplain
Conservation District shall be considered using the standards listed in
§ 82-21.
B. For a use other than those permitted in § 82-14, an application seeking
approval by variance shall be forwarded to the Zoning Hearing Board
along with required studies or information and the findings of the
Zoning Officer.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board shall request the review and
recommendations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the County Conservation District at least 30 days prior
to the public hearing.
D. The Board shall request, at least 30 days prior to the public hearing, the
review and recommendation of the Township Planning Commission and
the Township Engineer.
E. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
F. In rendering a decision, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary
in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve
the objectives of this chapter.
G. Whenever a variance is granted, the Township shall notify the applicant
in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
H. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
§ 82-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-21
1:185
A. No variance shall be granted for any of the uses in § 82-17, Banned
uses.
B. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the
BFE.
C. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any portion of the FP Floodplain Conservation District
without a defined floodway that would, together with all other existing
and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one foot at
any point.
D. The effect of the use shall not substantially alter the cross-section
profile of the stream and floodplains at the location of the proposed use.
E. Lands abutting the waterway, both upstream and downstream, shall not
be adversely affected by the proposed use.
F. The general welfare or public interest of Towamencin Township or of
other municipalities in the same watershed shall not be adversely
affected.
G. Any new construction or improvements to existing structures permitted
by a variance shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer
the minimum obstruction to the flow of water.
H. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
base flood.
I. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township shall consider, at
a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of the Floodplain
Management Chapter and that the authorization of a variance
is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
§ 82-21 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-21
1:186
§ 82-22. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense;
(b) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the public or
conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and
regulations.
§ 82-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-22
1:187

ARTICLE VII
Technical Provisions for Variances
§ 82-23. General.
In granting any variance, the Township shall attach the following technical
provisions to the proposal for which the variance has been granted. These
conditions and safeguards are necessary in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the municipality.
A. Pertaining to the alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. The municipality shall require technical or scientific data to be
submitted to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) within six
months of the completion of any new construction, development, or
other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. The applicant is required
to apply to FEMA for a conditional approval prior to permitting the
encroachments to occur in accordance with 44 CFR 65.12. Upon
conditional approval and prior to approving the proposed
improvements, the Township is required to adopt a revision to the
Floodplain Management Chapter incorporating the increased base
flood elevation and/or revised floodway for post-development
conditions. Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, the
applicant is required to provide as-built certifications to be submitted to
FEMA for the final map revision in accordance with 44 CFR Part 67. A
LOMR or conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is required for:
(1) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(2) Any development occurring in Zone A and Zone AE without a
designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot
in the base flood elevation; or
(3) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
§ 82-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-23
1:189
§ 82-24. Improvements to existing structures in Floodplain
Conservation District.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any Floodplain Conservation District:
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed by
variance within any Floodplain Conservation District shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this
chapter and any other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. In
addition, when such development is proposed within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top of bank of any watercourse, a permit
shall be obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway area that would cause any increase in the
elevation of the base flood elevation and the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any portion of the FP Floodplain Conservation District without a
defined floodway, as defined in § 82-10, that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Within any portion of the FP Floodplain Conservation District without a
defined floodway, no new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
D. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
undertaken in the direction of the streambank.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
F. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this chapter must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from the ordinance requirements will be the minimum
§ 82-23 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-24
1:190
§ 82-25. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
G. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions
thereof.
H. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
I. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In the Floodway or AE Zone, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones or other areas of the Floodplain Conservation District,
where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any
new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation determined in accordance with § 82-10C of this
chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In the Floodway or AE Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones or other areas of the Floodplain Conservation District,
where no base flood elevations are specified on the FIRM, any new
§ 82-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-25
1:191
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated or completely floodproofed up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance
with § 82-10C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the Wl or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be used.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor which will be used
solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental
storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed and
constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters
for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls.
The term "fully enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) Minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures.
(1) Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with
the following requirements:
§ 82-25 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-25
1:192
§ 82-26. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any Floodplain Conservation District:
(a) The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to
the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the
principal use or activity.
(b) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(c) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(d) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(e) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to at or above
the regulatory flood elevation.
(f) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(g) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(h) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation
or movement and shall be designed to automatically provide
for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
§ 82-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-26
1:193
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to four horizontal feet unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
Floodplain Conservation District except in strict compliance with
all state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system
is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human animal, or plant life and
not listed in § 82-17A, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
§ 82-26 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-26
1:194
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
§ 82-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-26
1:195
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of
this chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
§ 82-26 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-26
1:196
ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 82-27. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Zoning Officer within Towamencin Township is hereby appointed to
administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the
Floodplain Administrator.
§ 82-28. Permits required.
§ 82-29. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within the Floodplain Conservation District.
B. Fees. Applications for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable
to the municipality, at rates adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
Development/Permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. The Floodplain Administrator shall make as many
inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the Floodplain Conservation District, upon presentation
of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 82-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-29
1:197
§ 82-30. Application procedures and requirements.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter including, but not
limited to, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Township. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits or variances required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any Floodplain Conservation District, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
§ 82-29 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-30
1:198
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways;
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
the Floodplain Conservation District, and, if available,
information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water
including direction and velocities;
(f) All property lines and lot lines including dimensions, and the
size of the site expressed in acres or square feet.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100 feet
or less showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
§ 82-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-30
1:199
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood elevation; and detailed information
concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an Floodway Area/District, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(d) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a portion of the FP Floodplain
Conservation District without a defined floodway, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at
any point.
(e) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure
and/or the development.
(f) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 82-26F, Storage, and § 82-17A, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 82-17A and 82-26F which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 82-17A
during a base flood.
(g) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(h) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
§ 82-30 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-31
1:200
§ 82-31. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any Floodplain Conservation District to be considered for
approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other
appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission,
Municipal Engineer, County Conservation District, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 82-32. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 82-33. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and shall be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 82-34. Start of construction.
§ 82-35. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction shall begin within 180 days after the
date of issuance and shall be completed within 12 months after the date
of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The
term "start of construction" shall be understood as defined in § 82-8 of
this chapter.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request, and the
original permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect
at the time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
§ 82-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-35
1:201
§ 82-36. Appeals.
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall pay a fine to the Township of not less than $25 nor more than $600
plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other
actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and the
Zoning Ordinance.62
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 82-35 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 82-36
1:202
ARTICLE IX
Enactment
§ 82-37. Adoption, effective date.
This chapter (Ord. No. 16-01) shall be effective on March 2, 2016, and
shall remain in force until modified, amended or rescinded by Towamencin
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 82-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-37
1:203
Chapter 84
GARBAGE AND OTHER SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 54.
Littering — See Ch. 93.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 117.
§ 84-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Municipal Waste Collection and
Recycling Ordinance."
§ 84-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 97 — The Solid Waste Management Act of 1980.63
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act of 1988.64
ALUMINUM — Empty, all-aluminum beverage and food containers,
commonly known as "aluminum cans."
BIMETAL CANS — Empty food or beverage containers constructed of
a mixture of ferrous metal, usually steel, and nonferrous metal, usually
tin.
BULK ITEMS — Any large durable goods such as refrigerators, washing
machines, window air conditioners, hot-water heaters, dishwashers and
any other major home appliances in addition to other large bulk items
such as dressers, beds, mattresses, sofas, television sets and other
large household items.
BUSINESS(ES) — The legal owner, occupant or lessee of a commercial,
industrial or cooperative enterprise, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, institution, trust or governmental entity that engages in
any form of business or governmental operations.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Paper products made of a stiff, moderately
thick paper board, containing folds or alternating ridges, commonly
known as "cardboard."
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
GLASS — Products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone.
The product may be transparent (clear) or colored (e.g., brown or
63.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
64.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 82-37 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 84-2
1:204
green) and used as a container for packaging (e.g., jars) or bottling of
various matter. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, window or
plate glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
GRASS CLIPPINGS — The material bagged or raked during or after
cutting of a lawn, field or similar grassed area.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All types of high-grade, white or
colored paper, bond paper and computer paper used in commercial,
institutional, business, office and municipal establishments.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Small quantities of hazardous
waste (as defined in the Solid Waste Management Act) available to a
person or entity on a retail basis, such as pesticides, certain paints,
paint thinners and solvents, cleaning agents and automotive products.
IMA — The intermunicipal agreement adopted by the municipalities
which are members of the Northern Montgomery County Recycling
Commission.
LANDLORD(S) — Any individual or organizational owner who rents
and/or leases residential units, commercial space or an industrial
complex(es). Landlords own the properties in question and deal directly
with their tenants or lessees.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree
trimmings and similar material, but does not include grass clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Such matter typically has a gloss or shine added to the paper. Expressly
excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MIXED PAPER — All types of paper combinations, such as colored
paper, carbonless forms, ledger paper, colored paper envelopes,
mixtures of high-grade office paper and the like.
MUNICIPALITY — Towamencin Township.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any municipal waste as defined by Section 103
of the Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No.
97, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., and Section 103 of Act 105 and any rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
MUNICIPAL WASTE COLLECTOR(S) — Any collector, remover,
transporter and/or hauler of municipal waste and/or recyclable
materials in the NMCRC. A municipality shall be considered a
municipal waste collector if it provides manpower and equipment for
the collection of municipal waste.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having
printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and
other matters of public interest.
§ 84-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-2
1:205
NORTHERN MONTGOMERY COUNTY RECYCLING COMMISSION
(NMCRC) — The legal entity established by and operating as agent
for the municipalities hereunder who have delegated certain of their
duties and powers respecting recycling, including but not limited to the
development, implementation and enforcement of common recycling
programs. Presently the NMCRC is comprised of Ambler Borough,
Franconia Township, Hatfield Township, Hatfield Borough, Lower
Gwynedd Township, Lower Salford Township, Montgomery Township,
North Wales Borough, Souderton Borough, Telford Borough,
Towamencin Township and shall be deemed to include all new member
municipalities and accepting member municipalities who have
completed the withdrawal process.
PARTICIPATING MUNICIPALITIES — Those municipalities which have
executed the intermunicipal agreement (IMA).
PERSON or ENTITY — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
business, association, institution, cooperative enterprise, trust,
municipality, municipal authority, federal institution or agency, state
institution or agency (including but not limited to the Department
of General Services and the Public School Building Authority), other
governmental agency or any other legal entity or group whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any
provision of this article prescribing a fine, penalty or imprisonment or
any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" or "entity" shall
mean the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity
having officers and directors.
PLAN or COUNTY PLAN — The latest revision of the county-wide
municipal waste management plan adopted by the county and approved
by DEP, as such may hereinafter be supplemented, revised, amended or
modified in compliance with the law.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
Due to the large variety of plastics, the recycling regulations will
stipulate the specified types of plastics that may be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by a person or entity
which can be separated from municipal waste and returned to
commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of useful
products. Materials which may be recycled include, but are not limited
to, glass (clear, brown or green), aluminum, steel and bimetal cans,
high-grade office paper, mixed paper, newspaper (including newspaper
inserts, junk mail and telephone books), corrugated paper, magazines
and other periodicals, plastic containers and other materials as may be
designated from time as recyclable materials.
RECYCLING COLLECTOR — A municipal waste collector engaged in
the collection, removal, transportation or hauling of recyclable
materials.
RECYCLING PROCESSORS — Entities which receive recyclable
materials, separate recyclable materials from nonrecyclable residue
§ 84-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 84-2
1:206
§ 84-3. Legislative intent.
§ 84-4. Administration and enforcement of program.
and market the separated recyclable materials for reuse or
remanufacture.
RENTAL AGENT(S)/PROPERTY MANAGERS — Any individual or
organization who or which assumes the owner's responsibility in
renting and/or leasing residential units, commercial space or industrial
complexes. Agents do not own the properties in question, but deal
directly with tenants or lessees on behalf of the owner(s).
RESIDENT(S) — The legal owner, occupant or lessee of a single-family
residential unit in a municipality served by curbside collection of
municipal wastes and/or recyclables or owner, occupant or lessee of
any other type of multifamily residential unit, including but not limited
to townhomes, duplexes, condominiums and apartments, whose
multifamily unit has curbside collection of municipal waste and/or
recyclables. Also classified as a resident will be any business
professional who operates a profession from his/her personal residence.
YARD WASTE — Twigs, shrub trimmings, small branches and like
vegative matter.
B. All terms not separately defined in this article that are contained in Act
97 and Act 101 are incorporated herein by reference.
A. The reduction of the amount of municipal waste and conservation of
recyclable materials is an important public concern by reason of the
growing problem of municipal waste disposal and its detrimental
impact on the environment. It is the intent of this article to require,
promote and regulate recycling activities in the municipality and to
protect the health, safety and welfare of residents.
B. This article has been developed to meet and implement municipal
responsibilities established under Act 101.
C. It is the intent of this article to promote intergovernmental cooperation
in recycling activities by and among the municipalities comprising the
NMCRC. Such cooperation is intended to more efficiently conduct
recycling programs and to reduce costs.
D. The municipality's adoption of this article anticipates the assignment of
certain of its duties and powers under Act 101 to the NMCRC with
respect to recycling activities and enforcement against violations of this
chapter. Such assignment of duties and powers will be accomplished in
accordance with Section 304(c) of Act 101 and as set forth in this article
and in the intermunicipal agreement adopted by the member
municipalities of the NMCRC. Duties and powers not assigned by the
intermunicipal agreement or subsequent agreement shall remain with
the municipality.
§ 84-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-4
1:207
§ 84-5. Responsibilities of generator. [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-06]
A. The NMCRC is authorized to carry out a recycling program on behalf of
the member municipalities in accordance with the terms and conditions
of the IMA.
B. In accordance with the responsibilities in this chapter, the NMCRC is
authorized to establish, by resolution, rules and regulations related to
the administration of the recycling program and to administer and
enforce against violations of all such rules and regulations. The NMCRC
shall determine the recyclable materials to be separated by residents,
noncurbside residents and businesses and collected by municipal waste
collectors; however, this designation may be changed by the NMCRC
from time to time. The municipality may require additional materials to
be recycled, in which event such additional materials shall be deposited
at dropoff centers designated by the municipality, and the municipal
waste collector will not be responsible for collecting such materials.
Any additional requirements imposed by the municipality shall be
consistent with and not interfere with the recycling program developed
and implemented by the NMCRC. All commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments shall also be required to separate the
materials designated by the NMCRC for recycling.
C. In accordance with Section 1501(c)(1)(iii) of Act 101, the NMCRC shall
be authorized to exempt persons occupying commercial, institutional
and industrial establishments from the requirements of this chapter if
they have otherwise provided for the recycling of materials designated
by this chapter and any subsequent resolutions. To be eligible for this
exemption, the commercial, industrial or institutional waste generator
must provide, on an annual basis, written documentation to the
municipality and the NMCRC of the total quantity of each material
recycled, in the form and by the Act as provided for in the NMCRC's
rules and regulations. Exemptions shall be handled administratively by
the NMCRC.
A. Each person or entity, unless exempted under § 84-4C of this article,
who or which generates municipal waste and/or designated recyclable
materials shall have such waste and recyclable materials collected by a
municipal waste collector.
B. Each person or entity who or which generates municipal waste in the
NMCRC shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of
this chapter for the separation of recyclable materials as required by
Act 101 as implemented by the NMCRC. This shall include tenants and
lessees occupying leased properties.
C. Owners, landlords or rental agents of any leased property, other than a
single-family-occupied property, shall be responsible for publicly
posting educational information provided by the NMCRC, municipality
and/or municipal waste collectors; providing appropriate recyclable
§ 84-4 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 84-5
1:208
material collection containers and providing for pickup of such
containers in accordance with this chapter. Owners, landlords or rental
agents of a single-family-occupied property may assign such
responsibility to the tenant or lessee occupying the property through a
lease or rental agreement or other written assignment.
D. Every person or entity must separate household hazardous waste and
leaf waste from the recyclable materials and other municipal waste. It is
the responsibility of a person or entity to dispose of household
hazardous waste in accordance with applicable law as implemented by
the Montgomery County Waste System Authority.
E. All occupants of single-family homes, including townhomes and
rowhomes where individual municipal waste collection occurs, shall
maintain a separate container of the type specified or provided by the
NMCRC or municipal waste collector to collect all designated
recyclable materials in a commingled or modified commingled (e.g.,
different materials separated into paper bags and placed in the
container) fashion, as established by the municipal waste collector,
subject to the rules and regulations of the NMCRC. No municipal waste
or recyclable material container shall be placed at the curb or in the
front yard of any resident's property except during the period
beginning at 6:00 p.m. on the evening prior to the day of scheduled
collection, and the empty container shall be removed by 11:59 p.m. on
the day of scheduled collection. Enforcement of container rules for
placement at curbside shall be the responsibility of the municipality.
Newspapers may also be placed in paper bags (no plastic bags) or
bundled and tied, both across and lengthwise, with rope or cord, and
kept dry prior to collection and placed at curbside with the recycling
container. No such municipal waste containers or recyclable material
containers, including bundles of newspapers (other than containers
supplied by municipal waste collectors), shall weigh more than 50
pounds.
F. Owners or landlords of any multifamily residential units where
individual residential refuse collection does not occur shall be
responsible for providing suitable containers or dumpsters for
recyclable materials. Such containers or dumpsters shall be provided
through arrangements with a municipal waste collector, and sourceseparated
or commingled recyclable material containers or dumpsters
may be utilized. The containers or dumpsters must be provided at easily
accessible locations, and written instructions must be provided to the
occupants concerning the use and availability of such containers or
dumpsters. Owners or landlords of multifamily residential units who
comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be liable for
the noncompliance of any persons or entity occupying their buildings as
such noncompliance relates to separation of materials. All tenants or
lessees of multifamily residential units shall be responsible for
separating recyclable materials and placing them in the containers or
dumpsters provided for such purposes.
§ 84-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-5
1:209
§ 84-6. Materials to be recycled.
§ 84-7. Responsibilities of municipal waste collectors.
G. Owners or landlords of any institutional, commercial, business or
industrial establishment shall be required to meet the same
requirements outlined in Subsection E, unless exempted under § 84-4C
of this chapter or unless such responsibilities are specifically assigned,
in writing, to the tenant or lessee of such property.
A. All homes, apartments and other residential establishments shall be
required to separate and recycle the following: clear glass, colored
glass, newsprint (including newspaper inserts, junk mail and telephone
books), aluminum cans, steel cans, bimetallic cans, No. 1 PET plastics
and No. 2 HDPE plastics.
B. Commercial establishments will be required to separate and recycle the
following: corrugated paper, high-grade office paper, aluminum cans
and yard waste.
C. Hospitality establishments which include restaurants and taverns shall
be required to separate and recycle the following: cardboard, office
paper, newspaper (including newspaper inserts, junk mail and
telephone books), aluminum cans, steel cans, bimetallic cans, No. 1 PET
plastics and No. 2 HDPE plastics.
D. Community events. Recycling containers shall be provided at all
community events attended by 200 or more people. The disposal of
recyclable materials collected at such events shall be in accordance
with the provisions of this article. [Added 11-23-2010 by Ord. No.
10-06]
A. Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
(1) Unless specifically provided otherwise in the NMCRC's rules and
regulations, all municipal waste collectors shall deliver or send, at
least every six months, an information sheet that names the
materials which are to be recycled.
(2) Municipal waste collectors shall be responsible for obtaining
weight and volume data on all municipal waste and recyclable
materials collected by them in each municipality which is a member
of the NMCRC. Said data shall be supplied to the NMCRC on an
annual basis by January 15 for the preceding year. Such report
shall include the name of the market or processor where recyclable
materials are delivered and shall be signed by an officer of the
municipal waste collector.
(3) Municipal waste collectors shall maintain records of their
collection, removal, transportation and hauling activities for each
municipality and make them available for inspection by the
§ 84-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 84-7
1:210
NMCRC, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
NMCRC.
B. Collection, processing, marketing and reporting requirements.
(1) Each municipal waste collector operating in the municipality shall
be responsible for complying with the requirements of this chapter
and the NMCRC's rules and regulations for the collection,
processing and marketing of recyclable materials.
(2) The municipal waste collector shall, in providing refuse collection
and disposal services, also provide for the collection of recyclable
materials. Unless specifically provided otherwise in the NMCRC's
rules and regulations, where once or twice a week municipal waste
collection is provided, the municipal waste collector must provide
at least once a week recyclable material collection. Customers
using once a month municipal waste collection must have
recyclable materials collected at least once a month.
(3) A municipal waste collector shall not be permitted to allow
recycling containers or dumpsters to fill beyond capacity and shall
schedule the frequency of such collection accordingly.
(4) The municipal waste collector shall be responsible for the
processing and marketing of the recyclable materials or the
delivery of recyclable materials to a recycling processor. Such
activities may be conducted by the municipal waste collector or any
agent thereof or a private entity conducting such business, a
nonprofit entity able to undertake such effort or any
governmentally owned or operated facility capable of such
functions.
(5) The municipal waste collector shall, prior to initiating processing
and marketing activities, provide the NMCRC with a summary of its
proposed efforts, including the location of the facility(ies) to which
the recyclable materials will be delivered, to the maximum extent
possible. All such facility(ies) shall be appropriately licensed and
permitted. Updates shall be provided as changes are made.
(6) All municipal waste collectors shall keep records of the quantities
of recyclable materials collected in the municipality. The records
shall include the weight of the total quantities of recyclable
materials and total quantities of municipal waste and an estimate of
the corresponding volume of material for both recyclable materials
and municipal waste. Estimates of the individual components
comprising the commingled recyclable materials shall also be
provided. Written reports shall be provided to the NMCRC on
reporting forms provided by the NMCRC and shall include the
name and location of the processing center and/or recyclable
materials dealer and shall be submitted in accordance with the
time schedules established in this chapter.
§ 84-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-7
1:211
§ 84-8. Assignment of program responsibilities; intergovernmental
cooperation.
(7) Leaf waste quantities shall be recorded by the municipal waste
collector collecting such materials. Such quantities may be in the
form of estimates on either a cubic yard or tonnage basis collected,
and written documentation must be provided to the NMCRC by
January 31 of each year for materials collected in the preceding
calendar year of the total quantity of leaf waste collected. The
collector has the option of reporting tonnage either in compacted
or uncompacted cubic yards.
(8) Municipal waste collectors shall not collect refuse, recyclable
materials or any other wastes between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. Eastern standard time nor, when applicable, between
8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daylight saving time. Failure to comply
with this provision shall subject a municipal waste collector to the
enforcement by the individual municipality.
A. The municipality recognizes that intergovernmental cooperation among
the municipalities comprising the membership of the NMCRC will be of
benefit to the municipality by more efficiently conducting recycling
program activities. Intergovernmental cooperation efforts will include,
but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Ongoing determination of the list of recyclable materials for the
NMCRC municipalities.
(2) Development and implementation of joint education programs,
including the placement of newspaper ads, website pages and
other appropriate media.
(3) Preparation of information for municipality newsletters.
(4) Development and implementation of reporting forms and grant
applications and the filing of such forms and applications with the
appropriate agencies.
(5) Preparation of informational sheets for municipal waste collectors;
promulgation of rules and regulations pertaining to the recycling
program.
(6) Authorization for the NMCRC solicitor to seek enforcement against
violations of this chapter as specified herein.
B. Intermunicipal agreement.
(1) In order to implement the intent and terms of this chapter, the
municipality, pursuant to the authority of the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act, Act of July 12, 1972, codified at 53 P.S. §§ 481
through 490, and Article 9, § 5, of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, has determined to enter into an
§ 84-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 84-8
1:212
§ 84-9. Ownership of recyclable materials and municipal waste.
intermunicipal agreement (IMA) between the municipalities
comprising the NMCRC.
(2) Terms and implementation of IMA. The terms and implementation
of the IMA shall be as more fully set forth in the IMA and this
chapter as follows:
(a) The NMCRC shall develop, implement and maintain a recycling
program for the municipalities comprising the NMCRC.
(b) The participating municipalities shall certify that they have
enacted a municipal recycling ordinance in a form
substantially similar to this chapter by providing an executed
and attested copy of the ordinance to the NMCRC solicitor.
(c) The NMCRC shall be authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations and administer and enforce those rules and
regulations as desired or to delegate such enforcement to the
member municipalities.
(d) The NMCRC shall be authorized to enforce the IMA and select
municipal ordinances enacted pursuant to the IMA.
(e) The purpose of the IMA is to provide a uniform recycling
program for the municipalities comprising the membership of
the NMCRC and to minimize duplicative efforts by the member
municipalities.
(3) Findings under Intergovernmental Cooperation Act. As required by
the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of July 12, 1972, P.L. 762,
No. 180, as amended, the following matters are specifically found
and determined:
(a) The conditions of agreement are set forth in the IMA.
(b) The duration of the term of the IMA is set forth in §§ 913 and
914 of the IMA.
(c) The purpose of the IMA is to cooperate with the NMCRC and
other participating municipalities in developing, implementing
and maintaining a recycling program.
(d) The organizational structure necessary to implement the
agreement is set forth in the IMA, with which the member
municipalities shall cooperate.
(e) The manner in which property, real or personal, shall be
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of is by way of lease
or other contract unless otherwise set forth in the IMA.
§ 84-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-9
1:213
§ 84-10. Alternate recycling activities.
§ 84-11. Handling of leaf waste.
A. All recyclable materials and municipal waste placed at curbside for
collection or in any container or dumpster designated for recyclable
materials shall become the property of the municipal waste collector
providing the service, except as outlined in § 84-11 of this chapter.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person or entity, other than
the municipal waste collector providing the service, to collect or
remove any of the recyclable materials from their designated collection
location, except as outlined in § 84-11 of this chapter. Each
unauthorized collection from one or more designated locations on one
calendar day, in violation hereof, shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
A. Any person, volunteer organization or other entity may utilize
alternative methods, other than collection by a municipal waste
collector, to accomplish the purpose of reutilizing recyclable materials.
Any such person, volunteer organization or other entity shall register
such programs with the NMCRC recycling consultant and the
municipality where the recycling activity shall take place. All recyclable
materials tonnage data shall be collected and reported to the NMCRC
recycling consultant in accordance with all applicable procedures for
the reporting of such information.
B. The NMCRC is authorized to permit an alternate recycling program to
be developed in accordance with Paragraph 1501(h) of Act 101 if the
requirements of that paragraph can be complied with. The NMCRC
shall, before implementation of the program, review and approve the
program. The municipal waste collector conducting the program must
provide annual written documentation to the NMCRC of the total
quantity of each material recycled.
A. Each municipal waste collector shall provide leaf waste collection
service during the fall of each year.
B. Leaf waste collection shall be conducted by municipal waste collectors
in accordance with regulations of DEP, and leaf waste disposal shall be
in a DEP-certified facility in accordance with all applicable state
guidelines.
C. All municipal waste collectors shall provide the NMCRC with the name
and address of the facility(ies) where the leaf waste will be disposed.
Leaf waste shall not be commingled with any other municipal solid
waste. The disposal of noncomposted leaf waste at a sanitary landfill or
waste-to-energy facility is strictly prohibited.
D. The methodology for separating and collecting leaf waste shall be
established by the municipal waste collectors and subject to approval
§ 84-9 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 84-11
1:214
§ 84-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
by the NMCRC and municipality. All municipal waste collectors shall
provide the NMCRC with a leaf waste collection/disposal plan providing
information regarding their expected leaf waste collection and disposal
service to their customers on or before June 30 of each year prior
to distribution to customers. The NMCRC and/or municipality shall
have 60 days to provide comment or the information shall be deemed
approved for distribution to customers. Leaf waste shall not be left at
curbside more than 24 hours prior to collection and shall not be left in
a form that obstructs the flow of traffic or affects the performance of
drainage facilities or catch basins.
A. Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter pertaining
to the separation of recyclable materials, within the boundaries of any
municipality which is a member of the NMCRC, including commingling
of recyclable materials with municipal waste by haulers and their
employees, shall receive an official written warning sent certified mail,
return receipt requested, from the NMCRC solicitor and/or from the
solicitor for the municipality in which the alleged violation occurred for
the first offense. Thereafter, within two years from the date of the
written warning for the first offense, any person or entity violating any
of the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the separation of
recyclable materials within the boundaries of any municipality which is
a member of the NMCRC, shall be subject to a criminal fine not to
exceed $2,500 per violation, plus damages, court costs and reasonable
attorney's fees and imprisonment in the Montgomery County
Correctional Facility to the extent allowed by law for the punishment of
summary offenses. Enforcement of any such violations shall be by
action commenced by the NMCRC and/or the municipality in which the
alleged violation occurred before a District Justice in the same manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
B. Any person or entity who shall violate any provision of this chapter not
covered in Subsection A above shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
criminal fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation, plus damages, court
costs and reasonable attorney's fees and imprisonment in the
Montgomery County Correctional Facility to the extent allowed by law
for the punishment of summary offenses. Enforcement of any such
violations shall be by action commenced by the NMCRC and/or
appropriate member municipality before a District Justice in the same
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Each day on which a
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense
punishable by a like fine or penalty.
C. No municipal waste collector shall knowingly collect municipal waste
which contains unsegregated recyclable materials or leaf waste. The
municipal waste collector shall provide a person or entity violating the
§ 84-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-12
1:215
§ 84-13. Authorization to execute intermunicipal agreement.
The Board of Supervisors/Borough Council hereby authorizes the Chairman
of the Board of Supervisors/President of Borough Council to execute that
certain intergovernmental agreement attached hereto as Exhibit A65
between all the municipalities comprising the membership of the Northern
Montgomery County Recycling Commission which IMA sets forth the
procedures and administration of the NMCRC.
Chapter 87
GRADING AND EXCAVATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Driveways — See Ch. 67.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 133.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
§ 87-1. Short title and purpose.
provisions contained herein regarding the separation of recyclable
materials with written notice for the first offense and also provide the
NMCRC and the member municipality with the same written notice.
Any municipal waste collector who shall knowingly violate the
provisions of this subsection and collect municipal waste containing
recyclable materials or leaf waste from a person or entity who or
which has previously been notified by the NMCRC, municipality and/or
a municipal waste collector of noncompliance shall receive an official
warning from the member municipality and/or NMCRC for the first
offense. The municipal waste collector, for subsequent offenses within
a two-year period of the warning, upon conviction, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $5,000, plus
damages and costs of prosecution of each and every offense, or, in
default of the payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment
for not more than 30 days.
D. The NMCRC is authorized to establish, through its rules and
regulations, procedures through which violations of this chapter and of
the NMCRC's rules and regulations themselves may be determined and
administrative sanctions therefor, including but not limited to
imposition of monetary penalties.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the NMCRC's
remedies which shall include but not be limited to including the filing of
actions at law or in equity seeking damages and/or injunctive relief.
65.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 84-12 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 87-1
1:216
§ 87-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Towamencin Grading and Excavating Ordinance."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards
to safeguard persons, to protect property and to promote the public
welfare by regulating and controlling the grading, excavation and
removal or destruction of topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover or
land within the Township of Towamencin.
A. Any word, term or phrase used in this chapter, but not specifically
defined herein, shall be defined as set forth in the Towamencin
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as last
amended.66
B. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words
shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein stated:
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required under this chapter.
QUALIFYING SITE — Any lot, tract or parcel of land, or series of
lots, tracts or parcels of land joined together, where grading work is
continuous and performed at the same time.
RUNOFF FROM A FULLY DEVELOPED AREA UPSTREAM — The
surface water runoff that can be reasonably anticipated upon maximum
development of that area of the watershed located upstream from
the subject tract, as permitted by prevailing zoning or the Township
Comprehensive Plan, as last amended, whichever is greater.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical, physical or structural treatment of
a mass of soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise improve
its engineering properties.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface solid which presumably are
fertile solid and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus
debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the
"A-horizon."
WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river,
brook, creek, channel, ditch, swale or culvert for water, whether natural
or man-made.
C. Word usage. Words in the singular include the plural, and words in the
plural include the singular. Present tense includes the future. The word
"building" shall be deemed to include the word "structure."
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-3
1:217
§ 87-3. Permit required.
No person shall commence or perform any grading, excavation, fill, topsoil
removal or removal of vegetative cover within the Township of Towamencin
without first having obtained a grading permit from the Township Zoning
Officer upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer. A separate
grading permit shall be required for each site. One permit may cover both
an excavation and any fill made on the same site. A grading permit will not
be required, however, in the following situations, but in all other respects
the provisions of this chapter shall apply:
§ 87-4. Application for permit.
A. An excavation which does not exceed 100 cubic yards of total material
removed.
B. A fill which does not exceed 100 cubic yards of material deposited.
C. An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of
single-family residences, swimming pools or underground structures
authorized by a building permit; an excavation for a driveway between
a single-family residence and a street; or the grading of such excavated
materials into the site from which excavated and including the
provision of additional topsoil as may be required for seedbed
preparation.
A. Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application
therefor with the Township Zoning Officer. Such application shall:
(1) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot,
block, tract or street address or similar description which will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work.
(2) Be accompanied by plans and specifications, including a contour
map showing the present contours of the land and the proposed
grading. The plan shall show contours at vertical intervals of two
feet with sufficient details to show the course, structure and
capacity of all drainage facilities and the method of drainage of the
adjacent or contiguous territory. In areas included within relatively
level tracts, contours may be shown at lesser intervals as may be
necessary for study as determined by the Township Engineer. In no
case shall the contour interval exceed 100 feet horizontally.
Benchmarks to which contour elevations refer shall be noted. A plot
plan shall be filed showing the location of the grading, boundaries,
lot lines and trees greater than six inches in caliper measured at a
point one foot above the ground and containing sufficient
dimensions and other data to show the location of all work;
description of the type and classification of the soil; details and
location of any proposed drainage structures and pipes, walls and
cribbing; floodplains, watercourses, wetlands, existing and
proposed drainage structures; nature of fill material and such other
§ 87-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 87-4
1:218
§ 87-5. Permit fees.
§ 87-6. Expiration of permit.
Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if
the work authorized by such permit has not commenced within six months
or is not completed within one year from the date of issue; provided,
however, that the Township Engineer may, if the permit holder presents
satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented the work's
being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant
reasonable extensions of time, provided that the application for extension of
time is made before the date of expiration of the permit.
§ 87-7. Denial of permit; appeal.
information as the Township Engineer may require to carry out
the purposes of this chapter. All plans shall be dated and bear the
name(s) of the person(s) who prepared the same, the applicant and
the owner of the land. Four copies of the plan shall be submitted.
(3) Include a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation in
conformity with PADER, Chapter 102 regulations, as last amended.
(4) State the reason for which the grading is proposed.
B. The Township Engineer may waive the requirements for any or all plans
and specifications listed above if he finds that the work contemplated
will conform to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Applicants for permits relating to this chapter shall pay to the Township
at the time of application the fees set forth in the then-current fee
schedule which shall have been adopted by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors.67
B. Escrow agreements and bonds. For each agreement and bond, the fee
shall be $25.
A. The Township Zoning Officer shall deny a grading permit upon
recommendation of the Township Engineer where, in their opinion, the
work as proposed by the applicant may endanger any property or any
street or alley or fails to meet Township standards. In determining
whether the proposed work is likely to endanger any property or streets
or alleys or create hazardous conditions, the Township Engineer shall
give due consideration to possible saturation by rains, earth
movements, runoff of surface waters and subsurface conditions, such as
the stratification and faulting of rock and the nature and type of the soil
or rock.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Fees.
§ 87-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-7
1:219
§ 87-8. Erosion and sediment control.
§ 87-9. Design standards.
In order to provide more suitable sites for building and other uses, to
improve surface drainage and to control erosion, the following
requirements shall be met:
B. Appeals from the denial of a permit shall be taken in accordance with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
last amended.68
A. Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a
minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the PADER Chapter
102 regulations, as last amended, and the Towamencin Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as last amended.69 The
Township Engineer, or other official as designated, shall monitor
compliance with the appropriate specifications.
B. Plans for erosion and sediment control shall be submitted in support of
the grading permit applications.
A. All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper drainage of
surface water away from buildings and dispose of it without unwanted
ponding or other ponding, except where approved by the Board of
Supervisors (such as for retention basins) on the recommendation of
the Township Engineer.
B. All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to adequately handle
the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet such as a
curb street, storm drain or natural watercourse. Where drainage swales
are used to divert surface waters away from buildings, they shall be
sodded or planted as required and shall be of such slope, shape and size
as to conform to the requirements of the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, as last amended.70
C. Concentration of surface water runoff shall only be permitted in swales
or watercourses.
D. Excavations and fills.
(1) Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than 4:1 unless stabilized by
a retaining wall or cribbing or other acceptable method approved
by the Township Engineer.
(2) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills.
68.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 87-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 87-9
1:220
§ 87-10. Destruction of trees.
In order to maintain the supply of natural vegetation, to prevent erosion of
the topsoil on the site and surrounding properties, to foster the retention
of groundwater supply and generally attempt to maintain the ecological
balance in the Township, the following requirements shall be met:
(3) Cut and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
(4) Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
(5) Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels except as permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
(6) Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
(7) Grading shall not be done in such a way as to divert water onto the
property of another landowner without the expressed written
consent of the affected landowner.
(8) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control
shall be exercised.
(9) Grading equipment shall not be allowed to cross live streams.
Provision will be made for the installation of culverts or bridges.
(10) All fills shall be made of clean soil or earth.
(11) Notice to adjacent property owners. Before commencing any
excavation or fill which will affect an adjoining property or
structures thereon, the person making or causing the excavation to
be made shall give written notice to the owners of said adjoining
properties or structures not less than 14 days before such
excavation is to be made. Adjoining properties and structures shall
be protected as provided in the Township Building Code.71
A. Every existing tree with a trunk six inches or more in caliper (measured
at a point one foot above existing ground line) which is destroyed
because of street alignment, building placement, parking area location,
grading or otherwise shall be replaced with one new tree of a type
specified by the Township, with a trunk of not less than 21/2 inches in
caliper as measured at a point one foot above ground line.
B. Such new trees shall not be placed on the lot as street trees or in place
of trees required as screening or buffering.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes.
§ 87-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-10
1:221
§ 87-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 87-12. Additional remedies.
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the proper official of this Township, in addition to
other remedies, may institute, in the name of the Township, any appropriate
action or proceeding at law or in equity, whether by legal process or
otherwise, to prevent such unlawful work and to restrain and abate such
violations.
Chapter 90
INSURANCE; REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS
C. At the discretion of the Township, a number of trees not greater in
number than those destroyed may be planted on lands owned by the
Township in order to maintain the proper ecological balance of the
Township. The Township shall assess the developer the cost of these
trees and the cost of planting.
A. When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter has been served by the Township Zoning Officer or any other
person designated by him, such violation shall be discontinued
immediately.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable,
upon conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $1,000 and costs of
prosecution for each and every offense or, upon default in payment of
the fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison
for not more than 30 days, and whenever such person shall have been
notified by the Township Zoning Officer or by service of a summons in a
prosecution or other written notice that he is committing such violation
of this chapter, each day that he shall continue such violation after such
notification shall constitute a separate offense, punishable by a like fine
or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like fines and
penalties are now by law collected.
§ 87-10 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 87-12
1:222
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 10-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-08]
§ 90-1. Designated officer.
The Township Treasurer or such official's designee is hereby appointed as
the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 90-2. Municipal certificate required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Township of Towamencin (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$5,000, unless the insuring agent is furnished by the designated officer with
a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(B) of Act 98 of 199272 and
unless there is compliance with Section 508(C) and (D) of Act 98 of 199273
and the provisions of this article.
§ 90-3. Claims payment procedure.
A. Where pursuant to Section 508(B)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 199274 the
designated officer issues a certificate indicating that there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real
property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured
and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building restructure, the
following procedures must be followed:
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the designated officer in the aggregate of $1,000 for each $20,000
of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim, this
subsection to be applied such that if the claim is $20,000 or less,
the amount transferred to the municipality shall be $1,000; or
(2) If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall
transfer to the municipality from the insurance proceeds the
amount specified in the estimate.
72.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
73.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
74.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-3
1:223
(3) The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(4) After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, and the designated officer shall return
the amount of the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of
the estimate to the named insured, if the municipality has not
commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure.
(5) Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall
do the following:
(a) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate
fund to be used solely as security against the total costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the municipality. Such costs shall
include without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the municipality in connection
with such removal, repair or securing of the building or any
proceedings related thereto.
(b) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the municipality with the name and
address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred
funds and the name and address of the named insured, the
designated officer shall contact the named insured, certify that
the proceeds have been received by the municipality and notify
the named insured that the procedures under this subsection
shall be followed.
(c) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all
applicable regulations and orders of the municipality and the
required proof of such completion received by the designated
officer and if the municipality has not incurred any costs for
repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the
named insured. If the municipality has incurred costs for
repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure,
the costs shall be paid from the fund, and if excess funds
remain, the municipality shall transfer the remaining funds to
the named insured.
(d) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this subsection and not returned to
the named insured, such interest shall belong to the
municipality. To the extent that proceeds are returned to the
named insured, interest earned on such proceeds shall be
§ 90-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 90-3
1:224
§ 90-4. Establishment of procedures and fees.
The Board of Supervisors may by resolution adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 98 of 199275 and this article and may by
resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and this article, including but
not limited to issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections
and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 90-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation.
distributed to the named insured at the time that the proceeds
are returned.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured or some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property has been negotiated.
75.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 90-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-5
1:225

ARTICLE II
Emergency Services Cost Reimbursement
[Adopted 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-14]
§ 90-6. Designated provider.
Towamencin Township has recognized and designated the Towamencin
Volunteer Fire Company as its designated fire service provider for the
Township of Towamencin.
§ 90-7. Recovery of cost.
§ 90-8. Responsibility of Township.
The Township shall not be responsible for any aspect of the recovery of costs
under this article. The Township shall not take any steps to assist the Fire
Company or any third-party billing service in recovery of costs under this
article.
A. Towamencin Township hereby authorizes Towamencin Volunteer Fire
Company of Towamencin, Pennsylvania, to recover the reasonable cost
of emergency rescue tools, equipment, and materials; hazardous
materials abatement tools, equipment, and materials; and incurred
third-party expenses arising from environmental incidents, firefighting
incidents, safety and rescue incidents, and vehicular accidents.
B. The reasonable costs described herein may be recovered directly by the
said Fire Company or through a third-party billing service as an
authorized agent for the recovery of such costs.
C. The Fire Company or third-party billing service shall have authority to
recover the aforementioned costs only from the applicable insurance
company or carrier.
D. The reimbursement rates for the aforementioned tools, equipment, and
materials shall be set by the Fire Company from time to time and shall
only be applied to the recovery of costs arising out of incidents
occurring after the setting of the applicable rates. A current schedule of
rates shall be maintained by the Fire Company and on file with
Towamencin Township.
E. In addition to the aforementioned costs, the Fire Company or thirdparty
billing service is authorized to collect reasonable interest and a
reasonable administrative fee, and any and all other fees and costs as
may be authorized by the Hazardous Material and Emergency Planning
and Response Act, or any other applicable statute.
§ 90-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-8
1:227
Chapter 93
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and other solid waste — See Ch. 84.
Nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Parks — See Ch. 107.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 117.
Signs and posters — See Ch. 130.
§ 93-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words used in plural numbers include
the singular number and words used in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meanings given
herein:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, use
or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft"
shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle as authorized by Towamencin Township and the National
Sanitation Foundation.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature:
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing.
(1)
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of
either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
(2)
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit;
but the terms of this subsection shall not apply where an admission
fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of
defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind when either of the
same is held, given or takes place in connection with the
(3)
§ 90-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 93-1
1:228
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law; any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States in accordance with federal statute or
regulations; and any newspaper filed and recorded with a recording
officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, any
periodical or current magazine regularly published with not fewer than
four issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the
aforesaid definitions of "commercial handbill" and "newspaper."
PARK — A playground, recreation center or any other public area in
the Township owned or used by the Township and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed to be used wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, including any yard, grounds, walks, driveway, park, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and
good order; provided that nothing contained in the subsection shall
be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
without a license where such license is or may be required by
any law of Pennsylvania or under any ordinance of Towamencin
Township.
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private
benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or
distributor.
(4)
§ 93-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-1
1:229
§ 93-2. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or public place within the Township except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 93-3. Manner of placing litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon public property.
§ 93-4. Sweeping litter into gutters.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or gutter public
place within the Township the accumulation of litter from a building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 93-5. Duties of merchants.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Township the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the Township shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business
premises free of litter.
§ 93-6. Litter thrown from vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other the public place within the Township or upon
private property.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, grass, leaves, yard clippings, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Towamencin, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 93-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 93-7
1:230
§ 93-7. Trucks causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley
or other public place, nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the Township, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit
in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter
or foreign accumulation of any kind.
§ 93-8. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Township
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as
provided herein.
§ 93-9. Litter in waters.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any pond, stream or any other
body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Township.
§ 93-10. Litter in sewers.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any storm or sanitary sewer,
including rights-of-way.
§ 93-11. Distributing handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Township, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful
on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the Township for any
person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 93-12. Placing handbills in or upon vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 93-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-13
1:231
§ 93-13. Depositing handbills on vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 93-14. Distributing handbills on posted property.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any premises if requested by anyone thereon
not to do so if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position
near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No
Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisements" or any similar notice indicating
in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be
molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such
handbills left upon such premises.
§ 93-15. Distributing handbills at private premises.
§ 93-16. Dropping litter from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
Township any litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 93-17. Posting notices.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted as provided in this chapter, such person,
unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place
or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises
if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such
handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks,
streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so
used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
B. Exception for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to
newspapers, as defined herein, except that newspapers shall be placed
on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place or upon private property.
§ 93-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 93-18
1:232
§ 93-18. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Township, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 93-19. Duty of owner of premises.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 93-20. Removal of litter by owner.
§ 93-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, shall be sentenced to pay a fine not to
exceed $300, which fine may be collected by a suit brought in the name
of the Township before any District Justice in like manner as debts of like
amount may be sued for by existing laws.
Chapter 97
MAP, RIGHT-OF-WAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 67.
Grading and excavating — See Ch. 87.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 133.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
A. Notice to remove. Towamencin Township is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property
within the Township, or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of
litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public
health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by certified mail,
addressed to said owner at his last known address.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within five days after receipt of written
notice provided for in Subsection A above, the owner shall be cited for
violation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 93-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-1
1:233
§ 97-1. Rights-of-way system established; map.
There is hereby established an official system of ultimate rights-of-way in
the Township of Towamencin as shown on the map entitled "Ultimate Rightof-
Way Map," a part of the Official Map of Towamencin Township, a copy of
which is on file and made a part of this chapter. Said map may be examined
at the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 97-2. Showing on map.
Ultimate rights-of-way in the Township of Towamencin shall be as shown on
the map unless officially changed by specific ordinance passed subsequent
to the adoption of this chapter.
§ 97-3. Building setback lines.
All building setback lines shall be established in relation to these ultimate
rights-of-way.
§ 97-4. Minimum rights-of-way of streets.
No new streets shall be accepted by the Township nor municipal
improvements made therein unless such streets have minimum rights-ofway
of at least 50 feet.
Chapter 100
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental unit occupancy — See Ch. 119.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
§ 100-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A trailer coach which does not have a toilet
or a bath or shower.
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME SPACE — A park space which is designed to
accommodate a dependent mobile home and does not have sewer and water
connections to accommodate the toilet and the bath or shower in a mobile
home.
INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A trailer coach that has a toilet and a
bath or shower.
§ 97-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 100-1
1:234
INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME SPACE — A park space which has sewer
and water connections designed to accommodate the toilet and bath or
shower contained in an independent mobile home.
MOBILE HOME — Any portable structure or vehicle so constructed and
designed as to permit occupancy thereof for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile
homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located regardless of
whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
PARK or CAMP — Mobile home park.
PERSON — Any natural individual, copartnership, association or
corporation.
SERVICE BUILDING — A building housing toilet facilities with slop water
closet and laundry facilities and with separate bath and shower
accommodations.
§ 100-2. License required.
§ 100-3. License fee.
The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be $50.
§ 100-4. Application for license.
A. Two or more inhabited mobile homes shall be located only in licensed
mobile home parks.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the
limits of the Township of Towamencin, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, any mobile home park containing two or more mobile
homes unless such person shall first obtain a license therefor. All mobile
home parks in existence upon the effective date of this chapter shall,
within six months thereafter, obtain such license and in all other
respects comply fully with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Licenses shall not be transferable without the consent of the licensing
authority.
A. Applications for a mobile home license shall be filed with and issued by
the Supervisors. Applications shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) A complete plan of the park showing compliance with § 100-6,
including plans for sewerage and water facilities.
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-4
1:235
§ 100-5. Parking prohibited except in parks.
Mobile homes shall not be parked on any public thoroughfare, street,
alley or public place in the Township of Towamencin, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, for longer than three hours when no emergency repairs are
required.
§ 100-6. Required plan of park.
The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements:
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements so
drawn as to enable the issuing head to determine if the proposed
park will comply with legal requirements.
B. The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be
filed in triplicate. The Supervisors shall investigate the applicant and
inspect the proposed plans and specifications. If the applicant if found
to be of good moral character and the proposed mobile home park will
be in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable ordinances or statutes, the Supervisors shall approve the
application and, upon completion of the park according to the plans,
shall issue the license.
A. The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to
ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
Walks, driveways and retaining walls shall be so constructed as not to
interfere with drainage. Drainage shall be away from the mobile home
spaces, service buildings and recreational areas. Stormwater shall not
drain into sanitary sewers.
B. Mobile home spaces shall be provided consisting of a minimum of 3,600
square feet for each space, which shall be at least 45 feet wide and
clearly defined. Mobile homes shall be so parked on each space that
there shall be at least a twenty-five-foot clearance between mobile
homes. No mobile home shall be located closer than 50 feet to a
dwelling and closer than 10 feet to any property line bounding the park
nor closer than 50 feet to any street or highway right-of-way line.
C. Safety and convenience shall be major considerations in the layout of
driveways, walks and parking areas within the mobile home park, and
driveways shall be continuous insofar as possible. Adequate culs-de-sac
or turnaround areas shall be provided where continuous driveways are
impractical.
D. All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a surfaced macadam driveway.
Where such driveways provide for continuous circulation in only one
direction, the roadway shall be of a twelve-foot minimum width, with an
additional seven-foot width if on-street parking is permitted. Where
driveways are to carry traffic in two directions, the roadway shall be of
a twenty-four-foot minimum width, with an additional seven-foot width
§ 100-4 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 100-6
1:236
§ 100-7. Electricity and lighting.
§ 100-8. Park location.
Mobile home parks shall be located only in areas approved by the
Supervisors or as required by the Zoning Ordinance.76
§ 100-9. Water supply.
if on-street parking is permitted on but one side of the street and an
additional fourteen-foot width if on-street parking is permitted on both
sides of the street. Where culs-de-sac or turnarounds are necessary,
they shall have a minimum radius of 50 feet.
E. Each park shall provide service buildings to house toilet facilities,
bathing facilities, laundry facilities and other sanitary facilities as
hereinafter more particularly prescribed.
F. The number of parking spaces shall equal the number of coach spaces.
These may be provided either as on-street parking or in special parking
areas.
A. Every mobile home park shall be provided with electric power. An
electric outlet supplying 110/115 volts must be provided for every
mobile home space. The outlets shall be weatherproof and in easy reach
of parked mobile homes. In no instance shall any power line across the
mobile home park area be less than 18 feet above the ground. All
electric wiring in the mobile home park shall be in accordance with
Towamencin Township and Pennsylvania codes, or in the absence of
local codes, then in accordance with the National Electrical Code.
Adequate overcurrent protection shall be provided on all circuits.
Service drops to each mobile home space shall be weatherproof,
insulated and not smaller than two No. 8 wires.
B. Street and yard lights sufficient in number and intensity to permit the
safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians shall be provided. Lights
shall be at least 25 watts spaced at intervals of at least 100 feet and
located approximately 15 feet from the ground and shall be effectively
related to buildings, walks, trees, steps and ramps. Lights shall be kept
burning from sunset to sunrise.
A. All mobile home parks shall be connected with an approved public
water supply where available, supplied to each mobile home space by
pipe.
B. Where a public water supply is not available, a suitable private water
supply shall be developed that meets standards prescribed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health as safe for drinking purposes.
Water shall be piped to each mobile home space.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 100-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-9
1:237
§ 100-10. Service buildings.
C. Water distribution and storage facilities shall be adequate to supply a
continuous year-round frost-free water supply of 150 gallons per day
per mobile home space, at a rate of six gallons per minute, with a
residual pressure of 20 pounds per square inch. Wells shall be
constructed in accordance with regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Health. Water shall be tested for bacteria content every
two months.
D. Dependent mobile home spaces shall be provided with sanitary
facilities in service buildings not less than 25 nor more than 150 feet
from any dependent mobile home, as outlined in § 100-10 below. Such
service buildings shall provide abundant hot-water supply at all times
for bathing, washing and laundry facilities.
A. Each park shall be provided with toilets, baths or showers, slop sinks
and other sanitation facilities which shall conform to the following
requirements:
(1) Toilet facilities of men and women shall either be in separate
buildings at least 20 feet apart or if in the same building, be
separated by a soundproof wall.
(2) Flush toilets shall be placed in conveniently located buildings not
more than a maximum distance of 150 feet from any dependent
mobile home. The building shall be well-lighted at all times,
ventilated with screened openings and constructed of
moistureproof materials permitting satisfactory cleaning. The
floors shall be concrete or similar materials, slightly pitched to a
floor drain. Toilets shall be enclosed in separate compartments with
doors and having a minimum width of two feet eight inches. Toilet
facilities for women shall consist of not less than one flush toilet for
every five dependent mobile home spaces, shower or bathtub for
every five dependent mobile home spaces and one lavatory with hot
and cold running water for every five dependent mobile home
spaces. Each toilet and bathtub shall be in a private compartment.
(3) Toilet facilities for men shall consist of not less than one flush toilet
for every five dependent mobile home spaces, one shower or
bathtub for every five dependent mobile home spaces and one
lavatory with hot and cold running water for every five dependent
mobile home spaces. Each toilet, shower and bathtub shall be in a
private compartment.
B. An independent mobile home may be parked on a dependent mobile
home space, but the requirements of Subsection A(1), (2) and (3)
immediately hereinabove specified shall not thereby be affected.
C. A dependent mobile home may be parked on an independent mobile
home space, but in such event such space shall be regarded as being a
§ 100-9 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 100-10
1:238
§ 100-11. Laundry facilities.
§ 100-12. Sewage disposal.
dependent mobile home space for the purpose of determining
compliance with the provisions of Subsection A(1), (2) and (3).
D. Service buildings housing the toilet facilities shall be permanent
structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes
regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and
sanitation systems77 and shall be located not closer than 25 feet and not
farther than 150 feet from any dependent mobile home space.
E. Each service building shall contain at least one slop sink located in a
separate compartment.
F. The service buildings shall be well lighted at all times of the day and
night, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be
constructed of such moistureproof material, including painted
woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be
maintained at a temperature of at least 68° F. during the period from
October 1 to May 1. The floors of the service building shall be of waterimpervious
material and shall slope to a floor drain connected with the
sewerage system.
G. All service buildings, mobile homes, mobile home spaces and the
grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and
kept free of any conditions that will menace the health of any occupant
or of the public or constitute a nuisance.
A. The laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one standard
washer and/or one automatic washer and dryer for every 10 mobile
home spaces. Drying spaces shall be provided sufficient to
accommodate the laundry of the park occupants. The service building
housing the laundry facilities shall be a permanent structure complying
with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating buildings,
electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems.78 Hot
water should be provided for clothes-washing equipment.
B. Outside drying space adjacent to the service building or other clothesdrying
facility shall be provided. A minimum of 50 square feet per
mobile home space shall be provided in the area used for outside
clothes drying.
A. A system of sanitary sewerage shall be provided in mobile home parks,
and all waste and soil lines discharging from buildings and mobile
homes should be connected thereto. Each mobile home space shall be
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes; Ch. 124, Sewage Disposal Systems,
Individual; and Ch. 127, Sewers.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes; Ch. 124, Sewage Disposal Systems,
Individual; and Ch. 127, Sewers.
§ 100-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-12
1:239
§ 100-13. Refuse disposal.
§ 100-14. Insect and rodent control.
provided with a trapped sewer below frost lines at least four inches
in diameter and sloped so as to provide a minimum flow velocity of
not less than two feet per second when flowing half full. The sewer
connection shall be provided with suitable fittings so that a water- and
gastight connection can be made between the mobile home drain and
the sewer connection. Such individual mobile home connections shall
be so constructed that they can be closed when not linked to a mobile
home and shall be trapped in such a manner as to maintain them in an
odor-free condition. Sufficient cleanouts, handholes and manholes shall
be installed in sewer systems so as to maintain serviceable conditions.
Sewer lines shall be located in a separate trench from water mains.
B. All sewers shall discharge into a public sewer system where possible. In
the absence of a public sewerage system, adequate private sewage
disposal and treatment facilities shall be installed to treat a minimum
average of 150 gallons per day per coach space of ultimate capacity of
the mobile home. The treatment facility shall be located so that it shall
not create a health or odor nuisance to the mobile home park or
adjacent property occupants or discharge untreated effluents into any
commonwealth body of water.
C. All sewerage systems shall meet applicable local plumbing and sanitary
requirements and shall meet the standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Health.
A. A flytight and watertight metal garbage can shall be provided for each
mobile home adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish.
Garbage shall be collected at least twice a week.
B. Racks and holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such
container racks shall be designed so as to prevent containers from
being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to
facilitate cleaning around them.
C. Where collection service is not available, the mobile home park
operator shall dispose of the refuse by incineration, burial or
transporting to an approved disposal site.
D. Buried garbage shall be covered with at least 12 inches of compacted
earth, but shall not be buried within 300 feet of any mobile home,
permanent dwelling, structure or recreation area.
A. Insect- and rodent-control measures to safeguard public health, as
recommended by the Health Officer or other authority, shall be applied
in the mobile home park.
§ 100-12 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 100-14
1:240
§ 100-15. Fire protection.
B. Effective larvicidal solution may be recommended by the Health Officer
for fly- or mosquito-breeding areas which cannot be controlled by other,
more permanent measures.
C. Suitable measures as recommended by the Health Officer shall be
taken by the mobile home park operator to control other insects and
obnoxious weeds.
D. Accumulations of debris which may provide harborage for rodents shall
not be permitted in the mobile home park.
E. When rats or other rodents are known to be in or near the mobile home
park, the operator shall take definite action, under direction by
appropriate health authority, to exterminate them.
A. Fire alarms and instructions.
(1) Provision shall be made for giving a general alarm in case of fire. A
bell, iron hoop or a similar manually operated device may be used
for this purpose. It shall be the duty of the mobile home park
operator or owner to instruct all tenants in the means of
summoning fire-fighting apparatus, police, medical help and in the
proper operation of fire extinguishers.
(2) A public telephone shall be available at all times to summon fire,
police and other protective services. Up-to-date lists of telephone
numbers of emergency services shall be permanently displayed
near the telephone.
B. Fire extinguishers.
(1) Every mobile home in the park shall be equipped with at least one
approved hand-operated fire extinguisher of a type suitable for use
on oil fires, preferably the foam type. The extinguisher shall be
installed on the inside of the mobile home in a fixed location,
preferably near a door, but in no case in close proximity to the
cooking or heating stove.
(2) In the absence of a system of yard hydrants and hose, a
complement of approved fire extinguishers on wheels for every 20
mobile home spaces shall be provided, located not farther than 200
feet from any mobile home. Each complement of extinguishers shall
contain one foam-type extinguisher (with antifreeze) of two-andone-
half-gallon rated capacity for Class A-type fires and at least one
approved carbon dioxide dry chemical or vaporizing liquid
extinguisher of at least 25 pounds' capacity for Class B oil-type
fires. All extinguishers shall be kept in good operating condition
and checked at intervals by an appropriate authority.
§ 100-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-15
1:241
§ 100-16. Oil-burning stoves.
§ 100-17. Fuels.
Cylinders containing liquefied petroleum gas or oils to be used as fuel
by mobile home occupants shall be connected to the stoves or heaters of
the mobile home by copper tubing, to provide leakproof connections. The
cylinders should be securely fastened in place not less than five feet from
any mobile home exit. State and local codes applicable shall be followed.
§ 100-18. Animals and pets.
No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet animal shall
permit it to run at large.
§ 100-19. Alterations and additions.
C. Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other
flammable material.
D. Means of egress. Two doors, one located at each end of the mobile
home, shall be provided on the right side of the body. Doors and screen
doors shall be of the hinged type, opening outwardly from the inside.
Locks, when provided, shall be of the type that permits opening from
the inside by the simple operation of a knob or lever or by pressure
against the door.
A. Oil-burning cooking and heating stoves shall be of an approved type and
shall be provided with flue connections to the outside of the mobile
home. Flues shall penetrate the roof of the mobile home through a
weathertight sheet metal shield or roof jack which shall provide a
clearance of at least two inches between the flue and combustible roof
material if approved outlet flues are provided. A clearance of at least six
inches shall be provided if metal flues are used. Downdraft diverters
shall be provided on all vents from oil-burning stoves.
B. Oil-burning stoves for heating purposes may provide for attachment to
fuel tanks located outside and separate from the mobile home. Auxiliary
oil storage tanks, when provided, shall be so located as to require filling
and drainage on the outside of the mobile home and shall be securely
fastened in position in a place readily available for inspection. When
installed in closed compartment outside of the mobile home, such
compartment shall be ventilated at the bottom.
C. No gasoline or portable stove equipment shall be permitted. Fires shall
be made only in approved stoves, incinerators and other equipment
intended for such purposes.
A. No permanent additions of any kind shall be built onto nor become part
of any mobile home. Skirting of mobile homes is permissible, but such
§ 100-15 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 100-19
1:242
§ 100-20. Recreation areas.
At least 100 square feet per mobile home space shall be made available in
one or more areas for recreational uses. These areas shall be located so as
to be free of traffic hazards.
§ 100-21. Register of occupants.
§ 100-22. Supervision.
A responsible attendant, caretaker, owner or operator shall be in charge at
all times to keep the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment in a
clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and he shall be answerable with the
licensee for any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 100-23. Communicable diseases.
It shall be the duty of each park owner or operator to report promptly to the
Health Officer or other officials all cases of persons and animals affected or
suspected of being affected with a communicable disease.
skirting shall not attach the mobile home permanently to the ground,
create a fire hazard or provide a harborage for rodents.
B. The wheels of the mobile home shall not be removed, except
temporarily when necessary for repairs. Jacks or stabilizers may be
placed under the frame of the mobile home to prevent movement on the
springs while the mobile home is parked and occupied.
A. It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record
of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park.
B. The register shall contain the following information:
(1) Name, address and age (if under 21) of each occupant.
(2) The make, model and year of all vehicles and mobile homes.
(3) License number and owner of each mobile home and of the vehicle
by which it is towed.
(4) The state issuing such license.
(5) The dates of arrival and departure of each mobile home.
(6) Place of previous residence.
C. The park operator shall keep the register available for inspection at all
times, including inspection by Township officials. The register records
shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of
registration.
§ 100-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-24
1:243
§ 100-24. Revocation of license.
The designated authority or Health Officer shall make inspections of the
park to assure compliance with this chapter, and parks shall be open for
such inspections at all reasonable hours. in case of noncompliance with
any provisions of this chapter, the designated authority shall serve warning
to the licensee. Thereafter, upon failure of the licensee to remove said
violation, the Supervisors shall hold hearings on the matter and, upon
determination of noncompliance, revoke said license. The license may be
reissued if the circumstances leading to the revocation have been remedied
and the park can be maintained and operated in full compliance with the
law.
§ 100-25. Posting of license and chapter.
The license certificate and a copy of this chapter shall be conspicuously
posted in the office or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times.
§ 100-26. Violations and penalties.
A. For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the persons
maintaining and operating a mobile home park of any of the classes
covered by this chapter where such violation has been committed or
shall exist, and the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any
other person who knowingly commits or takes part in or assists in any
such violation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for each
offense by a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution or,
upon default in payment of the fine and costs, by imprisonment in the
Montgomery County Prison for not more than 30 days, and whenever
such person shall have been notified by the Secretary of the Zoning
Hearing Board, or by service of summons in a prosecution or in any
other way that such person has committed such violation of said
chapter, each day that such person shall continue said violation after
such notification shall constitute a separate offense, punishable by a
like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like
fines or penalties are now collected by law. [Amended 12-28-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-15]
B. In case any mobile home park of the classification specified in this
chapter is not maintained or operated in conformity with this chapter or
any land is used in connection therewith in violation of this chapter or
any amendments hereof, in addition to other remedies provided by law,
any appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal or equitable
process or otherwise, may be instituted or taken by any public officer or
by any resident, property owner or tenant in the Township or other
party in interest to prevent such unlawful maintenance, operation,
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion or
use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the
maintenance and operation of said mobile home park or land in
connection therewith or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or
§ 100-24 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 100-26
1:244
§ 100-27. Conflicting provisions.
In case a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision
of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance of this Township or
any state law or regulations existing on the effective date of this chapter,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail.
Chapter 103
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals and fairs — See Ch. 56.
Dogs — See Ch. 64.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 149.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
§ 103-1. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of Towamencin Township to prohibit
and prevent noise pollution, as hereinafter defined, for the purpose of
securing and promoting public health, comfort, convenience, safety,
welfare, peace and quiet in residentially zoned districts.
§ 103-2. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used herein, shall have the respective
meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the context:
ANSI — The American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies.
DAYTIME HOURS — Seven o'clock a.m. to 8:00 p.m., local time.
dB(A) — The abbreviation for the sound level in decibels determined by the
A-weighting network of a sound-level meter or by calculation from octave
band or 1/3 octave band data.
DECIBEL (db) — A unit of measure, on a logarithmic scale, or the ratio
of a particular sound pressure squared to a standard reference pressure
squared. For the purpose of this chapter, 20 micropascals shall be the
standard reference pressure.
about said premises in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any
amendments hereof.
§ 100-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-2
1:245
EMERGENCY — Arty occurrence of set or circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — Eight o'clock p.m. of one day through 7:00 a.m. of
the next day.
NOISE — The intensity, frequency, duration and character of sound,
including sound and vibration of sub audible frequencies.
NOISE POLLUTION — The presence of noise of sufficient loudness and
character, from a single source or from multiple sources, which is, or may
be predicted with reasonable certainty to be, injurious to health, safety and
comfort or which unreasonably interferes with the peaceful enjoyment of
property or with any lawful business or activity. Noise/sound pressure levels
exceeding those permitted in residential districts constitute noise pollution.
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, lessee, lessor, guest,
licensee, firm, partnership, voluntary association or corporation responsible
for the use of property.
SOUND LEVEL — In decibels, the weighted sound-pressure level measured
by the use of a sound-level meter satisfying the requirements of ANSI SI.4,
1971, Specifications for Sound-Level Meters. "Sound level" and "noise level"
are synonymous.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument meeting ANSI SI.4, Specifications
for Sound-Level Meters, comprising a microphone, an amplifier, an output
meter and frequency weighting network or networks, that is used for the
measurement of sound-pressure levels in a specified manner.
SOUND PRESSURE — Minute fluctuations in atmospheric pressure which
accompany the passage of a sound wave.
SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — In decibels, 20 times the logarithm to the
Base 10 of the ratio of a sound pressure to the reference sound pressure of
20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). In the absence of any
modifier, the level is to be that of a root-mean-square pressure.
SOURCE — Any person or property, real or personal, contributing to noise
pollution.
ZONING DISTRICT — The land use category defined according to the
Zoning Ordinances of Towamencin Township.
§ 103-3. Responsibility of owner of premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit the making, creation
or maintenance of noises in excess of those permitted by this chapter upon
any premises owned or possessed by him or under his control.
§ 103-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 103-4
1:246
§ 103-4. Noise standards.
The following sound/noise levels represent the maximum permissible levels
in residential zoning districts. Levels exceeding said permissible levels are
prohibited.
A. Noise prohibitions.
(1) The creation or allowance of such creation within any residential
zoning district of noise/sound levels in excess of 65 dB(A) during
the daytime and 55 dB(A) during the nighttime hours is hereby
prohibited.
(2) In situations where noise levels are measured at an interface or
boundary line between a residential district and nonresidential
zoning district or where noise levels measured in a residential
zoning district emanate from a source in another zoning district,
the applicable permissible noise level at the point of measurement
shall be the noise level permitted in the residential zoning district.
(3) It is prohibited for any person to cause, permit or allow any noise
emanated by him or from property owned by him in any
nonresidential zoning district to reach any residential zoning
district when said noise levels exceed those as set forth in
Subsection A(1) above.
(4) No nonemergency noise from recording, loudspeakers, or public
address systems which interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of
adjacent or nearby residential properties shall be allowed, and no
such noise discernible beyond the subject property shall be
permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. [Added
2-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-04]
(5) No construction activity shall take place on any lot except between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., weekdays, and 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., Saturdays and holidays. No construction activity shall
take place on a Sunday. [Added 2-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-04]
B. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Devices used solely for the purpose of warning, protecting or
alerting the public, or some segment thereof, of the existence of
any emergency situation.
(2) Household tools and portable appliances in normal usages, during
daytime hours.
(3) Lawn care equipment in normal daytime usage if used and
maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
(4) Motor vehicles licensed for operation on public roads.
(5) Emergency utility operation.
§ 103-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-4
1:247
(6) Operations by Township, county or commonwealth departments.
(7) Non-amplified sound emanating from duly permitted or licensed
and/or authorized athletic contests, fairs, parades and municipally
sponsored events.
(8) Mechanical and electrical construction noise resulting from the
operation of tools and equipment used in the ordinary course of
drilling, renovations, lawn/yard and/or pool maintenance, tree
maintenance, trimming and/or removal, digging, demolition and all
related practices provided the noise emanating from said use
occurs during the daytime hours.
(9) All activities granted immunity and/or exemption from noise
pollution control by the legislation of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to the extent of the immunity or exemption as granted
by state law.
(10) Declared emergencies, when an emergency is declared by the
Township Manager or Chief of Police, household equipment, such
as chain saws, snowblowers or similar equipment may be used in
response to that emergency during non-daytime hours.
(11) A carnival, fair, concert, party or other gathering, during daytime
hours and into the nighttime hours but no later than 10:00 p.m. on
Sunday through Thursday and no later than 11:00 p.m. on Friday
and Saturday. At no time may the noise be in excess of 85 db(A) at
the lot line.
(12) Sporting events during daytime hours and into nighttime hours but
no later than 10:00 p.m.
C. Measurement.
(1) The measurement of noise levels shall be conducted at points on
the property line of the source if the source is in a residential
zoning district, or on the boundary of a zoning district if the source
emanates from property in a nonresidential zoning district, or may
be made on the premises or any property in a residentially zoned
district reached by the sound waves from the noise emanating from
the source.
(2) Measurement equipment shall be sound-level meters complying
with ANSI SI.4, 1971, Specifications for Sound-Level Meters, of at
least Type 2 quality and sensitivity, comprising a microphone,
amplifier, output meter and frequency weighting network(s).
(3) Measurement equipment of operators shall be members of the
Code Enforcement and/or Police Department of Towamencin
Township, who have been properly trained in the operation and
interpretation of the noise measuring equipment.
§ 103-4 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 103-5
1:248
§ 103-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons or group of persons who shall violate this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a summary offense punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus cost of prosecution and, upon default
of payment, may be sentenced to the county correctional facility for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation by a corporation, firm
or partnership shall be construed, insofar as is legally permissible, as the
commission of such offenses by any and all officers and/or partners of said
corporation, firm or partnership.
Chapter 104
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
False alarms — See Ch. 44, Art I.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 49.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 54.
Dogs — See Ch. 64.
Garbage and other solid waste — See Ch. 84.
Littering — See Ch. 93.
Parks — See Ch. 107.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 117.
Inoperative, unlicensed and junk
vehicles — See Ch. 151.
§ 104-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 65712,79
regarding nuisances, Towamencin Township has determined that the
prohibition of nuisances is an important public concern because of the
impact on the public health, safety and welfare, and the Township believes
there is a necessity to establish regulations to prohibit nuisances, including
but not limited to accumulations of garbage and rubbish, the storage of
abandoned or junked automobiles and the depositing of hazardous
substances on public or private property; and to establish penalties for
violation of such regulations.
§ 104-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Ordinance for the Abatement of
Nuisances."
§ 104-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
79.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 66529 (per reorganization by the Act of 11-9-1995, P.L.
350, No. 60.
§ 103-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-3
1:249
ABATE — The cleanup or removal of deposited hazardous substances,
including such actions as may be necessary to monitor, assess and evaluate
the potential threat of hazardous substances to the public health, safety and
welfare; actions to prevent, minimize and mitigate damage to the public
health and the disposal of removed materials.
DEPOSIT — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, discharging,
injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance or combination of substances
which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics, may:
NUISANCE — That which is set up, maintained or continued so as to be
injurious to health or that which is an obstruction to the use of property by
interfering with the health, safety, comfort or repose of the public.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation, joint
venture or other private or commercial entity, as well as all officers, agents,
servants, employees or others acting for any of the same, and shall be taken
as applying in the singular or plural as the case may require.
§ 104-4. Creation or maintenance of public nuisance.
Any person who creates, continues or maintains any public nuisance within
the Township shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall
be liable for the expense and abatement and remedy thereof, as well as such
fines and penalties as may be imposed.
§ 104-5. Declaration of nuisances.
Without in any manner intending to limit or restrict the generality of the
above definition of and prohibition against a nuisance, the following are
hereby declared to constitute nuisances:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness;
A.
B. Otherwise pose a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public;
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed
of, or otherwise managed; or
C.
Damage or impede the use of public highways, sewers or other public
improvements.
D.
A. Dumping. It shall be unlawful to throw, deposit or dump any paper,
building material, construction material, trash, rubbish, ashes, junk,
waste or discarded materials of any kind on any street, highway or any
public place or on any private property within the limit of Towamencin
Township.
§ 104-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 104-5
1:250
§ 104-6. Notice of violation; remedial action.
The violation of any of the foregoing sections shall be deemed to be and
constitute a nuisance. Whenever it is found that any person maintains
such nuisance or nuisances, as prohibited in § 104-5 of this chapter, within
the Township, the Board of Supervisors of the Township, by its employees
or agents, shall serve notice by any means practicable upon the person
responsible for the public nuisance. The notice shall sufficiently describe
the condition complained of and shall require the nuisance to be abated
within the time as served by the notice, which shall not be less than
five days, unless the Board of Supervisors or the Emergency Management
Director shall determine that the nature of the hazardous substance
deposited is of such nature as to pose an immediate threat to the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 104-7. Emergencies.
In the event that the Township Emergency Management Director shall
determine the nature of the hazardous substance deposited is of such
nature as to pose an immediate threat to the public health, safety and
welfare, the Township's Emergency Management Director, or his designee
in accordance with Township policy, shall act to abate said public nuisance,
and any cost of the abatement by the Township or other emergency service
organization shall be paid by the person who causes or contributes to the
deposit of the hazardous substance.
§ 104-8. Abatement by Township.
Where a nuisance is determined not to pose an immediate threat to the
public health, safety and welfare, and where the person who maintains such
nuisance or nuisances fails, neglects or refuses to make such conditions safe
or to correct or remove such conditions to the satisfaction of the Township,
then the Township may abate or cause to be abated said nuisance, and the
expense of such abatement shall be paid by the responsible person.
§ 104-9. Reimbursement of Township expenses.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Township in the abatement of such
condition shall be a lien upon the premises, and whenever a bill therefor
remains unpaid for a period of 60 days after it has been rendered, the
B. Lot maintenance. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant upon
any property within Towamencin Township to permit or suffer the
accumulation thereon of any water that stagnates, paper, trash,
rubbish, ashes, junk or waste.
C. Hazardous substances. The existence of hazardous substances
deposited upon public roadways, public lands or private property within
the Township shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be abated
immediately by the person responsible for such deposit of hazardous
substances.
§ 104-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-9
1:251
Township Solicitor shall file a municipal claim or an action of assumpsit
for such cost and expenses, together with a penalty of 10%, in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 104-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 104-11. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be construed under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 104-12. Modifications.
The Township may, from time to time, modify the rules and regulations
adopted in accordance with this chapter or modifications to this chapter.
Chapter 107
PARKS
§ 107-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
FIREARM — Anything contained within the definition of "firearm" in the
Pennsylvania Uniform Firearms Act.80
LITTER — Includes rubbish, paper, trash, ashes, junk, waste, liquid or solid
vegetable or animal matter and garbage.
A. Any person or persons, firms or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to pay
a fine or penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each and every offense. All
fines and penalties imposed by this chapter are recoverable by
summary proceedings before the District Justice, and all suits or actions
at law instituted for the recovery thereof are to be in the name and for
the use of Towamencin Township, against which the offenses are
committed. In default of payment of any fine or penalty imposed by any
District Justice under the provisions of this chapter, the person or
persons so offending may be committed to the Montgomery County
Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Each day a violation is committed shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
C. This section shall not preclude the Township from any other remedy it
may have at law or equity.
80.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq.
§ 104-9 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 107-1
1:252
PARK — Any park, playground, open space or municipal facility owned,
leased, maintained by or dedicated to the Township of Towamencin.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Towamencin.
TOWNSHIP OFFICIALS — The Chief of Police, Township Manager or the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 107-2. Park regulations.
A. No person or persons without a special permit shall be allowed in the
park except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and dusk, except in parks
where other hours are posted.
B. Persons shall enter and leave a park by the entrances and exits
provided for that purpose.
C. Automobiles or other vehicles shall not be parked in any roadway or
section of ground except in areas designated for parking purposes nor
driven on any areas other than designated roads within the parks.
D. The washing, repair or painting of any motor vehicle shall not be
allowed in any park.
E. Intoxicating beverages shall not be possessed, sold, distributed or
consumed within a park.
F. Intoxicated persons shall not be allowed in the park.
G. No person shall be present in any Township park, open space or
recreation area while under the influence of intoxicating beverages,
drugs or any other controlled substances.
H. Disorderly conduct as defined in the statutes in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, ordinance in the Township of Towamencin or in common
law, is prohibited.
I. Abusive, indecent or threatening language or any conduct that may
annoy others shall not be allowed in the parks.
J. No person shall operate a minibike, snowmobile or other similar
recreational vehicle, whether licensed or unlicensed, anywhere in a
Township park, recreation area or Township-owned open space area.
K. No animals are allowed in the park or recreational areas unless
attended and controlled by a leash no greater than 12 feet in length.
The individual in charge of an animal entering any park or recreational
area is required to be in possession of proper implements for the
gathering and disposing of animal feces. All feces will be collected
immediately, removed from the park or recreational area and disposed
of.
L. Defacing, injuring, displacing, removing or damaging any natural or
artificial facility or appurtenance in the park shall not be permitted.
§ 107-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-2
1:253
M. No persons shall scatter, drop or leave litter in any portion of a park
except in the receptacles provided for that purpose.
N. No persons shall injure, deface or destroy any notices, rules or
regulations for the government of a park posted or in any manner
permanently fixed within the limits of the same.
O. No persons shall cut, injure, destroy, remove, disturb, interfere with or
take any of the blossoms or fruit growing upon any tree, shrub, flower
or bush in a park.
P. Fires in parks shall only be allowed in designated areas where
fireplaces or stoves are provided or in grills brought to a park for this
purpose. All fires are to be extinguished before leaving.
Q. Groups or parties wishing to reserve a park facility shall apply for a
permit prior to occupying such a facility. Applications for a permit must
be made at least 10 working days before the time the group or party
desires to occupy the park and a schedule reservation fee must be paid.
R. Use of Township parks shall be restricted to persons who are residents
and/or taxpayers of Towamencin Township or persons who are guests of
Township residents, except for parks funded in part by state or federal
grants.
S. Activities and games within the park shall take place in areas
designated for such. Paintball and golf are prohibited activities in all
parks.
T. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to discharge any firearm
in any park or any Township open space, except in lawful self-defense.
U. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, in any park or Township
open space, to bring into or to discharge any air rifles, spring guns, bow
and arrow, slingshots, BB guns or any other missiles or projectiles not
included within the definition of "firearms" contained within the
Pennsylvania Uniform Firearms Act.81
V. It shall be unlawful to molest, annoy, strike, injure, maim, kill or destroy
any animal life and/or animal habitat in the park.
W. No soliciting, posting of notices or advertisements, vending or any
commercial activity is permitted in any Township park except any
concession as may be duly established by the Board of Township
Supervisors.
X. No group exceeding 25 persons shall be allowed to use Township parks
without a parks facilities use permit obtained from the Township
Manager's office.
81.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq.
§ 107-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 107-3
1:254
§ 107-3. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Township of Towamencin shall enforce these
regulations and exercise general supervision over persons occupying or
using the parks. The police shall have the right to evict violators from the
parks and to suspend the use thereof for up to one year in duration.
§ 107-4. Supervision.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Towamencin, along with the
Open Space and Parks Committee and with other Township officers, shall
exercise general supervision over persons occupying or using the parks
and over the care, maintenance and replacement of Township property and
equipment in the parks and shall keep such property and equipment in a
clean and sanitary condition.
§ 107-5. Fees.
The Board of Supervisors may from time to time, by resolution, adopt
a schedule of fees and charges and other use regulations for Township
facilities.
§ 107-6. Parking violations.
A. Any person or persons who shall violate any of the above regulations
relating to parking of a motor or other vehicle within any park shall be
notified by the Police Department of such violation, said notice to be
served by affixing a written ticket or notice upon the vehicle unlawfully
operated or by personal service upon the owner or operator of the
vehicle. The traffic notice shall indicate the violation, the model of the
vehicle, the license number, the name and address of the owner, if such
information is immediately available, the place and time of the violation
and the officer's name.
(1) Any person receiving a notice of such a violation shall report within
72 hours to the Township Building and settle the charge by paying
$10 for said violation to the proper Township employee, for the use
of the Township of Towamencin, and thus avoid further
proceedings.
(2) In case such person fails to report to the Township Building within
72 hours or, having reported, fails to settle the charge by paying
the prescribed sum of money to the Township of Towamencin, the
officer who served the notice shall file a citation against such
person before a District Justice of the Township of Towamencin,
and thereafter the said District Justice shall follow the procedure
and prescribe such fines as are set forth hereinbelow.
B. The procedures and charges set forth in this section shall be in addition
to and not a substitution for the fines and penalties prescribed for
violation of any other Township ordinance.
§ 107-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-7
1:255
§ 107-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $25 nor more than $300, costs of prosecution and restitution
of damages.
Chapter 110
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER/SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in peddling/
soliciting as herein defined. The words "peddler" and "solicitor" shall
include the words "vendor," "street vendor," "hawker" and "huckster," and
other such words carrying or conveying the same meaning and
understanding and addressing the same activities described thereby.
PEDDLER/SOLICITOR (NONPROFIT/EXEMPT) — Any person representing
a governmental agency, charitable, educational, religious or political
organization or any association incorporated in accordance with or subject
to the provisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
State, Bureau of Charitable Organizations, for the purpose of soliciting
membership, money and/or property by or on behalf of a nonprofit/exempt
organization, cause, candidate or viewpoint.
PEDDLING (COMMERCIAL) — The selling or offering for sale of any goods,
wares or merchandise for immediate delivery, which the person selling
or offering for sale carries with him/her in traveling or has in his/her
possession or control upon any of the streets or sidewalks, from house-tohouse
within the Township of Towamencin.
SOLICITING (COMMERCIAL) — The seeking or taking of contracts or
orders for any goods, wares or merchandise for future delivery or for
services performed for the homeowner by a private individual or for-profit
corporation, upon any of the streets or sidewalks, from house-to-house
within the Township of Towamencin, including the door-to-door delivery of
business advertisements that do not require direct contact with residents.
§ 110-2. Entering upon posted property prohibited.
Any and all peddlers/solicitors are prohibited from entering upon any
property that is posted with a "No Peddling" and/or "No Soliciting" sign and
may be prosecuted for trespassing.
A. No person or persons without a special permit shall be allowed in the
park except between dawn and dusk.
§ 107-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 110-3
1:256
§ 110-3. Conduct of peddlers, solicitors and transient vendors.
It is unlawful for any person(s) to engage in peddling or soliciting within
Towamencin Township without a valid permit issued by Towamencin
Township, except if said person(s) represents an exempt organization. All
peddlers/solicitors shall, when conducting business activities in the
Township, comply with the following rules of conduct:
A. Carry the permit at all times and furnish it upon request of any person
to whom the peddler/solicitor is attempting to peddle.
B. Peddlers/solicitors shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling
house or place of business without the invitation or permission of the
occupant and shall immediately leave the premises upon request.
C. Peddlers/solicitors shall only engage in peddling/soliciting within the
Township between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday and 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. No
soliciting is permitted on Sundays and federal/state legal holidays.
D. Peddlers/solicitors shall not call out or shout to sell services or goods,
nor shall they use any loudspeaker, horn, music or other device or
vehicle that uses such devices.
E. Peddlers/solicitors shall not occupy by standing in person, with or
without a stand, cart, or similar fixtures, upon any fixed location or
along any of the alleys, sidewalks, streets or any other public rights-ofway
in the Township.
F. Peddlers/solicitors shall not park any vehicle upon or along any of the
streets or sidewalks of the Township for the sole purpose of advertising,
displaying and selling of merchandise.
G. Peddling/soliciting is not permitted on Township property or in
Township parks unless approved by the Board of Supervisors.
H. Peddlers/solicitors shall not peddle/solicit on private property without
permission of the property owner.
I. Peddlers/solicitors shall not cut across or walk upon any front lawn,
back yard or courtyard except upon sidewalks, walkways or private
driveways, if such sidewalks, walkways or driveways are provided.
J. It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit or attempt to
peddle/solicit at a place of residence at any entrance other than the
main entrance of the residence.
K. Peddlers/solicitors who are offering any food for sale or using any
mobile food unit that requires a permit from the Montgomery County
Health Department must provide said permit when applying for a
Township permit.
§ 110-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-3
1:257
§ 110-4. Permits.
§ 110-5. Fees.
Fees for peddling/soliciting permits shall be set from time to time by
separate resolution of the Towamencin Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 110-6. Revocation and suspension of permits; appeals.
L. Peddlers/solicitors of home improvements services who are required to
comply with any state legislation must provide proof of compliance with
said legislation when applying for a Township permit.
A. Any person or business desiring to engage in peddling/soliciting within
the Township must first obtain an application from the Towamencin
Township Police Department for a permit. The application must be
completed by the individual applicant and returned to the Police
Department, which may require such information as the Chief of Police
deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, valid governmentissued
photo identification, fingerprinting, photograph, prior criminal
record (provided at the applicant's expense), name of employer and the
type of peddling/soliciting being made to the public.
B. All peddling/soliciting permits shall be issued by the Towamencin
Township Police Department and shall be exhibited in clear view by the
peddler/solicitor at all times. Permits shall not be altered. No permit
can be transferred from one person to another, and there may be a fiveto-
seven-business-day waiting period between application and issuance
of a permit. Permits shall be valid for a maximum period of up to 30
days, after which a new permit application must be submitted, fee paid,
and permit approved by the Towamencin Township Police Department.
C. A separate application shall be filed and a separate permit fee shall be
paid by each person who shall actually conduct the peddling/soliciting
and shall apply where an employer desires to secure permits for his
employees, agents or representatives.
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to revoke or suspend any
permit issued under this chapter for any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, or for giving false information or for failing to
properly and accurately complete the application for a permit. The
Chief of Police is further authorized to refuse a permit to any person
whom the Chief deems could present a threat of harm or danger to the
citizens of Towamencin Township. When a permit is revoked, no other
permit shall be issued to the same applicant within one year of the date
of revocation.
B. An applicant may appeal, in writing, a decision by the Chief of Police to
the Township Manager.
§ 110-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 110-7
1:258
§ 110-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or commercial entity who or which has violated or permitted
the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before
a Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a penalty of not less than $200
nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues may be regarded
as a separate offense and punishable as such.
§ 110-8. Exemptions for nonprofit and exempt peddlers and
solicitors.
§ 110-9. Exemption for community events.
Special exceptions to this chapter may be granted by the Board of
Supervisors for community or Township-sponsored events.
Chapter 113
PICKETING
§ 113-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PICKETING — The act of standing upon or patrolling any public street,
sidewalk or any other public place where persons may lawfully assemble, by
one or more persons for the purpose of:
A. Persons and organizations, their employees, agents and representatives
who engage in door-to-door soliciting/peddling on behalf of nonprofit/
exempt organizations and causes that are in compliance with the
provisions set forth by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department
of State, Bureau of Charitable Organizations, are exempt from the
requirement to obtain a permit and to pay any fee to solicit.
B. All persons, organizations, their employees, agents and representatives
who engage in door-to-door soliciting/peddling on behalf of nonprofit/
exempt organizations and causes are required to provide proof of their
nonprofit/exempt registration and register with the Towamencin
Township Police Department.
C. All persons, organizations, their employees, agents and representatives
who engage in door-to-door soliciting/peddling on behalf of nonprofit/
exempt organizations and causes are required to adhere to all other
provisions of this chapter.
Persuading other persons to cease patronizing, contracting with,
employing or leaving the employ of any person or persons; or
A.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-1
1:259
§ 113-2. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful:
§ 113-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1988 by Ord. No.
88-15]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for not more than
30 days.
Chapter 116
(RESERVED)
Chapter 117
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 49.
Change of occupancy — See Ch. 59.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Garbage and other solid waste — See Ch. 84.
Nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
§ 117-1. Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code,
2009 Edition.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Manager of Towamencin Township, being marked and designated as the
Giving publicity to or communicating information regarding the
existence, facts or merits of a labor dispute or other controversy.
B.
A. To engage in picketing by force, violence, duress, breach of the peace
or threat of any of the foregoing.
B. To engage in picketing in such manner as to prevent ingress and egress
to or from any premises.
C. To engage in picketing in such a manner as to obstruct, prevent or
interfere with the free or unobstructed use of any public street or
sidewalk by other persons.
D. To engage in picketing other than in a reasonable and peaceful manner.
§ 113-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 117-1
1:260
International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of Towamencin Township for regulating and governing
the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures,
by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the condemnation of buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of
such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance
Code on file in the office of the Manager of Towamencin Township are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in
§ 117-2 of this chapter.
§ 117-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the Property Maintenance Code are hereby
revised:
A. Section 101.1, insert "Towamencin Township" for the name of
jurisdiction. Insert the following sentence at the end of the paragraph:
"Towamencin Township is hereinafter referred to as "the Township."
B. Add new Section 101.5 as follows:
101.5 Applicability. This code shall apply along with the provisions
of the adopted building codes and the codes of Towamencin Township.
If the provisions of this code overlap with any other, then the more
stringent of the requirements shall apply.
C. Section 103.5, delete the heading and paragraph in its entirety and
insert the following:
103.5 Fee schedule. Applicants for permits under this code shall pay
at the time of application to the Township the fees set forth on the
then current fee schedule which shall have been adopted by resolution
by the Board of Supervisors. When a permit fee is based on cost of
construction, the valuation of the subject work shall be the fair market
value of all of the construction work. The Code Official shall be satisfied
as to the accuracy of the estimate both initially and at final completion
should changes occur as the work progresses.
D. Section 106.4, insert the following after the first sentence: "Any
violation of this code shall be considered a nuisance as detailed in
Chapter 104 of the Code of Towamencin Township."
E. Section 111, delete section, including all subsections, in its entirety and
insert the following:
§ 117-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-2
1:261
SECTION 111
MEANS OF APPEAL
111.1 Procedure. An appeal from any decision of the Code Official
may be taken to the Board of Supervisors. Such appeal shall be made
in writing, verified by an affidavit, within 10 days after such decision
has been made, and shall be filed with the Township Secretary. The
appellant or his representative shall have the right to appear and be
heard by the Board. The Board shall render a prompt decision on
such appeal. In making the decision, the Board may vary or modify
any provision of this code, where there are practical difficulties in the
way of executing the strict letter of the code, or to permit the use
of innovative procedures or materials, provided that the spirit of the
code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. Such variation or modification shall be the minimum necessary
in order to grant relief. Every action of the Board on such appeals
shall be by resolution, copies of which shall be certified to the Building
Official and the appellant. The decision of the Board shall in such cases
be final.
F. Section 202, add the following definition:
BOARD or BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The governing body for
Towamencin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
G. Section 302.4, delete the paragraph in its entirety and insert: "Weeds
and plant growth shall be maintained as detailed in Chapter 49 of the
Code of Towamencin Township."
H. Section 304.14, delete the words "During the period from [DATE] to
[DATE]" and replace with the following: "As required based on outdoor
temperatures."
I. Section 602.3, delete the words "during the period from [DATE] to
[DATE]" and replace with the following: "as required based on outdoor
temperatures."
J. Section 602.4, delete the words "during the period from [DATE] to
[DATE]" and replace with the following: "as required based on outdoor
temperatures."
K. Section 702 Means of Egress: add the following new section:
702.5 Stairway identification. A sign with bold-type six-inch
reflective number and letters designating the floor level shall be
installed on each floor level within all interior stairways, smoke and fire
towers. The signs shall be provided on all levels above or below the
level of exit discharge. The signs shall be located on the wall at the
opening side of the door within 12 inches of the floor. The level of exit
discharge shall be clearly marked with approved exit signage.
L. Add new Section 704.5 as follows:
§ 117-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 117-2
1:262
§ 117-3. Savings clause.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any actions required, or liability incurred,
or any cause or causes of action incurred or existing, under any act or
ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be
lost, impaired, or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 119
RENTAL UNIT OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 143.
§ 119-1. Reports by owner; annual report.
It shall be the duty of every owner of a rental unit or units used for
living purposes located within Towamencin Township to submit to the
Towamencin Township Manager the name, address and date of birth of any
and all persons living, occupying or dwelling in said rental units. Every
owner of said rental unit(s) shall be further required to submit to the
Township Manager a statement of the number of such rental units owned.
Said information shall be filed with the Township Manager within 60 days
of the enactment of this chapter and, after said sixty-day period, within
15 days of each and every new occupancy and each and every succeeding
occupancy of the said rental unit or units. In addition, a complete up-to-date
listing of all tenants shall be filed with the Township Manager not later than
January 15 of each year.
§ 119-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1988 by Ord. No.
88-15]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for not more than
30 days.
704.5 Testing. These systems shall be tested at least annually. Records
of the test results and the necessary repairs made shall be maintained
on site, for a period of two years. These test results shall be made
available to the Code Official upon request.
M. Chapter 8. Add the following codes to the list:
Pennsylvania's statewide building code, generally known as the
"Uniform Construction Code (UCC)," as amended.
§ 117-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-2
1:263
Chapter 124
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 76.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Sewers — See Ch. 127.
§ 124-1. Title and purpose.
§ 124-2. Indoor sewage disposal system required.
Inside sanitary facilities and a sanitary sewage disposal system shall be
provided for every improvement hereafter erected and intended to be used
as a dwelling even though such structure is fabricated or manufactured
elsewhere and placed on a lot and intended to be used as a dwelling,
whether affixed thereto permanently or temporarily and whether mobile or
immobile.
§ 124-3. System design, construction and location.
A. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Towamencin Township Sewage Disposal Ordinance of 1956."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health,
cleanliness, comfort and safety of the citizens of the Township of
Towamencin.
A. The design of individual sewage disposal systems shall take into
consideration location with respect to wells or other sources of water
supply, topography, water table, soil characteristics, available area and
the maximum occupancy of the buildings in relation to each unit of the
disposal system to be designed to adequately treat the estimated
volume of waste to be discharged from the premises to be served.
B. When inside sanitary facilities are to be provided, the sewage disposal
system shall contain a septic tank, a distribution box and a tile field
disposal area, with the minimum sizes and capacities and the manner of
construction and location of the different units of the system to be in
accordance with the Montgomery County Individual Sewage Disposal
System Code adopted June 9, 1953, and any amendments thereto which
may be adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of
Towamencin Township.
§ 119-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 124-4
1:264
§ 124-4. Connection to septic tank.
Any sewer line or lines connecting the inside sanitary facilities to the septic
tank shall be carefully constructed of approved materials, and all joints in
the line shall be carefully sealed and made watertight.
§ 124-5. Prohibited disposal methods.
Neither abandoned wells nor drilled wells, nor drilled holes nor dug holes
over 10 feet in depth, nor any device the use of which might pollute the
underground streams shall be used in connection with or become part of a
sewage disposal system.
§ 124-6. Filing of plans and specifications.
Prior to the commencement of construction or erection of any building
intended to be used as a dwelling or any structure to be provided with
inside sanitary facilities, or prior to occupancy of any mobile unit intended
to be used as a dwelling, plans and specifications of the proposed sanitary
sewage disposal system to be incorporated with said dwelling or building
shall be submitted to the Township Supervisors by the builder, owner or
proposed occupier thereof for their approval, which plans and specifications
shall clearly disclose the details of the proposed sewage disposal system
and all materials to be used therein. The Board of Supervisors may require
to be made such alterations in the plans or specifications as to it may seem
advisable.
§ 124-7. Permit required; fee.
In the event such plans and specifications shall be approved by the Board
of Supervisors as originally presented or as revised by said Board, a permit
shall be issued to the applicant upon the payment of a fee for the use of
the Township in accordance with a fee schedule to be adopted by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors upon the enactment of this chapter, or as such
schedule may be amended by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.82 No
construction or installation of any proposed sanitary sewage system or any
part thereof shall be commenced unless and until such permit shall have
been obtained.
§ 124-8. Inspection prior to covering.
The Township Supervisors shall be notified by the holder of such permit
before final coverage of the sewage disposal system, and an inspection shall
be made by the Board of Supervisors or its duly designated agent to ensure
that the approved plans and specifications have been faithfully followed. No
dwelling, whether mobile or immobile, shall be occupied until final approval
of the sanitary sewage disposal system has been given by the Board of
Supervisors.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Fees, Art. I, Miscellaneous.
§ 124-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-9
1:265
§ 124-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1988 by Ord. No.
88-15]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more
than $300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine
and costs, by imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for not more
than 30 days, and each day that a violation continues after notification shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
Chapter 127
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 21, Municipal
Authorities, Art. I.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 62, Art. VII.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
124.
§ 124-9 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 124-9
1:266
Part 1
[AdoptedRe9g-2u4la-1ti9o8n7s BAyndO rRda. tNeso. 87-12]
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 127-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used herein shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Authority.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — A source of wastewater
equivalent to that generated by a single-family dwelling unit. Every building
or use connected to the sewer shall constitute at least one EDU. For the
purposes of residential uses, the number of EDUs applicable shall consist
of the total number of residential dwelling units, together with the EDUs
applicable to any common-use areas calculated as set forth herein for
nonresidential use. For the purposes of a nonresidential use, the number
of EDUs applicable to that use shall consist of the actual or estimated
total gallonage discharge of wastewater at the property per day divided by
200.83[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises used in whole or in part
for the manufacture, processing, cleaning or assembly of any product,
commodity or article, or any other premises from which wastewater other
than sanitary sewage is discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, rejected or
escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business
process or in the course of the development, recovery or processing of
natural resources, which is discharged into the sewer system, as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, extending to the edge of the rightof-
way or sewer easement.
METERING FACILITIES — A flow-measuring system, designed and installed
in accordance with accepted engineering practices and approved by the
Township, for the measurement of sewage flows. For industrial
establishments and nonresidential users, publicly metered water use
records may be considered metering facilities if approved by the Township.
NONRESIDENTIAL USER — Any commercial, institutional or industrial use,
other than a residential unit, which is connected to the sewer system and
83.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “improved property,” which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 4-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06.
§ 127-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-1
1:267
from which sanitary sewage or industrial waste is or may be discharged into
the sewer system.
OUTSIDE SEWER FACILITIES — The system of sanitary sewers and
appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage
that is located outside of the municipal boundaries of Towamencin Township
and is owned and operated by the Township and/or Authority.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the sewered area.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
PLUMBING CODE — The BOCA Plumbing Code of the Township.84
PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM — The system of sanitary sewers and
appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage
that is located on private property or in noneasement areas and is not
owned and maintained by the Township or Authority.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Each private dwelling; each dwelling unit in a
double house or in a row of connecting houses; each apartment; each room,
group of rooms, house trailer, mobile home, independent living unit, or any
structure occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters
by a family or group of persons living together or by persons living alone,
which accommodation is connected to the sewer system and from which
sanitary sewage is or may be discharged into the sewer system.[Amended
11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
SANITARY SEWAGE — The type of toilet and other water-carried waste
normally discharged from residential properties.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system, used
or usable for sewage collection purposes, other than a lateral.
SEWERED AREA — That portion of the Township in which there shall be
constructed a sewage collection system as from time to time constructed
and extended by the Authority, the Township or others, and that part of
areas outside the Township in which sewers shall be constructed which
connect to the sewage treatment plant of the Authority located in the
Township.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial waste, situate
in the sewered area and owned and/or operated by the Authority or the
Township.
STREET — Any street, road, lane, court, alley or public square.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Towamencin, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, or as the context may require, the Board of Township
Supervisors (in connection with matters requiring action of the Supervisors)
or such officers or employees of the Township as are authorized to act for
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes, Art. VII, Plumbing Code.
§ 127-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-1
1:268
the Township in the premises, including but not limited to the Township
Engineers, Sewage Enforcement Officer and Code Enforcement Officer.
TREATMENT PLANT — The facility owned and operated by the Authority
situated at 2225 Kriebel Road, Towamencin Township.
§ 127-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-1
1:269

ARTICLE II
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 127-2. Permit required for connection.
No person shall uncover, connect to, make any opening into or use, alter
or disturb in any manner any lateral or any other part of the sewer system
without first obtaining a permit in writing from the Township and the
Authority authorizing such connection and/or use. No permit shall be issued
unless there is sufficient capacity in the sewer system to convey the
wastewater to the treatment plant and sufficient capacity in the treatment
plant to treat the wastewater.
§ 127-3. Application for permit.
Application for a permit required under § 127-2 shall be made by the
owner of the improved property to be served or by his duly authorized
representative.
§ 127-4. Conditions for connections.
No person shall make or cause to be made a connection of any improved
property with a sewer until such person shall have fulfilled each of the
following conditions:
§ 127-5. Display of permit.
The permit required by § 127-2 shall be displayed prominently upon the
improved property to be connected to a sewer at all times during
construction of the building sewer and connection of the building sewer to
a lateral.
§ 127-6. Separate connection for each unit.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, each connection unit on each
improved property shall be connected separately and independently with
a sewer through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one connection
unit on one building sewer shall not be permitted except under special
circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good cause shown,
and then only after special permission of the Township in writing shall have
been secured.
A. Such person shall have applied for and obtained a permit as required by
§ 127-2.
B. Such person shall have given the Township at least 48 hours' notice of
the time when such connection will be made so that the Township may
supervise and inspect the work of connection and necessary testing.
§ 127-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-7
1:271
§ 127-7. Costs of construction and connection.
All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and of a
connection to a lateral shall be borne by the owner of the property to be
connected; and in addition thereto, as a condition of the grant of a permit,
such owner shall agree to indemnify and save harmless the Township and
Authority from all loss or damage resulting directly or indirectly from the
connection to the lateral, including any damages to persons or property
occasioned thereby.
§ 127-8. Construction of lateral.
In instances where no lateral exists, the person shall contact the Township
to determine the method of connection to the sewer. The Township shall
approve the location and method of connection to the sewer. The person,
at a minimum, shall be required to install a lateral from the sewer for
a distance of 10 feet or to the curbline, whichever is greater, prior to
installing the building sewer. All work shall be done in accordance with the
Township's standards. In instances where, in the opinion of the Township,
a connection to the sewer may result in potential damage in the form of
collapse, blockage or failure of the sewer, special requirements to perform
the connection may be specified. These include but are not limited to the
setup of bypass pumping equipment at the site capable of transporting
flows equal to peak daily quantities and the posting of a bond equal to the
maximum established cost of repair should damage occur.
§ 127-9. Adherence to standards and specifications.
The construction of building sewers and the connection thereof to a lateral
shall be done in accordance with the provisions of the BOCA Plumbing Code
and the Township's specifications.85
§ 127-10. Guarding of excavations; restoration.
Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury. Streets,
sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of installation
of a building sewer shall be restored at the cost and expense of the owner
of the improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to the
Township. Every excavation requiring a road opening of a state or county
highway requires a highway occupancy permit from the appropriate agency.
The road restoration must be done in accordance with the specifications of
the appropriate agency.
§ 127-11. Maintenance of building sewer.
Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in
a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes, Art. VII, Plumbing.
§ 127-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-12
1:272
§ 127-12. Correction of defects in sewers.
Whenever the Township has reason to believe that any building sewer
has become defective, such building sewer shall be subject to test and
inspection. Defects found upon such test and inspection, if any, shall be
corrected as required by the Township in writing, at the cost and expense
of the owner of the improved property served through such building sewer.
§ 127-13. Surface water excluded from sewers.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
sump pump areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater in any manner resulting in such surface runoff's or
groundwater's being discharged directly or indirectly into the sewer
system. Any person found to have a connection of this type shall be formally
notified that he must remove the connection discharging such surface
runoff or groundwater. Such person shall have 30 days from said
notification in which to remove such connection or shall hereby be in
violation of this Part 1, and such person shall, upon conviction, be subject
to the penalties in § 127-46, with each day such violation shall persist
constituting a separate violation.
§ 127-14. Substances excluded from sewers.
A. No person shall cause, permit or allow any discharge or flow of any
flammable or explosive substance, solid, liquid or gas (such substances
include but are not limited to acetone, benzene, fuel oil, gasoline,
kerosene or naphtha), either directly or indirectly into the sewer system
that could create any danger of fire or explosion or result in damage or
injury to persons or to the structures, equipment or processes of the
sewer system or treatment plant.
B. No person shall cause, permit or allow any discharge or flow of any
corrosive substance, solid, liquid or gas, either directly or indirectly
into the sewer system that could create any danger of corrosive damage
or injury to persons or to the equipment, structures or processes of the
sewer system or treatment plant.
C. No person shall cause, permit or allow the discharge, flow or placement
directly or indirectly into the sewer system of any substance, material
or object that could cause or result in the obstruction of flow of
wastewater in the sewer system or the interference with or damage to
the equipment, structures or processes of the sewer system or
treatment plant.
D. In addition to invoking the penalties provided for violation of this Part 1
as set forth in § 127-46 hereof, the Township shall be empowered to
discontinue sewer service to any property from which objectionable
discharges emanate, to direct the owner or person occupying the
property to discontinue such discharge or make such repairs or
changes to the property, including the removal of materials from the
§ 127-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-14
1:273
property, as to prevent such discharges of objectionable substances, or
to take such other measures as may be required to safeguard persons,
equipment, structures or processes of the sewer system or treatment
plant.
§ 127-14 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-14
1:274
ARTICLE III
Connection to Public Sewer Facilities
§ 127-15. Disposal of wastewater on public or private property.
No person shall discharge or dispose of any wastewater, sanitary sewage,
industrial waste or other objectionable wastewater on public or private
property within the Township except into an existing and properly
functioning on-site sewage disposal system or in conformity with this Part 1.
All such discharges or disposal are hereby declared to be public nuisances
and are subject to abatement as provided by law.
§ 127-16. Connections to available sewers required.
The owner of any property in the Township which abuts or adjoins any
easement, alley, street or highway in which a sanitary sewer of the sewer
system owned or leased by the Township is located or through which a
sewer of such sewer system is constructed and upon which property there is
generated sanitary sewage or industrial waste shall, upon receipt of written
notice from the Township, connect such improved property to the sewer
system without delay in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Township.
§ 127-17. Connections by Township; costs.
If any owner of such property required to be connected to said sewer
system shall neglect or refuse to connect thereto after written notice so
to do, the Township may give such owner written notice making reference
to this section and ordering such owner to make the required connection
within 60 days of the date of said notice, and upon failure of such owner
to make the required connection within said sixty-day period, the Township
or its agents may enter upon such property and construct such connection
and, upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill of the cost of
the construction of such connection to the property owner, which bill shall
be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal by the owner of such
property to pay said bill, it shall be the duty of the proper Township officials
and Township Solicitor to file municipal liens for said construction within six
months of the date of the completion of the construction of said connection.
§ 127-18. Failure to make sewer connection a violation.
If any owner of improved property within the Township shall have failed
to connect such property with the sewer system as required by § 127-16
and the Township shall have given such owner written notice pursuant to
§ 127-17, and if such owner shall have failed within said sixty-day period to
make the required connection, such failure shall be and hereby is declared
a violation of this Part 1, and such owner shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit and pay to the use of the Township the sum $300 for each day such
violation shall persist, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 127-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-19
1:275
§ 127-19. Use of septic tank or similar receptacle prohibited.
It shall be unlawful, 60 days from receipt of written notice pursuant to
§ 127-16 or 127-17, for any person, firm or corporation to own, maintain,
operate or use within the Township a privy, cesspool, vault, septic tank or
similar receptacle for sanitary sewage upon any property now or hereafter
improved which is accessible to a collection sewer line of said sewer system,
or to connect any such privy, cesspool, vault, septic tank or similar
receptacle with any such collection sewer line.
§ 127-20. Wastes other than sanitary sewage excluded; exception.
No owner of property shall be permitted to discharge into the sewer system
any waste or drainage other than sanitary sewage except as may be
expressly permitted by the rules and regulations of the Township currently
in effect.
§ 127-21. Service of notice to property owners.
Notices to property owners under §§ 127-16 and 127-17 may be given either
by personal service or by certified mail sent to the last known address of
such owner. In the event that such notice is returned as unclaimed, the
Township may enter into the property as provided in § 127-17 hereof.
§ 127-22. Denial of use of sewer system.
If any person shall fail for 60 days after written notice from the Township to
remedy any unsatisfactory conditions with respect to a building sewer, the
Township may refuse to permit such person to use the sewer system until
such unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction
of the Township Engineer.
§ 127-23. Prevention of discharge of harmful wastes.
The Township reserves the right to refuse to any person the use of the sewer
system or to compel the pretreatment of industrial waste in order to prevent
discharge into the sewer system of harmful wastes.
§ 127-24. Metering facilities.
All private sewer systems, industrial establishments and nonresidential
users, except as specifically exempted by the Township, shall have metering
facilities. The type and location of the metering facilities shall be approved
by the Township. Operation and maintenance of the metering facilities shall
be the responsibility of the private sewer system, industrial establishment
or nonresidential user. For existing private sewer systems, industrial
establishments or nonresidential users not already equipped with metering
facilities, the private sewer system will have six months from the effective
date of this Part 1 to receive approval for the design and installation
procedures associated with metering facilities and must complete
construction and begin operation of such facilities within 12 months from
§ 127-19 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-24
1:276
the effective date of this Part 1. The private sewer system, industrial
establishment or nonresidential user shall submit to the Township on a
monthly basis a copy of the actual flow charts and a summary tabulation of
the daily flow volume and seven-day moving average flow volume. Failure
to comply with these requirements will require such owner to pay the
Township the sum of $300 for each day past the stated dates the
requirements are not met. Failure to properly maintain and operate the
metering facility will require the owner to pay the Township the sum of
$100 for each day the metering facility does not operate properly. The
owner will be given 30 days' notice to repair the metering facilities to an
operational condition prior to the penalty fee's being imposed. Should the
meter continuously malfunction, the owner shall remove the equipment and
install a new metering facility as approved by the Township. New private
sewer systems, industrial establishments and nonresidential users shall be
required to comply with this requirement upon the effective date of this Part
1.
§ 127-25. Approval required for increase in wastewater flow.
No private sewer system, industrial establishment or nonresidential user
shall increase the quantity of wastewater discharge through an existing
connection or construct a new connection to the sewer system without first
obtaining approval from the Township. Any such increase in wastewater
flow may require additional connection and/or usage charges in accordance
with this Part 1.
§ 127-26. Metering of outside sewer facilities.
All outside sewer facilities shall be equipped with metering facilities at the
connection point to the Township sewer system, and the Township may
require such outside sewer facilities to be organized into a separate sewer
district for the purpose of collecting sewer rentals and charges.
§ 127-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-26
1:277

ARTICLE IV
Connection Charges
[Amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-02]
§ 127-27. Imposition of charge; when due and payable.
There is hereby charged and imposed upon the owner of each EDU to
be connected a connection charge, which shall be due and payable to the
Township, with respect to those owners who are required to connect to the
sewer by this Part 1, at the time the connection permit is issued or 60 days
after written notice to such owner to connect, whichever date is earlier, and
with respect to owners not so required to connect but who desire to do so,
prior to the issuance of the connection permit referred to in Article II.
§ 127-28. Notice of completion of sewer section.
Upon the completion of each section of the sewer system constructed by the
Authority, by the Township or by others, the Township shall give notice to all
owners of properties required to be connected to such section and for which
a lateral has been constructed to connect to such property and shall advise
the owners of all properties not required to connect of their opportunity to
do so.
§ 127-29. Connection charge. [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No.
14-13]
The owner of each residential unit required to be connected to the sewer
system and the owner of each residential unit who shall voluntarily connect
such property with the sewer system, although not required to do so,
shall pay to the Township the applicable fees as adopted yearly by the
Township, which shall be due and payable in accordance with § 127-27.
Each nonresidential user required to connect its property to the sewer
system and each nonresidential user who shall voluntarily connect its
property with the sewer system, although not required to do so, shall pay
to the Township the applicable fees as adopted yearly by the Township
per 200 gallons per day of water consumption per EDU connection, which
shall be due and payable in accordance with § 127-27. The owner of each
respective property shall also be required to pay the Authority its tapping
fee that is in effect at the time the request for each EDU connection is
made. The Authority’s tapping fee shall be due and payable at the same
time as the Township’s conveyance component of the tapping fee charge.
(NOTE: Detailed calculations for the respective tapping fees are attached as
Appendix A86 at the end of this chapter.)
86.Editor’s Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 127-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-30
1:279
§ 127-30. Payment of connection charges by developer. [Amended
11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
A developer or other person who shall construct a collection system for
two or more residential units in a new development or housing cluster
which is then connected to the sewer system in accordance with the plans
approved pursuant to Article VI hereof shall pay the applicable connection
charge to the sewer system. The Authority’s capital contribution fee in
effect at the time the request for the EDU connections is made shall be
due and payable at the same time as the Township’s EDU connection
charge. All such charges and fees shall be paid prior to the signing of the
developer agreement for the total number of EDU connections approved for
construction as per the plans approved by the developer agreement.
§ 127-31. Basis for connection charges. [Amended 11-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-13]
The number of EDU connections and corresponding connection charge for
private sewer systems, nonresidential users and outside sewer facilities
shall be based on: the actual number of equivalent dwelling units connected
to the system as determined by the Township; or the total flow for any
ninety-day period, as selected by the Township from metering facilities data,
divided by the 90 days and 200 gallons per day per EDU and rounded to the
nearest whole number, whichever is greater. All such charges and fees shall
be payable prior to the time final approval is given for the connection to the
sewer system for the total number of EDU connections.
A. For private sewer systems, industrial establishments and nonresidential
users, the currently utilized sewer capacity will be compared to
available records indicating the sewer capacity previously reserved and
paid for. If the current utilized sewer capacity over a calendar year
exceeds the capacity previously reserved, the private sewer system,
industrial establishment and nonresidential user will be required to
either pay the Township the appropriate connection charge and the
Authority’s current capital contribution fee for usage above the
previously reserved quantity within 60 days after being so notified by
the Township of this condition or submit a report prepared by a
professional engineer outlining a plan to reduce flows to previously
reserved levels within the same sixty-day period. Upon review and
approval of the report by the Township, the private sewer system,
industrial establishment and nonresidential user shall have six months
in which to complete the work outlined in the report. If, upon
completion of said work and the recalculation of utilized sewer capacity,
the usage still exceeds the capacity previously reserved, the user will be
required to pay the charges and fee stated above.
B. For the sewer facilities not within the Towamencin Township boundary,
the calculated sewage usage shall not exceed the actual reserved
sewage capacity. If this condition exists, the Township shall have the
right to inspect, repair and rehabilitate the system to reduce flow
quantities to acceptable levels. All costs associated with such activities
§ 127-30 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-31
1:280
shall be borne by the separate sanitary sewer district for the particular
sewer facilities, and the Township shall have the right to make special
assessments accordingly.
§ 127-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-31
1:281

ARTICLE V
Sewer Rentals and Charges
§ 127-32. Rentals established. [Amended 4-23-2014 by Ord. No.
14-06]
Sewer rentals are hereby established and imposed, which shall be payable
by and collected from the owner of each property, based upon the number
of EDUs applicable to such property, from and after the date the Township
certifies the connection of such property to the sewer system as complete.
§ 127-33. Basic rental. [Amended 8-28-1991 by Ord. No. 87-12;
12-16-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6; 2-23-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2; 2-25-1998
by Ord. No. 98-2]
The annual sewer rental for each EDU shall be established by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors. Said sewer rental as established shall be payable
in one annual payment for residential units. The rental as established shall
be the basic rental for each residential unit, and the nonresidential users
shall be charged semiannually in accordance with § 127-35 as set forth
below. For all residential users, whether their system is a private system or
public, the rate shall be as set forth in said resolution.
§ 127-34. (Reserved)87
§ 127-35. Nonresidential users; private systems; industrial
establishments. [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
The sewer rental for nonresidential uses shall be calculated as the greater
of the basic sewer rental for one EDU or the product of multiplying the
number of EDUs applicable to such use, calculated based upon the sixmonth
volume of actual water consumption or measured volume of
wastewater, by the basic sewer rental.
A. Metering facilities: water usage. The volume of water to be used for
billing sewer rentals to industrial establishments and nonresidential
users shall include any and all water purchased from the North Penn
Water Authority or North Wales Water Authority or any other private or
public water company and, in addition, all water obtained from any
other source or sources (wells, springs, streams, etc.) as determined by
meters installed and maintained by either of said Water Authorities or
any other private or public water company, by meters maintained and
installed by the property owner as may be required, approved and
inspected by the Township, or from estimates or measurements made
by the Township where metering is considered impractical by the
Township or when meters have not been installed.
B. Excluded water.
87.Editor’s Note: Former § 127-34, Special rental, as amended, was repealed 12-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-09.
§ 127-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-35
1:283
(1) Exclusion from the sewer system and treatment plant of
nonprocess, nonsanitary waters not requiring treatment may be
required by the Township or such exclusion may be optional with
the property owner if not required by the Township. When such
waters are not discharged to the sewer system, sewer rentals shall
be based upon total water consumption less waters not discharged
to the sewer system.
(2) Waters not discharged to the sewer system may be determined
from meters installed and maintained by the owner or from
estimates or measurements made by the Township, or the owner
may elect to measure the volume of wastewater actually
discharged to the sewer system as provided for below.
C. Metering facilities: sewer meters. The Township shall require all
private sewer systems and outside sewer facilities, and may require any
industrial establishment and nonresidential user, to install, at their own
expense, and maintain a meter of a type approved by the Township to
measure the volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer system by
such user. Such a meter shall be installed for any nonresidential user
obtaining, in whole or in part, a supply of water from other than a public
water company.
D. Surcharge. In addition to the sewer rental established hereby, a
nonresidential user may be subject to surcharges based upon the
strength of the wastewater discharged, as established under the
provisions of Ordinance 84-6 of the Township, known as the
“Pretreatment Ordinance.”88 Any nonresidential user subject to a
strength surcharge under the pretreatment ordinance shall pay, in
addition to such surcharge, an additional amount to be added to each
billing to cover all costs associated with the monitoring, sampling,
testing or analysis of wastewater discharged by such nonresidential
user.
E. Sampling facilities. When directed by the Township, industrial
establishments shall install, pay for and maintain a manhole or other
device as may be approved by the Township to facilitate observation,
measurement and sampling of wastes discharged to the sewer system
and treatment plant. The Township or its duly authorized
representatives shall at all reasonable times be permitted to enter upon
any and all properties for the purpose of inspecting all metering devices
and of observing, measuring and sampling wastes discharged to the
sewer system and treatment plant. Any industrial establishment that
desires to connect with the sewer system or which is connected to the
sewer system and plans to change its operations so as to materially
alter the characteristics and volumes of wastes discharged therefrom
shall notify the Township in writing at least 10 days before making such
connection or changing its operations.
88.Editor's Note: See Part 2 of this chapter.
§ 127-35 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-35
1:284
§ 127-36. Time and method of payment; penalties and interest.
[Amended 12-28-1988 by Ord. No. 88-15; 2-23-1994 by Ord. No.
94-2; 2-25-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2]
F. Installation and maintenance of meters. If the owner of any industrial
establishment shall be required pursuant to the foregoing provisions to
install a water meter or meters or a meter or meters for measuring
wastewaters, it shall be the duty of such owner to furnish and install
such meter at his own expense, and in such case and also if such owner
shall have voluntarily installed such meter or meters, such owner shall
be required to maintain the same in good operating condition and make
all necessary repairs and replacements. If the owner, being obligated so
to do, shall fail to furnish or install such meter or meters or shall fail to
maintain the same as above provided, then in any such case after 10
days’ written notice by the Township to perform such obligation, the
Township may enter onto such property at all reasonable times and
install such meter or meters or repair and maintain the same, as the
case may be, and charge the cost of such installation or repair to such
owner. Bills for such installation or repairs if made by the Township
shall be due and payable immediately upon completion of the work and
then shall be collected in the same manner as semiannual bills for
sewer rentals and charges.
G. Amendments and modifications. Additional classifications of sewer
rentals or modifications of the above schedule of rentals may be
established or made by the Township from time to time as deemed
necessary.
A. Sewer rentals for residential units shall be billed annually on the first
day of March, commencing on the first day of the annual billing period
next succeeding the date upon which the Township certifies the
connection of the property to the sewer system as complete, and shall
be due and payable immediately. Apportionment of sewer rentals for
properties connected for less than the annual billing period shall be in
accordance with § 127-37 of the Towamencin Township Code. Sewer
rentals for industrial establishments and nonresidential users shall be
billed semiannually on such dates or as soon thereafter as necessary
data to prepare such bills for the semiannual period next preceding
such dates shall become available and shall be due and payable
immediately. [Amended 4-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
B. Bills for residential units shall provide that a two-percent discount from
the face amount may be taken for owners paying within 60 days of the
first day of March. If the full amount of such bills shall not be paid
within 120 days from the date of billing, 10% of the face amount of the
bill shall be added thereto, which together with the face amount of the
bill shall become the gross amount thereof. In the event any bill shall
remain unpaid as of December 31 of any year, the Township shall
proceed to collect all sums due in accordance with law.
§ 127-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-36
1:285
§ 127-37. Apportionment of rents. [Amended 2-25-1998 by Ord. No.
98-2; 4-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
Whenever sewer service to any property begins after March 1, the sewer
rentals for such property shall be for that portion of the annual billing
period during which the property is served. However, in making such
apportionment, a fraction of a month amounting to 1/2 or more of a month
shall be counted as a full month, and a fraction of a month amounting to less
than 1/2 of the month shall be disregarded.
§ 127-38. Collection of delinquent rents; lien.
Delinquent bills for sewer rentals, together with all charges, expenses and
fees added thereto, shall, in the manner provided by law, become a lien upon
the property served and shall be collectible by the Township by an action in
assumpsit against the owner of such property or be enforced against such
property by the filing of a municipal lien.
§ 127-39. Pump station operation and maintenance cost
assessments. [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-13]
The Township shall have the right to allocate the operation and
maintenance costs associated with a Township- and/or Authority-owned and
-operated pump station to the improved properties’ tributary to said pump
station. These costs shall include but not be limited to electricity, parts
and equipment replacement and associated labor costs, servicing, cleaning,
routine inspection and mileage costs. Such allocation of costs shall be in
addition to the other applicable sewer rentals and charges and shall be
assessed to each tributary improved property on the basis of volume of flow
contributed during each billing period.
C. Failure of any owner to receive a bill for sewer rentals and charges due
to the failure of such owner to notify the Township of his correct
address or failure of any owner to receive a correct bill for sewer
rentals and charges by reason of the failure of such owner to notify the
Township of the use or uses of which an improved property or any
portion thereof is made, pursuant to the notice requirements of
§ 127-44, shall not excuse nonpayment or failure to pay the amount
which would be properly applicable to the use or uses of which said
improved property is made, and shall not result in an extension of the
period of time during which the bill shall be payable.
§ 127-36 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-39
1:286
ARTICLE VI
Housing Developments
§ 127-40. Construction of extensions.
In cases where a builder or developer desires to install sewers, laterals and
building sewers to every housing unit within a housing development prior to
their individual sale, he shall meet all conditions as set forth in this section
and in other sections of this Part 1. Plot plans for such a development
must be submitted to the Township, which must include a provision for a
maintenance bond protecting the Township and the Authority against defect
for two years subsequent to completion, in an amount not less than 20%
of the cost of installation, and must also include a covenant to convey to
the Authority the sewers so constructed, other than building sewers, when
the said sewers are connected to the sewer system. Said plans must be
approved by the Township and the Authority prior to any construction.
Sewer plans conforming to all original specifications established by the
Township as to type of pipe, location of mains, size of pipe, grades, methods
of laying pipe and the type of construction of all necessary appurtenances
must be prepared, approved by the Township and the Authority, and
approval obtained from the necessary state agencies. The engineering fees
and charges for permits will be paid by the builder or developer. In no
case will lesser standards than exist in the sewer system presently to be
constructed and as outlined in this Part 1 be permitted for any future
extensions. Upon approval of such plans by the Township, the Authority and
the necessary state agencies, the extensions may be constructed by and
at the expense of the builder or developer, but only under the inspection
of an inspector designated by the Township. The cost of such inspection,
including salaries and expenses, shall be borne by the builder or developer
making the extensions.
§ 127-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-40
1:287

ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 127-41. Access to property.
The Township shall have the right of access at reasonable times to any
part of any improved property served by the sewer system as shall be
required for purposes of inspection, measurement, sampling and testing
and for performance of other functions relating to service rendered by the
Township through the sewer system.
§ 127-42. Variance of provisions.
No officer or employee of the Township is authorized to vary this Part 1
without action by the Board of Township Supervisors.
§ 127-43. Nonliability of Township.
The Township shall not be liable for a deficiency or failure of service when
occasioned by an emergency, required repairs or failure from any cause
beyond control. The Township reserves the right to restrict the use of sewer
service whenever the public welfare may require it.
§ 127-44. Notices to Township.
Each owner must give the Township written notice of his address, any
change of address, any change of ownership and of the use or uses of any
improved property or any part thereof or any change in such use or uses.
§ 127-45. Compliance.
Except as expressly provided herein, compliance with this Part 1 shall
not relieve any person from the requirement of complying with other
ordinances, resolutions or specifications of the Township or rules,
resolutions or specification regulations of the Authority, including but not
limited to Ordinance No. 84-6, the Pretreatment Ordinance; Ordinance No.
81-6, the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance; and the Plumbing
Code.89
89.Editor's Note: See Part 2 of this chapter; Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development; and
Ch. 62, Construction Codes, Art. VII, Plumbing.
§ 127-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-45
1:289

ARTICLE VIII
Violations
§ 127-46. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-15]
Violation of any of the terms of this Part 1 shall constitute a summary
offense and any person violating the terms of this Part 1 shall be liable,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding, to a fine of not more than $300,
together with the costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the
fine and costs, by imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for no
more than 30 days. Where more than one provision of this Part 1 has been
violated, each such violation shall constitute a separate offense, and where
any violation shall continue from day to day, each day that such violation
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 127-47. Additional violations.
In addition to the penalties provided by law for criminal mischief under
Section 3304 of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, as amended,Editor's Note:
See 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 3304. any person who intentionally, recklessly or by
criminal negligence damages, destroys or tampers with any equipment,
structure or other property of the sewer system or treatment plant or who
opens or tampers with any manhole or metering facilities shall be guilty
of a violation of this Part 1 and shall be subject to the penalty provided in
§ 127-46 hereof.
§ 127-48. Disposition of fines and penalties.
Except as may be provided by other law, all fines and penalties collected for
violation of this Part 1 shall be paid into the Township and used, together
with other funds, for the purpose of operating, maintaining and replacing
the sewer system.
§ 127-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-48
1:291

Part 2
[AdoptedP4r-e2t5r-e2a0t0m7eBnty POrrodg. rNamo. 07-0390 ]
ARTICLE IX
General Provisions
§ 127-49. Purpose and policy.
A. This Part 2 sets forth uniform requirements for Township contributors,
directly and indirectly into the wastewater collection and treatment
system of the Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Authority to
enable the Authority and Township to comply with all applicable state
and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403).
B. The objectives of this Part 2 are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Authority
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Authority
wastewater system which will pass-through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system;
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance, and improvement of the Authority's wastewater
system.
(5) To protect both the Authority's personnel who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public; and
(6) To enable the Authority to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which
the Authority is subject.
C. This Part 2 provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the wastewater system through the issuance of permits
to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring, compliance,
and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that
existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the
90.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Superseded Former Part 2, Pretreatment Program,
Adopted 8-6-1984 By Ord. No. 84-6, As Amended.
§ 127-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-49
1:293
§ 127-50. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this Part 2, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director in an NPDES state with an
approved state pretreatment program and the Administrator of the EPA in a
non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment
program.
AUTHORITY — Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Authority.
AUTHORITY MANAGER — The person designated to enforce this Part 2
along with the Township Manager.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An authorized
representative of an industrial user may be:
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
D. This Part 2 shall apply to Towamencin Township and to persons outside
the Township who are, by contract or agreement with the Township,
users of the Authority POTW. This Part 2 is a supplement to Ordinance
No. 87-12,91 as amended. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
Township Manager and/or Authority Manager shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this Part 2.
Corporate officer or manager.
A responsible corporate officer of the level of President, Vice
President, Secretary or Treasurer of the corporation in charge of
a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make
management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated
facility, including having explicit or implicit duty of making major
capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other
comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to
gather complete and accurate information for individual
wastewater discharge permit requirements, if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures;
(2)
A.
91.Editor's Note: See Part 1, Regulations and Rates, of this chapter.
§ 127-49 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-50
1:294
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 127-52A(1) and (2) [40
CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure, five days at 20° C. expressed in terms of weight and
concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BUILDING SEWER — An extension from the sewage drainage system of any
structure to the lateral of a sewer.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear
in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — A measure of the oxygen required
to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — Refers to the Authority.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetical average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed
in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively;
B.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if:
The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in
Subsection A(1); or
(1)
The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facilities from which
the indirect discharge originates, such as the position of plant
manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a
position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility
for environmental matters for the company; and
(2)
(3) The written authorization is submitted to the Control Authority.
C.
§ 127-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-50
1:295
course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetical average measurement
of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that
day.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also
be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a new source.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period
of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of pollutants
from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of
the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste
discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to
Section 402 of the Act. (33 U.S.C § 1342).
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from analysis of any
discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, along or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both causes the inhibition or
disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations, or its sludge
processes, use or disposal, and contributes to a violation of any
requirements of the Authority's NPDES permit (including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation). The term includes prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the
Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA)," the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, or more stringent state criteria,
including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Title IV (Subtitle D) of the SWDA applicable to the method of
disposal or use employed by the POTW.
§ 127-50 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-50
1:296
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
Authority upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general
and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during
that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of
daily discharges measured during that month.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the authority
of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which is
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source
if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater-generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site.
(3)
A.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in
a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation.
B.
Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
(1)
C.
§ 127-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-50
1:297
NONDOMESTIC WASTEWATER — A wastewater that is not discharged in
the normal day-to-day operation of a household.
NON-RESIDENTIAL USER —
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirements of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERMIT — Written permission by the Authority for the discharge of
nonresidential wastewater to the POTW.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, medical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature,
TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment; or
(2)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.
(3)
Any person who discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of
wastewater from any facility other than a residential unit.
A.
Any person who discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of
nondomestic wastewater from a residential unit.
B.
§ 127-50 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-50
1:298
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, or process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the
concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by applicable pretreatment
standards.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD or STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and the most recent EPAapproved
local limits.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works, as
defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by
the Authority. This definition includes any devices or sewers that convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes,
sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing
treatment. For the purposes of this Part 2, "POTW" shall also include any
sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the
Township who are, by contract or agreement with the Township, users of
the POTW.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
A. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
A user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling,
and boiler blow down wastewater);
(1)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
(2)
Is designated as such by the Authority on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(3)
B.
The Authority may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical
industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that
C.
§ 127-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-50
1:299
SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 127-52 of this Part 2. A slug discharge is any discharge of a
nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill
or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violate the POTW's
regulations, local limits, or permit conditions.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
STATE — State of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOWNSHIP — Towamencin Township or the Board of Supervisors of
Towamencin Township.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The person designated by the Township who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this Part 2, or his duly
authorized representative.
the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day
(gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blow down wastewater, unless specifically included
in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met:
The industrial user, prior to the Authority's finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards
and requirements;
(1)
The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in § 127-67E [See 40 CFR 403.12(q).], together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification
statement; and
(2)
The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
(3)
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection B has no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Authority
may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR,
Section 403.8(f)(6), determine that such use should not be considered a
significant industrial user.
D.
§ 127-50 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-50
1:300
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other Acts.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person who contributes, causes or
permits the contribution of wastewater into the Authority's POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any other waters which may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the
POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
wastewater and industrial waste.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
§ 127-51. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
BMP — Best management practice.
BMR — Baseline monitoring report.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
CIU — Categorical industrial user.
COD — Chemical oxygen demand.
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
GPD — Gallons per day.
IU — Industrial user.
l — Liter.
mg — Milligrams.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NSCIU — Nonsignificant categorical industrial user.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works.
RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
SIC — Standard industrial classification.
§ 127-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-51
1:301
SIU — Significant industrial user.
SNC — Significant noncompliance.
SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
U.S.C. — United States Code.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
§ 127-51 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-51
1:302
ARTICLE X
Regulations
§ 127-52. General discharge prohibitions.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater into the POTW which causes
pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all
such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or
local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not
contribute the following substances to any POTW: [Amended
8-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-04]
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction
with other substances, to cause fire or explosion, including but not
limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flash point of less than
140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR, 261.21,
or which are, or may be, injurious in any other way to the POTW or
to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive
readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge
into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than 5% nor
any single reading be over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of
the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides, and any other
substances which the Township, the Authority, the state or EPA has
notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to: grease,
garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or
polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0, or greater than 9.0 or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
POTW.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
§ 127-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-52
1:303
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a
categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include,
but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section
307(a) of the Act.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either
single or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewer for maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to
the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use
or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control
Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
(7) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality
standards.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into
the POTW which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.) or exceeds 65° C. (150°
F.) at the point of discharge to the sewer system.
(10) Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. In no case shall a
slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of
pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes
more than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration,
quantities, or flow during normal operation.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such halflife or concentration in accordance with applicable state
or federal regulations.
(12) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
§ 127-52 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-52
1:304
§ 127-53. Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
§ 127-54. Specific pollutant limitations.
The Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Authority, in accordance with
the United States EPA regulations, shall develop and maintain technically
based local limits. Local limits shall be developed through the evaluation of
the following criteria:
§ 127-55. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this Part 2.
(13) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(14) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(15) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Authority.
B. When the Authority determines that a user is contributing to the POTW
any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, the Authority shall:
(1) Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and
(2) Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the
interference with the POTW.
A. Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard,
if more stringent than limitations imposed under this Part 2 for sources
in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations
imposed under this Part 2. The Authority shall notify all affected users
of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
B. Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found
at 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
A. Sludge use;
B. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) limitations;
C. Interference and inhibition; and
D. Worker safety.
§ 127-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-56
1:305
§ 127-56. Right of revision.
The Township or Authority reserves the right to establish more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal
system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in
§ 127-49 of this Part 2, or as required by the United States EPA.
§ 127-57. Excessive discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the Township, Authority, or state.
§ 127-58. Accidental discharges.
A. Accidental and/or problem discharges. Each user shall provide
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this Part 2 and from discharges that could
cause problems to the operations of the POTW, including any slug
loadings. Facilities to prevent accidental or problem discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or
user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to
the Authority for review by the Authority before construction of the
facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan when designated
by the Authority. No user who commences contribution to the POTW
after the effective date of this Part 2 shall be permitted to introduce
pollutants into the system until accidental and/or problem discharge
procedures have been provided to the Authority. Review of such plans
and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this Part 2. In the case of an accidental or problem
discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone
and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective actions.
B. Written notice. Within five days following an accidental or problem
discharge, the user shall submit to the Authority a detailed written
report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this Part 2 or other applicable law.
C. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
§ 127-56 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-58
1:306
§ 127-59. Local limits. [Amended 7-14-2010 by Ord. No. 10-02;
11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
The following pollutant limits are established to protect pass-through and
interference. No person shall discharge wastewater at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the POTW containing parameters in excess of
the these limits:
Parameter
Daily Maximum
(mg/l)
Average Monthly
(mg/l)
Arsenic, total 0.05
BOD-5 540.0 450.0
COD 1,110.0 922.0
Cadmium, total 0.0032
Chromium, total 1.3
Cyanide, free 0.1
Lead, total 0.03
Mercury, total 0.004
Nickel, total 0.3
call in the event of an accidental or problem discharge. Employers shall
ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental
or problem discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
D. The Authority shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental
discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug
discharges. The Authority may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may
be necessary to control slug discharges. An accidental/slug discharge
control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the Authority of any
accidental or slug discharge; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of stored areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants,
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
§ 127-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-59
1:307
Parameter
Daily Maximum
(mg/l)
Average Monthly
(mg/l)
Nitrogen-ammonia 65 54
Oil & grease 100 75.0
pH 6 to 10 6 to 9
Phosphorus, total 14 13
Selenium, total 0.05
Silver, total 0.05
Total dissolved solids (TDS) 3,950
Total suspended solids (TSS) 360.0 300.0
Zinc, total 0.45
Merck 1.1
Clemens Food Group 0.23
Lehigh Valley Dairies 0.23
Accupac 2.8
Iron, total 22
Phenol 4.7
Total copper*
Merck 0.95
Hatfield 0.20
Lehigh Valley 0.19
Clemens Food Group 0.19
Accupac 0.24
Ammonia 65 54
* Loadings associated with the overall limits for copper and zinc are mass
allocated as interim limits for individual significant industrial users.
§ 127-60. Additional pretreatment measures.
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the Authority may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be
necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance
with the requirements of this Part 2.
B. The Authority may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or her expense, a
suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow.
§ 127-59 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-60
1:308
An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users.
All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Authority and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and
repaired by the user at its expense.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter at the user's expense.
§ 127-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-60
1:309

ARTICLE XI
Fees
§ 127-61. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the POTW for the implementation of the program established
herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be established by resolution and
set forth in the Township's or Authority's Schedule of Charges and Fees.92
§ 127-62. Charges and fees.
§ 127-63. Strength surcharge.
A. The charges and fees established by the Township or Authority may
include the following:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
required pretreatment program, including, but not limited to, legal,
engineering, and administrative costs.
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(4) Fees for permit applications;
(5) Fees for filing appeals;
(6) Fees for consistent removal by the POTW of pollutants otherwise
subject to federal pretreatment standards;
(7) Other fees as the Township or Authority may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein.
B. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part 2 and are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the Township and/or the
Authority.
A. The strength of the total wastes used for establishing surcharges shall
be determined on at least one monthly twenty-four-hour composite
sample collected by the Authority or its designated representative.
Additional samples may be required if repeated violations of the local
limits occur.
B. Any nonresidential user discharging waste to the Authority's POTW
with a monthly average BOD concentration greater than 200 milligrams
per liter (mg/l) or COD concentration greater than 400 mg/l and/or
ammonia nitrogen concentration greater than 18.0 mg/l and/or total
phosphorus concentration greater than 5.0 mg/l and/or total suspended
92.Editor's Note: Fees are on file in the Township offices. See also Ch. 76, Fees.
§ 127-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-63
1:311
§ 127-64. Flow surcharge.
solids concentration greater than 150 mg/l, in each case measured at
the source, will pay a strength surcharge in addition to the applicable
volume charge. Such strength surcharge shall be in addition to and
not in substitution for any actions, remedies, or penalties described in
Articles XIII and XIV hereof.
C. The strength surcharge shall be based on the operating costs for the
Authority's POTW during the previous calendar year. A cost per pound
of pollutant shall be determined by dividing the total annual operating
costs, (including general and office, treatment plant and operating
reserve costs) by the total pounds of pollutants (BOD or COD, ammonia
nitrogen, phosphorus and total suspended solids) treated during the
same period. The resultant cost per pound of pollutant is then utilized
to determine the surcharge amount. Strength surcharges are
calculated according to the following general equation:
Surcharge = [(Pollutant concentration - Surcharge limit)
x (Total Billing Period Flow, mg) x 8.34 x (Cost per lb.)]
D. In accordance with § 127-54, unless approved by the Authority in a
compliance schedule contained in the permit conditions as described
under § 127-66D, no industrial user shall, at any time, discharge a
wastewater containing pollutants in excess of the daily maximum limits
established in § 127-54. If a compliance schedule is required, the
industrial user shall develop a schedule and submit this schedule to the
Authority for approval within 30 days of notification by the Authority. If
the industrial user fails to submit a compliance schedule within this
thirty-day period, the Authority shall develop a schedule at the user's
expense. If the user is in violation of or is not making satisfactory
progress in completing the requirements of the compliance schedule
contained in the permit, the Authority shall impose civil penalties as
directed in § 127-76.7.
E. The strength of the total wastes used for establishing surcharges shall
be determined by qualified industrial user discharge monitoring data
and/or on at least one monthly twenty-four-hour composite sample
collected by the Authority or its designated representative. Additional
samples may be required if repeated violations of the local limits occur.
A. The permitted flow is the purchased capacity of the collection system
and the wastewater treatment facility operated by the Authority.
Wastewater discharged in excess of this permitted flow by the
permittee will be cause for a flow surcharge. The basis for this
surcharge is the following:
(1) When the recorded volume or flow of the wastewater exceeds any
of the following stated permit limitations:
(a) Daily maximum flow.
§ 127-63 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-64
1:312
(b) Five-day average flow.
(c) Daily average flow per month.
(d) Six-month total flow.
(2) Each permittee has at least two of the above limitations.
(3) The calculation used for flow surcharges is:
Flow Surcharge = (Recorded/reported flow in gallons - permitted
flow in gallons)
x cost per gallon as reflected in the Discharge Permit
B. Repeated flow surcharge conditions will require the permittee to
purchase additional capacity for the collection system and wastewater
treatment facility at the then-current prescribed rate. Failure to do so in
a timely manner is cause for the permittee to be subject to all of the
enforcement actions available to the Authority.
§ 127-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-64
1:313

ARTICLE XII
Administration
§ 127-65. Nonresidential wastewater dischargers.
It shall be unlawful to discharge without a permit to any natural outlet
within Towamencin Township, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
Authority, and/or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the
Authority in accordance with the provisions of this Part 2.
§ 127-66. Nonresidential wastewater discharge permits.
A. General. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to
contribute to the POTW shall obtain a permit from the Authority before
connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant
industrial users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall apply
for a permit within 30 days after the effective date of this Part 2.
B. Permit application.
(1) Users required to obtain a permit shall complete and file with the
Authority an application in the form prescribed by the Authority
and accompanied by a fee set by resolution. Existing users shall
apply for a permit within 30 days after the effective date of this Part
2, and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to
connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the
application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate
for evaluation, information, including, but not limited to the
following:
(a) Name, address, and location;
(b) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not
limited to those mentioned in Article X of this Part 2 as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act
and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended;
(d) Time and duration of contribution;
(e) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;
(f) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;
§ 127-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-66
1:315
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which are or could be
discharged;
(h) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by any Township, Authority,
state or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement
regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are
being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards;
(i) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
[2] No increment referred to in Subsection on B(1)(i)[2] shall
exceed nine months.
[3] Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the Authority including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress
to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the
reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to
return the construction to the schedule established. In no
event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Authority.
(j) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production;
(k) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
(l) Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system;
§ 127-66 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-66
1:316
(m) Any other information as may be deemed by the Authority to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application;
(n) The permit application shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user;
(o) A list of any environmental control permits held by the
applicant for its facility. [Added 8-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-04]
(2) The Authority will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial
user and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the Authority may issue a permit
subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
C. Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater
contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised
to require compliance with such standard within the time frame
prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an
application for a permit as required by Subsection B, the user shall
apply for a permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. In addition,
the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit
to the Authority Manager or his designee within 180 days after the
promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment
standard, the information required by Subsection B(1)(h) and (i).
D. Permit conditions. Permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of
this Part 2 and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees
established by the Township or the Authority. Permits must contain the
following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
(2) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule. These requirements
shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management
practice) to be monitored based on federal, state and local laws;
§ 127-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-66
1:317
(6) Compliance schedules for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate
containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW;
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports (See § 127-67.);
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge for five years or longer as specified by the
Authority, and affording Authority access thereto;
(9) Requirements for notification of the Township and/or the Authority
of any new introduction wastewater constituents or any substantial
change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents
being introduced into the wastewater treatment system;
(10) Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the
Authority to be necessary, in accordance with § 127-58;
(11) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date, and effective date;
(12) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the Authority in
accordance with § 127-76.1 of this Part 2 and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit;
(13) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
(14) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of the pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such compliance schedule may
not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable federal, state, or local law;
(15) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township and/or
the Authority to ensure compliance with this Part 2.
E. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a
year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply
for permit reissuance not less than 180 days prior to the expiration of
the user's existing permit or as specified on the permit. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the Authority
during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as
identified in Article X are modified or other just cause exists. The user
shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in
§ 127-66 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-66
1:318
the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance as
determined by the Authority.
F. Permit transfer. Permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a
new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation
without the approval of the Authority. Any succeeding owner or user
shall comply with the terms and conditions of this Part 2.
G. Permit modification. The Authority may modify an individual
wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited
to, the following reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the
time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the Authority's POTW, Authority personnel, or the receiving
waters;
(5) Violation of any terms and conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the individual
wastewater discharge permit; or
(9) To reflect transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator where requested.
H. Permit revocation.
(1) The Authority may revoke an individual wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
(a) Failure to notify the Authority of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(b) Failure to provide prior notification to the Authority of changed
conditions pursuant to § 127-67F of this Part 2;
§ 127-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-66
1:319
§ 127-67. Reporting requirements for permittee.
(c) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
(d) Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
(e) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(f) Refusing to allow the Authority timely access to the facility
premises and records;
(g) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(h) Failure to pay fines;
(i) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(j) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(k) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
(l) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility;
(m) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this Part 2.
(2) Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation or transfer of business ownership. All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the
issuance of a new individual wastewater discharge permit to the
user.
A. Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to
or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the
Authority a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection A(2), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical
industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the Authority a report which
contains the information listed in Subsection A(2), below. A new
source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to
meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be
discharged.
(2) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
§ 127-66 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-67
1:320
(a) All information required in § 127-66B of this Part 2. [See 40
CFR 403.12(b)(1) through (7).]
(b) Measurement of pollutants:
[1] The user shall provide the information in § 127-66B.
[2] The user shall take a minimum of one representative
sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this section.
[3] Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow
use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR
403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment
standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit
has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e),
this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be
submitted to the control authority.
[4] Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with Subsection A.
[5] The Authority may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the
data provides information sufficient to determine the need
for industrial pretreatment measures.
[6] The baseline report shall indicate time, date, and place of
sampling and method of analysis, and shall certify that
such sampling and analysis is representative of normal
work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW.
(c) Compliance certification shall include a statement, reviewed
by the user's authorized representative and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not,
whether additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(d) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/
or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
§ 127-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-67
1:321
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out in Subsection C of this section.
(e) All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance
with Subsection A(1) of this section and signed by an
authorized representative as defined in § 127-50.
B. Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by Subsection A(2)(d) of this
section:
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such
events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation);
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the Authority no later
than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final
compliance including, as a minimum, whether following each date
in the schedule and the final compliance including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the
reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by
the user to return to the established schedule; and
(4) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Authority.
C. Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a
new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards
and requirements shall submit to the Township and/or the Authority a
report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by
pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and
maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which
are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The
report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified
professional.
D. Periodic compliance reports.
§ 127-67 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-67
1:322
(1) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit
to the Authority during the months of June and December, unless
required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the
Authority, a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment
standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily
flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily
flow reported pursuant to Subsection C of this section. If sampling
by the user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the POTW
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall
also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the POTW within 30 days after becoming aware
of the violation, except if the POTW performs sampling at least
once per month at the user's facility or if the POTW performs
sampling at the user's facility between the time when the user
performs its initial sample and the time the user receives the
results of this sampling. At the discretion of the Authority and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates,
holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Authority may agree to alter the
months during which the above reports are to be submitted. This
report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user. All wastewater samples must be representative of
the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow
measurement facilities shall be property operated, kept clean, and
maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user
to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be
grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge. If a user subject to the reporting
requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently
than required by the Authority, the results of this monitoring shall
be included in the report. In cases where the pretreatment
standard requires compliance with a best management practice
(BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit
documentation required by the Authority or the pretreatment
standard necessary to determine compliance.
(2) The Authority may impose mass or production-based limitations. In
such cases, the report required by Subsection D(1) shall indicate
the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of
sampling and analysis of the discharge, the flow of the discharge,
the mass of the pollutants discharged which are subject to
applicable pretreatment standards, and, where required by the
Authority discharge permit, production data. The frequency of
monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment
standards. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the Administrator pursuant to Section
304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, and
§ 127-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-67
1:323
amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved
by the Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance
with the techniques approved by the Administrator. (Comment:
Where 40 CFR, Part 136, does not include a sampling or analytical
technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall
be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening
of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and
amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical
procedures approved by the Administrator.)
E. Certification statements. All user reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
F. Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the Authority of
any significant changes to the user's operations or system which might
alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days
before the change.
(1) The Authority may require the user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed conditions,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application as required in this Part 2.
(2) The Authority may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit
or modify an existing permit in response to the changed conditions
or anticipated changed conditions.
G. Reports of potential problems.
(1) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
a noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that
might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone the Authority of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions
taken by the user.
§ 127-67 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-67
1:324
(2) Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the Authority, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage,
or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to
the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines,
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
Part 2.
(3) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising the employees who to call in the
event of a discharge described above. Employers shall ensure that
all employees who could cause such a discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(4) Significant industrial users are required to notify the Authority
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for
a slug discharge.
H. Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain an
individual wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate
reports to the Authority as the Authority may require.
I. Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
Authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the Authority within 30 days after becoming aware of
the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the
Authority performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month,
or if the Authority performs sampling at the user between the time
when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or
the Authority receives the results of this sampling, or if the Authority
has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user.
J. Discharge of hazardous waste. The discharge of hazardous wastes, as
described in 40 CFR, Part 261, is prohibited from being discharged into
the POTW.
K. Recordkeeping. Users, subject to the reporting requirements of this
Part 2, shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this Part 2, any additional records of information obtained
pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent
of such requirements, and documentation associated with best
management practices established herein. Records shall include the
date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who
performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and
§ 127-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-67
1:325
§ 127-68. Monitoring facilities.
§ 127-69. Inspection and sampling.
the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for
a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the
Authority or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Authority.
L. Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines
that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate
for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed
by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling
and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
Authority or other parties approved by EPA.
M. Date of receipt of reports. Written reports will be deemed to have been
submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed,
postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal
Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
A. The Township and/or the Authority shall require to be provided and
operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow
inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/
or internal drainage systems.
B. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user.
C. The sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance
with the Authority's requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90
days following written notification by the Township and/or the
Authority.
A. The Township or the Authority shall inspect the facilities of any user to
ascertain whether the purpose of this Part 2 is being met and all
requirements are being compiled with. Persons or occupants of
premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the
Township and/or the Authority or its representatives ready access at all
times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection,
§ 127-67 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-69
1:326
sampling, records examination, and copying, or in the performance of
any of their duties. The Township, the Authority, the approval authority,
and the EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of
suitable identification, personnel from the Township, the Authority, the
approval authority, and the EPA will be permitted to enter, without
delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
Unreasonable delays in allowing the Authority access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this Part 2.
B. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
date obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed
during the period covered by the report. Based on data that is
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period:
(1) Except as indicated in Subsection B(2) and (3) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flowproportional
composite sampling techniques, unless timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the Authority. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the Authority, the samples must be
representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during
a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to analysis as
follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples may be
composited in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples
for other parameters unaffected by compositing procedures as
documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by
the Authority, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.
(3) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety-day compliance reports required in this Part 2 and 40 CFR
403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four grab samples must be used
for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile
organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data
do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are
available, the Authority may authorize a lower minimum. For the
reports required by in § 127-67D [40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)],
the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab
§ 127-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-69
1:327
§ 127-70. Pretreatment.
§ 127-71. Confidential information.
samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by and with the
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
A. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this Part 2 and shall achieve compliance with all National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as
specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Authority
shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Authority for review, and shall be
acceptable to the Authority before construction of the facility. The
review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve
the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
produce an effluent acceptable to the Authority under the provisions of
this Part 2. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the
Authority prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
B. The Authority shall annually publish in the local newspaper a list of the
users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment
requirements or standards at least once during the 12 previous months.
The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken
against the user during the same 12 months.
C. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the Authority, EPA or the approval
authority upon request.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Authority that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or
data. When requested and demonstrated by the person furnishing a
report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public but shall be made available upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to this Part 2, the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state disposal
system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however,
that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or
any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
§ 127-69 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-71
1:328
§ 127-72. Publication of list of users in significant noncompliance.
The Authority shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation
that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the
POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous 12 months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall be applicable
to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
Subsection C, D or H of this section) and shall mean:
involving the person furnishing the report. Effluent data will not be
recognized as confidential information.
B. Information accepted by the Authority as confidential shall be
transmitted to any governmental agency immediately when requested,
but not to the general public by the Authority until and unless a ten-day
notification is given to the user.
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in Article X;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard and requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by Article X multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for
all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by Article X (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the Authority determines has caused,
alone, or in combination with other discharges interference or passthrough,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public;
D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Authority's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-
§ 127-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-72
1:329
monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Authority determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
§ 127-72 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-72
1:330
ARTICLE XIII
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
§ 127-73. Harmful contributions.
§ 127-74. Notice of violation; plan for correction.
When the Authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this Part 2, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Authority may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within
15 days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and
a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Authority.
Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the powers of the Authority to take
any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
§ 127-75. Search warrants.
If the Authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this Part 2, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
of the Authority designed to verify compliance with this Part 2 or any permit
or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety
A. The Authority may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the
Authority, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes
interference to the POTW, or may cause the POTW to violate any
condition of its NPDES permit.
B. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the permit shall immediately cease wastewater
discharge to the POTW. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the Authority shall take such
steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
possible endangerment to any individuals or the environment. The
Authority may reinstate the permit and/or the wastewater treatment
service upon proof, satisfactory to the Authority, of the elimination of
the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by
the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measure taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to
the Authority within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
§ 127-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-75
1:331
and welfare of the community, the Authority may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the Court of Common Pleas in Norristown, Pennsylvania.
§ 127-76. Consent orders.
The Authority may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance,
or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to §§ 127-76.2
and 127-76.3 of this Part 2 and shall be judicially enforceable.
§ 127-76.1. Show-cause hearing.
The Authority may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this Part 2, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, to
appear before the Authority and show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying
the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the
reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the
proposed enforcement should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall
be served personally or by registered or certified mail at least 15 days prior
to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative
of the user as defined in § 127-50 and required by § 127-67E. A show-cause
hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
§ 127-76.2. Compliance orders.
When the Authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this Part 2, an individual wastewater discharge permit,
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Authority may issue an order to the user responsible
for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a
specific time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time
provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to
address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline
for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
§ 127-75 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-76.3
1:332
§ 127-76.3. Cease and desist orders.
When the Authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this Part 2, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, or
that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Authority may issue
an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
§ 127-76.4. Termination of discharge.
A. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance
of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.
A. In addition to the provisions in § 127-66H of this Part 2, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article X of this Part 2.
B. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 127-76.1 of this
Part 2 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this
option by the Authority shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.
§ 127-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-76.4
1:333

ARTICLE XIV
Remedies, Penalties and Costs
§ 127-76.5. Summary conviction.
Any user or other person who knowingly makes any false statements,
representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained by this Part 2 or permit
conditions; or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this Part 2; or who shall
violate any other provision of this Part 2; or who shall fail to comply with any
of the requirements hereof, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a summary
offense and sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $10,000 and costs of
prosecution for each and every violation, or in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 90 days for each
violation. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 127-76.6. Legal action.
§ 127-76.7. Civil penalties.
Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this
Part 2, and the orders, rules, regulations or permits issued hereunder, may
be fined up to $25,000 for each offense. Each day on which a violation
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In
addition to the penalties provided herein, the Township and/or Authority
may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees
and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the
person found to have violated this Part 2 or the orders, rules, regulations,
and permits issued hereunder.
A. If any user or other person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or
other wastes into the POTW contrary to the provisions of this Part 2,
federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the
Township and/or the Authority, the Township or Authority Solicitor may
commence an action for legal and/or equitable relief in a court of
competent jurisdiction. In addition to the other penalties provided
herein, the Township or Authority may recover reasonable attorney
fees, court costs, court reporter fees, and other expenses of litigation.
B. Any fines, costs, penalties or other expenses imposed upon or incurred
by the Township or Authority as the result of any violation or violations
by any user or other person of any provision of this Part 2 shall be
assessed against and chargeable to the user or other person and may be
collected as provided by law.
C. None of the provisions of this article or Article XIII shall be deemed in
any way to limit the enforcement powers of the Authority embodied in
its enforcement response plan and civil penalty policy, as adopted by
Authority Resolution No. 94-2, and as may be amended from time to
time.
§ 127-76.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-76.8
1:335
§ 127-76.8. Falsifying information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part 2, or permit condition or
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this Part 2 shall, upon conviction, be guilty
of a summary offense and sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $10,000 and
costs of prosecution for each and every violation or, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 90 days for
each violation.
§ 127-76.9. Appeal procedures. [Added 8-13-2008 by Ord. No.
08-04]
A. Any user that has been issued a notice of violation, compliance order,
cease and desist order, emergency suspension notice, termination of
discharge notice, refusal to issue permit notice, or severance of water
service has the right to appeal either the amount of the penalty or the
fact of the violation. Said appeal must be filed within 30 days of receipt
of the notice or violation. The appeal shall be filed pursuant to
Pennsylvania Administrative Law and Procedure as set forth in 2
Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
B. Failure of the user to appeal the penalty contesting either the fact of the
violation or the amount of the penalty within the 30 days of receipt of
the notice or order shall result in the waiver of the user’s legal rights to
contest the violation or the amount of the penalty.
C. Challenges, answers, or appeals to actions taken pursuant to or under
the authority of this section that are governed or subject to other
statutes or procedures, including the Judicial Code, or Rules of Civil or
Criminal Procedure, shall be subject to the time limitations and
procedural requirements of those laws.
§ 127-76.8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-76.9
1:336
Part 3
[Adopted 8-28-1991OBny-SOitred D. Nisop.o 9s1a-l 7Systems 93; Amended In Its Entirety
7-27-2016 By Ord. No. 16-12]
ARTICLE XV
Regulation
§ 127-77. Title; introduction; purpose.
§ 127-78. Definitions.
A. This Part 3 shall be known and may be cited as the "On-Site Disposal
System Program."
B. As mandated by the Municipal Code, which shall include but not be
limited to the Second Class Township Code,94 the Clean Streams Law
(35 P.S. § 691.1 to § 691.1001) and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et
seq., known as "Act 537"), municipalities have the power and the duty
to provide for adequate sewage treatment facilities and for the
protection of the public health by preventing the discharge of untreated
or inadequately treated sewage. The Official Sewage Facilities Plan for
Towamencin Township indicates that it is necessary to formulate and
implement a sewage management program to effectively prevent and
abate water pollution and hazards to the public health caused by
improper treatment and disposal of sewage.
C. The purpose of this Part 3 is to provide for the inspection, maintenance,
management, rehabilitation, repair, replacement and construction of
on-lot sewage disposal systems; to further permit the municipality to
intervene in situations which are public nuisances or hazards to the
public health; to establish a procedure by which public sewers will be
installed and to establish penalties and appeal procedures necessary
for the proper administration of the On-Site Disposal System Program.
A. As used in this Part 3, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 537 — The Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1 et seq., known as the "Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act."
ALTERNATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system employing the use of
demonstrated technology as outlined in the most current alternate
systems listings by the PADEP.
APPARENT MALFUNCTION — Wet, murky conditions (not resulting
from surface water runoff or ponding) in areas designated as the
adsorption area. These conditions are typically accompanied by high
93.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Repealed Former Part 3, Holding Tanks, Adopted 2-25-1987
By Ord. No. 87-1, As Amended.
94.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 127-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-78
1:337
grass and increased growth and strong sewage odors and significant
algae growth in the warmer months. In the winter, these areas do
not freeze and the area is typically spongy and soft, nor does snow
accumulate in these areas. Information from homeowners such as
frequent septic tank pumping or inability to pump a septic tank due
to backflow from the absorption area also indicates an apparent
malfunction.
AUTHORITY — Towamencin Municipal Authority.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A certified Sewage Enforcement Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, professional engineer, plumbing inspector,
Township Manager or any other qualified or licensed person(s) who are
delegated by the Township to function within specified limits as the
agent(s) of the Township to carry out the provisions of this Part 3.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors, Towamencin Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO) — An individual employed
by the Township to administer and enforce other ordinances in the
Township.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two or more lots and
the treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or at
any other site.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (DEP).
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — In the case of a residential
use in the amount of sewage deemed to be generated by one singlefamily
dwelling unit and in the case of nonresidential uses, a flow of 200
gallons of sewage per day at the property's water meter.
GRAY WATER — Domestically generated liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener backwash.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal
of the sewage at another site. Holding tanks shall be restricted to that
type in which sewage is conveyed to it by a water-carrying system.
INDIVIDUAL SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks or other facilities
collecting and/or disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil or
into any waters of this commonwealth.
MAINTENANCE — The pumping of a septic tank, cesspool or dry well;
the cleaning, pumping and/or leveling of a distribution box; the removal
of trees or growth affecting the operation of an on-site disposal system;
the diversion of surface water away from an on-site disposal system;
and the reduction of flow from the structure being served (i.e., the
installation of water conservation devices).
§ 127-78 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-78
1:338
MALFUNCTION — The condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground,
into groundwaters of this commonwealth or into surface waters of this
commonwealth, backs up into a building connected to the system or
otherwise causes a nuisance, hazard to the public health or pollution of
ground or surface water or contamination of public or private drinking
water wells. Systems shall be considered to be malfunctioning if any
of the conditions noted above occur for any length of time during any
period of the year.
MCDH — Acronym for the Montgomery County Department of Health,
the local agency in the County of Montgomery responsible for enforcing
the rules and regulations of the PADEP regarding sewage facilities,
Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Chapters 71, 72, and 73, promulgated
thereunder.
NEW SYSTEM — The installation of an on-site disposal system on a
property where a system has not previously existed, or the installation
of a larger on-site system in conjunction with the expanded use of an
existing structure. It does not include replacement systems installed on
properties with existing on-lot systems where rehabilitation and repair
efforts are required to correct an existing malfunction.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES ACT 537 PLAN — The comprehensive
plan for the provision of adequate sewage disposal systems, adopted
by the Township and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection on March 22, 1988, as amended.
ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for disposal of
sewage involving pretreatment and subsequent disposal of the clarified
sewage into the soil for final treatment and disposal, including both
individual sewage systems and community sewage systems.
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation
for profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department,
board, bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision,
municipality, district, authority or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty or
imposing a fine or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include the
members of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of any
local agency or municipal, public or private corporation for profit or not
for profit.
POSSIBLE MALFUNCTION — The property owner points to one area
where the adsorption area is supposedly located, but problems are
evident in other areas of the property; evidence of previous repair or
extension of a system or piles of recently placed soil and/or dirt in the
vicinity of where the adsorption area is located; installation of a garden,
shrubs or trees in the vicinity of where the absorption area is located; or
inability to distinguish gray water discharge from the absorption area
malfunction. A system subject to improperly routed runoff or drainage,
§ 127-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-78
1:339
which may be affecting performance, is also considered a possible
malfunction.
REHABILITATION or REPAIR — Work done to modify, alter or repair
an existing on-lot sewage disposal system or individual components
thereof. Enlargement of the total absorption area, as long as flows
from the structure being served are unchanged or reduced, are also
included.
REPLACEMENT AREA — A portion of a lot or a developed property,
sized to allow the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal area,
which is reserved to allow that new installation in the event of the
malfunction of the originally installed on-site sewage disposal system.
REPLACEMENT SYSTEM — An on-site sewage disposal system which
replaces a previously installed on-site system which cannot be repaired
or rehabilitated to a condition acceptable to the Township's SEO.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or
inimical to the public health, to animal or aquatic life or to the use of
water for domestic water supply or for recreation or which constitutes
pollution under the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as
the "Clean Streams Law," as amended.95
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — The Montgomery County
Department of Health official who issues and reviews permit
applications and conducts such investigations and inspections as are
necessary to implement Chapter 71 (Administration of Sewage
Facilities Planning Program) and Chapter 73 (Standards for Sewage
Disposal Facilities).96
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or other parcel
of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines. The enumerating of lots shall
include as a lot that portion of the original tract or tracts remaining
after other lots have been subdivided therefrom.
TOWNSHIP — Towamencin Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, ponds, springs and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface and underground water or any of their parts,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
95.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
96.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapters 71 and 73, Standards for onlot Sewage Treatment
Facilities.
§ 127-78 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-78
1:340
§ 127-79. Applicability.
From the effective date of this Part 3, its provisions shall apply to all existing
on-site disposal systems, as well as all new systems proposed within the
Township.
§ 127-80. Registration of systems.
§ 127-81. Initial maintenance and inspection activities.
B. All definitions included in Act 537 and the Clean Streams Law97 are
hereby incorporated into this Part 3.
A. All properties which have existing on-site systems shall be registered
with the Township.
B. All new systems shall be required to file a registration form with the
Township and pay the appropriate registration fee prior to the issuance
of a use and occupancy permit for the use of the structure being served
by the on-site system.
A. The Township's authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon all
lands in the Township for the purpose of conducting the inspection
activities outlined herein.
B. The following procedure shall be utilized in pumping and inspecting an
on-lot disposal system utilizing a septic tank as a primary unit. Aerobic
systems may not need to be pumped but shall be inspected by a
qualified person to determine that they are in good working order.
(1) Locate the septic tank and the absorption areas (tile field trenches,
seepage pits, elevated sand mound, etc.).
(2) Locate the septic tank cleanout manhole and excavate around the
cover to prevent soil from falling into the tank when the cover is
removed. The owner shall be responsible to have the cleanout
manhole excavated, whether by the sewage hauler or otherwise.
(3) Remove cleanout manhole cover. Break up scum in the tank and
pump out a portion of the material in the tank. The inspection port
over the baffle shall not be pumped out as this may damage the
baffle and will not permit the tank contents to be thoroughly mixed
for pumping.
(4) Reinject the pumped liquid back into the tank to further break up
the scum and mix the sludge at the bottom of the tank with the
liquid. Pump out the mixed material.
(5) Repeat Subsection B(4) until the tank is pumped out, i.e., sludge
and scum removed.
97.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 127-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-81
1:341
(6) Inspect the empty tank for cracks, leaks, deterioration and missing
baffles. The tank shall not be entered for the purpose of inspection.
A mirror and light may be helpful to see inside the tank. Note any
problems with the tank. Acid or chemical cleaner shall not be used
in the tank.
(7) Replace the manhole cover carefully and securely.
(8) If the cleanout manhole is buried deeper than a foot, risers shall be
installed over the cleanout manhole and inspection port to facilitate
future cleaning and inspection. The riser cleanout manhole should
be 24 inches in diameter.
(9) Backfill over the cover or around the riser.
(10) Make a visual inspection of the disposal area for seepage,
breakouts, etc., and note any problems.
(11) Inform the property owner of any problems encountered with any
of the components of the system and, if possible, suggest corrective
measures.
(12) Clean up any spillage. Dispose of the septage at any PADEPapproved
disposal site.
C. The Township's designated agent shall, within 10 days after completing
each inspection required by Subsection B, issue a written report to the
Township and the owner of the property inspected. The report shall
include the findings of the inspection and make recommendations for
the maintenance and/or rehabilitation or repair of the on-site system.
Such recommendations may include requiring the property owner to
retain a private SEO or consultant to further evaluate the system and
develop a program to correct the malfunction. The program to correct
the malfunction may include a proposal to construct a replacement onsite
system, provided that the proposed system meets the requirements
as promulgated by the PADEP.
D. All owners of on-site systems with gray water discharges to the ground
surface shall correct such discharges and route the gray water into the
treatment tank (i.e., septic tank or, if applicable, cesspool or dry well).
The owner shall notify the MCDH SEO when the work is completed, and
the SEO shall inspect the property and file a report with the Township
no earlier than three months and no later than six months from the date
of notification.
E. Any on-lot sewage disposal system may be inspected by the Township's
authorized agent at any reasonable time as of the effective date of this
Part 3. The inspection may include a physical tour of the property; the
taking of samples from surface water, wells and other groundwater
sources; the sampling of the contents of the sewage disposal system
itself; and/or the introduction of a traceable substance into the interior
plumbing of the structure served to ascertain the path and ultimate
§ 127-81 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-81
1:342
§ 127-82. Operation and maintenance.
destination of wastewater generated in the structure. A written report
shall be furnished to the owner of each property inspected, and a copy
of said report shall be maintained in the Township records. The written
report shall be issued within 10 days following the inspection.
F. All on-site systems in the Township shall be inspected at least once
every four years.
A. No person shall operate and maintain an on-site sewage disposal
system in such a manner that it malfunctions. All gray water shall be
discharged to a treatment tank. No system shall discharge untreated or
partially treated sewage to the surface of the ground or into the waters
of the commonwealth unless a permit to discharge has been obtained
from the Department.
B. Only sewage which does not contain the following shall be discharged
into any on-lot sewage disposal system.
(1) Industrial waste.
(2) Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
(3) Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not
limited to pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners,
herbicides, gasoline and other solvents.
(4) Clean surfacewater or groundwater, including water from roof or
cellar drains, springs, basement sump pumps and french drains.
C. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system that contains a septic tank, or a cesspool/dry well, shall have the
septic tank or cesspool/dry well pumped by a pumper/hauler at a
minimum of every four years. The septic tank pumping shall be done in
the presence of the Township's SEO. Immediately following this
pumping, the SEO shall inspect the baffles of the septic tank. The
method of this inspection shall be determined by the SEO. This
inspection may require that a portion of the septic tank be exposed. If
excavation is necessary to accomplish the inspection, the excavation
shall be done by the property owner prior to the inspection. If deemed
necessary by the SEO, the distribution box, if one is present, shall be
excavated and remain excavated until inspection has been completed
by the SEO. Receipts from the pumper/hauler shall be submitted by the
property owner or tenant to the Township within 30 days of the receipt
of the invoice from the hauler.
D. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
the authorized agent if the septic tank is undersized, if solids buildup in
the tank is above average, if the hydraulic load on the system increases
significantly above average, if a garbage grinder is used in the building,
if the system malfunctions or for other good cause shown. In addition,
§ 127-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-82
1:343
§ 127-83. System rehabilitation, repair and replacement.
the Township reserves the right to modify the pumping frequency on
a case-by-case basis for those individuals and properties that see
significantly lower-than-normal flows, where in which a longer pumpout
schedule may be appropriate. Property owners who submit a
written statement to the Township that no more than two people reside
on the property may be switched to a five-year pump-out cycle at the
Township's discretion.
E. Any person owning a property served by a septic tank shall submit, with
each required pumping receipt, a written statement from the pumper/
hauler or from any other qualified individual acceptable to the
Township that the baffles in the septic tank have been inspected and
found to be in good working order. Any person whose septic tank baffles
are determined to require repair or replacement shall first contact the
MCDH SEO for approval of the necessary repair.
F. Any person owning a building served by an on-site sewage disposal
system which contains an aerobic treatment tank shall follow the
operation and maintenance recommendations of the equipment
manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's recommendations and a
copy of the service agreement shall be submitted to and remain on file
with the Township and MCDH. Thereafter, service receipts shall be
submitted to the Township at the intervals specified by the
manufacturer's recommendations. In no case may the service or
pumping intervals for aerobic treatment tanks exceed those required
for septic tanks.
G. Any person owning a building utilizing a cesspool or dry well which is
the receiving unit for solids shall have that system pumped according to
the schedule prescribed for septic tanks. As an alternative to this
scheduled pumping of the cesspool or dry well, the owner may secure a
sewage permit from the MCDH SEO for a septic tank to be installed
preceding the cesspool or dry well. For a system consisting of a
cesspool or dry well preceded by an approved septic tank, only the
septic tank must be pumped at the prescribed interval.
H. The Township may require additional maintenance activity as needed,
including but not necessarily limited to cleaning and unclogging of
piping; servicing and repair of mechanical equipment; leveling of
distribution boxes, tanks and lines; removal of obstructing roots or
trees; and the diversion of surface water away from the disposal area,
etc.
A. Should the MCDH SEO, or the independent SEO/consultant retained by
the property owner, with the approval of the MCDH, indicate that it is
not possible to repair or modify the system to comply with the
Department's standards for on-site sewage disposal systems, then the
property owner shall be required to have a replacement on-site sewage
disposal system designed for the property. Said design shall conform to
§ 127-82 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-83
1:344
§ 127-84. Holding tanks.
current regulations as promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection. This design may include the typical onsite
sewage disposal system for an approved alternate on-site sewage
disposal system.
B. The MCDH SEO shall have the authority to require the repair,
rehabilitation or replacement of any malfunction by the following
methods: cleaning, repair or replacement of components of the existing
system, adding capacity or otherwise altering or replacing the system's
treatment tank, expanding the existing disposal area, replacing the
existing disposal area, replacing a gravity distribution system with a
pressurized system or other alternatives as appropriate for the specific
site, including use of the reservation areas as required for new systems
in § 127-86G of this Part 3.
C. In lieu of or in combination with the remedies described in Subsection
B, the MCDH SEO may require the installation of water conservation
equipment and the institution of water conservation practices in
structures served. Water-using devices and appliances in the structure
may be required to be retrofitted with water-saving appurtenances, or
they may be required to be replaced by water-conserving devices and
appliances. Wastewater generation in the structure may also be
reduced by requiring changes in water usage patterns in the structure
served. The use of laundry facilities may be limited to one load per day
or discontinued altogether.
D. Should none of the repair, rehabilitation or replacement efforts
described herein be totally effective in eliminating the malfunction of
an existing on-site sewage disposal system, the property owner shall be
required to install a sealed holding tank. This holding tank shall be
sized by the MCDH SEO. The property owner shall have the holding
tank pumped out as required under § 127-82G.
E. Should none of the repair or rehabilitation efforts described herein be
totally effective in eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-site
sewage disposal system, a property owner whose property abuts or
fronts an existing public sewer shall be required to connect to said
public sewer at the property owner's sole expense.
F. Should more than 50% of the property owners in a particular drainage
area, as set forth in Exhibit A,98 petition the Board of Supervisors to
install public sewers, then the Board may authorize the design of the
public sewer system which shall be dependent upon the location of the
drainage area and its proximity to any existing public sanitary sewers.
98.Editor's Note: Exhibit A, On-Lot Disposal System Drainage Area Map, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 127-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-84
1:345
A. No holding tank shall be installed or used for the disposal of sewage
until a permit for such tank shall be obtained from the MCDH SEO.
Property owners shall submit to the SEO for approval plans showing the
size, shape, location and type of material used in the fabrication of the
holding tank and the details of its construction prior to the issuance of
the permit. At the time of application for such permit, the following
shall be submitted:
(1) A letter from the Authority or other disposal site agreeing to
receive sewage from the applicant.
(2) A copy of the contract between the applicant and the sewage
hauler providing for the pumping of such holding tank on a regular
basis, with the contract being irrevocable for a period of not less
than one year.
(3) A covenant, executed by the applicant, to be recorded running with
the land binding the successors entitled to observe the duties
required under this Part.
B. No truck used in the removal of sewage for disposal shall exceed a
capacity of 3,000 gallons, and no removal of sewage from a holding tank
shall occur before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. prevailing
time, except in the case of an emergency.
C. The Authority and the Township are hereby empowered to adopt from
time to time rules and regulations governing the disposal of sewage
from holding tanks. Such rules and regulations are and shall be a part
of this Part 3, and the violations of such rules and regulations shall be in
violation of this Part 3.
D. The owner of a property that utilizes a holding tank shall maintain the
holding tank in conformance with the rules and regulations adopted by
the Authority, the Township, MCDH, PADEP.
E. The holding tank shall have as a minimum the following construction
standards:
(1) Tank capacity. The minimum capacity allowed shall be equal to
either the daily flow times the longest interval, in days between
collection plus one day of additional capacity, or three days'
capacity, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the
minimum tank capacity shall be at least 1,000 gallons for each
equivalent dwelling unit (EDU).
(2) Level indicator. An indicator to show the sewage depth will be
required. Also, a warning device using a light and sound device
shall be installed within the proposed property to be activated
when a tank is 75% full.
(3) Withdrawal facilities. The tank shall be designed so that it can be
completely pumped out.
§ 127-84 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-84
1:346
§ 127-85. Failure to complete required work; liens.
The Township, upon written notice from the MCDH SEO that an imminent
health hazard exists due to failure of a property owner to maintain, repair,
rehabilitate or replace any on-site systems as provided under the terms
of this Part 3, shall have the authority to perform, or contract to have
performed, the work established by the SEO. The property owner shall be
charged for the work performed, and if necessary, a lien shall be entered
therefor in accordance with law.
§ 127-86. Permit required; prohibited acts.
(4) Venting. The tank shall be designed with a vent to the atmosphere.
If odor problems occur, it will be the property owner's
responsibility to install the necessary filter system within 30 days
after written notice from the Township.
(5) All holding tanks shall be located so that the sewage pump will
have easy access to withdrawal facilities during all seasons of the
year.
A. No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction or alter an on-site system or construct or request bid
proposals for construction or install or occupy any building or structure
for which an on-site system is to be installed without first obtaining a
permit indicating that the site and the plans and specifications of such
system are in compliance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, the standards adopted pursuant to the Act and
this Part 3. Maintenance of an on-site system is specifically excluded
from this requirement; rehabilitation, repair and/or replacement
activities require a permit.
B. No system or structure designed for on-site sewage disposal or for
rehabilitation, repair or replacement to an existing on-site system shall
be covered from view until approval to cover the same has been given
by the MCDH SEO. If 72 hours have elapsed, except Sundays and
holidays, since the SEO issuing the permit received notification of
completion of the construction or the rehabilitation, repair or
replacement, the applicant may cover said system or structure, unless
permission has been specifically refused by the SEO.
C. Applicants for on-site system permits shall notify the MCDH SEO of the
schedule for construction or rehabilitation, repair or replacement so
that inspection(s), in addition to the final inspection required by Act
537, may be scheduled and performed by the SEO.
D. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued by the Township or its
Code Enforcement Officer for a new building which will utilize an onsite
system until a valid sewage permit has been obtained from the
MCDH SEO.
§ 127-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-86
1:347
§ 127-87. Disposal of septage.
E. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure served
by an on-site system, if said alteration or conversion will result in the
increase or potential increase in sewage flows from the structure, until
the Code Enforcement Officer and the structure's owner receive from
the MCDH SEO either a permit for alteration or replacement of the
existing on-site sewage disposal system or written notification that such
a permit will not be required. The SEO shall determine whether the
proposed alteration or conversion of the structure will result in
increased sewage flows.
F. Sewage permits may be issued only by the MCDH SEO employed by the
county for that express purpose.
G. In addition to the Act 537 requirements and the standards adopted
pursuant to that Act, the following additional requirements pertain to
new systems in the Township:
(1) The permitting of a new system shall provide for the testing,
identification and reservation of an area of each lot or developed
property suitable for the installation of a replacement on-lot
sewage disposal system. This requirement is in addition to the
testing, identification and reservation of an area for the primary
sewage disposal system. No permit shall be issued for any
proposed new systems on any newly created or subdivision
property in the Township unless and until a replacement area is
satisfactorily tested, satisfactorily identified and reserved. No
building permit will be issued for structures on a property until the
replacement area has passed all tests required by the Township.
(2) All structures served by new systems shall be required to install
water conservation devices and fixtures meeting the minimum
criteria as set forth by the Delaware River Basin Commission.
(3) All new systems and replacements shall meet MCDH and PADEP
criteria in addition to the Township's requirements.
H. It shall be a requirement that all individuals selling property that are
not making use of a public sewer (being served by an on-site facility)
shall, through the owner and/or his agent, deliver a copy of this Part 3
to any purchaser. Any violation of this requirement shall be considered
a violation of this Part 3 and subject to the penalties set forth
hereinafter.
A. All septage originating within the Township shall be disposed of at sites
or facilities approved by the PADEP. Approved sites or facilities shall
include the following: septage treatment facilities, wastewater
treatment plants, composting sites and approved farmlands.
§ 127-86 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-87
1:348
§ 127-88. Administration and fees.
§ 127-89. Appeals.
B. Septage of pumper/haulers operating within the Township shall operate
in a manner consistent with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 to
6018.1003, as amended).
A. The Township shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this Part 3.
B. The Township shall employ qualified individuals to carry out the
provisions of this Part 3. Those employees shall include a certified SEO,
a Code Enforcement Officer, Township Engineer, Township Manager,
Public Works Director or other persons or firms as necessary to carry
out the provisions of this Part 3.
C. All permits, records, reports, files and other written material relating to
the installation, operation and maintenance and malfunction of on-site
sewage disposal systems in the Township shall become the property of
the Township. Existing and future records shall be available for public
inspection during required business hours at the official municipal
office. All records pertaining to sewage permits, building permits,
occupancy permits and all other aspects of the Township sewage
management program shall be made available, upon request, for
inspection by representatives of the PADEP.
D. The Township Board shall establish a fee schedule, and subsequently
collect fees, to cover the cost to the Township of administering this
program. Such fees shall be established in the Township's annual fee
schedule resolution.
A. Appeals from decisions of the Township or its authorized agents under
this Part 3 shall be made to the Board of Supervisors, in writing, within
30 days from the date of the decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board of
Supervisors at its next regularly scheduled meeting, if the appeal is
received at least 14 days prior to the meeting. If the appeal is received
within 14 days of the next regularly scheduled meeting, the appeal shall
be heard at the subsequent meeting. The Township shall thereafter
affirm, modify or reverse the aforesaid decision. The hearing may be
postponed for a good cause shown by the appellant or the Township.
Additional evidence may be introduced at the hearing, provided that it
is submitted with the written notice of appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered, in writing, within 30 days of the date of
the hearing. If a decision is not rendered within 30 days, the release
sought by the appellant shall be deemed granted.
§ 127-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-90
1:349
§ 127-90. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to comply with any provisions of this Part 3 shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 and costs, and not more than $1,000
and costs, or in default thereof shall be confined in the county jail for a
period of not more than 30 days. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 127-90 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-90
1:350
Part 4
[AdoptedSe9w-2a8g-e2 G00ri5nBdeyrO Prudm. Npso. 05-04]
ARTICLE XVI
Regulation of Pumps
§ 127-91. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 4 is to establish procedures for the installation, use
and maintenance of sewage grinder pumps and any associated force mains
or low-pressure laterals. It is hereby declared that the enactment of this
Part 4 is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this municipality.
§ 127-92. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms in this Part 4 shall be as follows:
ACT PLAN 537 — Municipality's official plan as defined in the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535 (1965), No. 537, as
amended, 35 P.S. §§ 750.1-750.20a (Sewage Facilities Act or Act 537).
AUTHORITY — An authority, as defined by the Municipality Authorities Act
of 2001 (2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22, and as amended thereafter, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.).
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
GRINDER PUMP — Any electric-motor-driven, submersible, centrifugal
pump capable of macerating all material found in normal domestic sanitary
sewage, including reasonable amounts of objects, such as plastics, sanitary
napkins, disposable diapers, rubber and the like, to a fine slurry, and
pumping this material through a small diameter discharge.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within Towamencin upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — Board of Supervisors authorized by law to
enact ordinances or adopt resolutions regarding sewage conveyance,
treatment and disposal in Towamencin Township.
MUNICIPALITY — Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL PLAN REVISION — A change in the municipality's Act 537 plan
to provide for additional or newly identified future or existing sewage
facilities needs, as defined fully in Section 1 of the Sewage Facilities Act, 35
P.S. § 750.1.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or
equitable, sole or partial, of any property located in Towamencin Township.
§ 127-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-92
1:351
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to
the public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for
domestic water supply or for recreation or any substance which constitutes
pollution under the Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 through 691.1001,
as amended.
§ 127-93. Planning requirements.
The connection of existing properties or proposed new land development
to an existing or proposed sewage system through the use of sewage
grinder pumps, their associated force mains, or low-pressure laterals shall
occur only after an official plan revision to the Municipality's Act 537 Plan,
approved by both the municipality and Department, designates that the
proposed properties be served by such a connection.
§ 127-94. Powers of Township.
§ 127-95. Duties and responsibilities of Township.
A. Towamencin Township is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt
such rules and regulations concerning sewage which it may deem
necessary from time to time to effect the purposes herein.
B. Towamencin Township is hereby authorized and empowered to take
such other actions as are necessary, including, but not limited to,
entering into agreements with property owners that assure proper
operation and maintenance of sewage facilities within the
municipality's borders, including, but not limited to, sewage grinder
pumps and any associated force mains or low-pressure laterals.
A. The Township shall exercise its powers and legal authority set forth
herein, and under all applicable statutes, ordinances, and other laws to
affect the purposes of this Part 4.
B. The Township may enter into an agreement with each property owner
proposing to install or who has installed a sewage grinder pump or lowpressure
sewage system to assure the short- and long-term operation
and maintenance, use, service, repair or replacement of such systems.
C. All grinder pumps and low-pressure sewer systems (and the
installation, use, operation, maintenance, service, repair and
replacement thereof) shall comply with the rules and regulations of
Towamencin Township, which are adopted by resolution from time to
time.
D. All grinder pumps and low-pressure sewer systems shall be connected
to the sewage collection and conveyance system in full compliance with
the rules and regulations of the Township, which are adopted by
resolution from time to time.
§ 127-92 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 127-95
1:352
§ 127-96. Duties and responsibilities of property owner.
§ 127-97. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this Part 4, any violation of
§§ 127-95 and 127-96 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated
by Towamencin Township by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or
appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
E. The Township shall maintain control over the type of grinder pumps
used and assure that full service capability is available locally on short
notice.
F. Towamencin Township shall bear no responsibility for the purchase,
installation, use, operation, maintenance, service, repair, or
replacement of the grinder pump and/or its low-pressure force main or
lateral, except as otherwise set forth herein.
A. Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall bear full
responsibility for providing, installing, using, operating, maintaining,
servicing, repairing and replacing his/her grinder pump and/or its lowpressure
force main or lateral, unless otherwise set forth herein.
B. Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall have full
responsibility for using the pump consistent with the manufacturer's
instructions and shall avoid introducing into the sewerage system
materials that may damage the impellers on the pump, including, but
not limited to, items designated as biodegradable in septic tanks.
C. Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall close the sewage
system and cease operations during any period when the grinder pump
and/or low-pressure system serving a property is inoperable.
D. Where the low-pressure force main or lateral is shared between
property owners, they shall submit to the Township a declaration of
easements, covenants and restrictions in recordable form setting forth
the agreement of each benefited property owner with respect to the
installation, use, operation, maintenance, service, repair and
replacement of the low-pressure sewer system, which agreement shall
bind all future property owners. Following the approval of the lowpressure
system by all applicable agencies, the Township will not issue
a permit for its installation until evidence is presented that the
agreement has been recorded in the Office for the Recording of Deeds,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 127-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-97
1:353
Chapter 130
SIGNS AND POSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills and littering — See Ch. 93. Zoning — See Ch. 153.
§ 130-1. Permit required; removal.
It shall be unlawful to tack or place any sign, bill, poster or advertisement
of any nature on any pole, tree or other plant or structure on any street,
alley or other public place in any manner without having a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Township Manager.
No such sign, poster, bill or advertisement shall be permitted to remain
in such public place for a period of longer than 30 days; and any such
advertisement, sign, bill or poster giving notice of an event or referring to
an election will be removed within 10 days after taking place of that event
or election.
§ 130-2. Deposit for permit.
No such permit shall be issued unless there is deposited with the Township
Manager the sum of $25, which sum shall be returned to the applicant
if the applicant causes all such signs, bills, posters or advertisements to
be removed within the time prescribed by this chapter. If such applicant
does not cause the removal of such signs, bills, posters or advertisements
within such time, then his twenty-five-dollar deposit shall be forfeited to the
Township.
§ 130-3. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to notices posted by order of
court or notices to the public required by law to be posted in a public place.
§ 130-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1988 by Ord. No.
88-15]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for not more than
30 days, and each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 127-97 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 130-5
1:354
§ 130-5. Enforcement.
The Zoning Officer, the Township Manager and the Police Chief are each
herewith given the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
Chapter 132
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch. 7.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 31.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 82.
Grading and excavating — See Ch. 87.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
§ 130-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-5
1:355

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 132-1. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout the Township increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development, activities causing accelerated
erosion, and connections and discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of the Township and all the people of
the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and streambanks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss
of recharge.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
F. Federal and state regulations require the Township to implement a
program of stormwater controls. The Township is required to obtain a
permit for stormwater discharges from its separate storm sewer system
under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
Permittees are required to enact, implement, and enforce a prohibition
of nonstormwater discharges to the permittee's regulated small
municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s).
G. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of surface waters of the commonwealth by
the Township.
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-2
1:357
§ 132-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Township and its watersheds by minimizing the harm and maximizing
the benefits described in § 132-1 of this chapter through provisions
designed to:
§ 132-3. Statutory authority.
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff
by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S.
§ 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act"; by the
Authority of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as
amended by Act 170 of 1988, as further amended by Act 209 of 1990 and
Act 131 of 1992, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.; and the Pennsylvania Second-Class
Township Code.99
A. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
C. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
D. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
Township and the commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide proper operation and maintenance of permanent stormwater
management facilities and permanent stormwater management best
management practices ("BMPs") in the Township that are constructed
in conjunction with a regulated activity.
G. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
H. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
I. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93, to protect and maintain, reclaim,
and restore the existing and designated uses of surface waters of the
commonwealth.
J. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
K. Provide standards to meet NPDES stormwater permit requirements.
L. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the municipal separate storm
sewer system of Towamencin Township.
M. Preserve natural drainage systems as much as possible.
§ 132-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-4
1:358
§ 132-4. Applicability and regulated activities.
§ 132-5. Exemptions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all areas of the Township.
The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to stormwater flow
received from outside Township borders, which affects the overall
stormwater management within the Township.
B. All construction and development activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are
subject to regulation by this chapter.
C. This chapter shall apply to any of the regulated activities identified in
this section.
D. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities, BMPs or
appurtenances thereto.
(7) Any regulated activity requiring a grading and excavating permit
pursuant to Chapter 87 of the Towamencin Township Code.
E. All regulated activities which result in earth disturbance shall comply
with the requirements of the Towamencin Township Grading and
Excavating Ordinance, Chapter 87 of the Towamencin Township Code.
Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
facilities and BMPs are also regulated under existing state law. This
chapter shall operate in coordination with those parallel requirements;
the requirements of this chapter shall be no less restrictive in meeting
the purposes of this chapter than state law.
A. General exemptions. The following land use activities, not proposed in
conjunction with a subdivision or land development, are exempt from
the requirements of this chapter, except where otherwise identified
herein:
(1) Installation of 1,500 square feet or less of cumulative impervious
surface area when not in conjunction with a subdivision or land
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 132-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-5
1:359
development. For regulated activities within the Neshaminy Creek
Watershed, the impervious surface exemption criteria identified in
Appendix 132F of this chapter shall be applicable:
(2) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(3) Agricultural activity when operated in accordance with a
conservation plan, nutrient management plan, or erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by the Montgomery County
Conservation District, including activities such as growing crops,
rotating crops, tilling of soil, and grazing animals. Installation of
new, or expansion of existing, farmsteads, animal housing, waste
storage, and production areas having impervious surfaces shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter unless exempt pursuant to
this § 132-5.
(4) Forest management operations following the Department of
Environmental Protection's management practices contained in its
publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for
Forestry" and operating under an erosion and sediment control
plan approved by the Montgomery County Conservation District.
(5) Public road replacement, replacement paving, repaving and/or
driveway maintenance (without expansion).
(6) Repair and reconstruction of on-lot sewage disposal systems where
work is performed in accordance with a valid permit issued by the
Montgomery County Department of Health.
(7) Any aspect of stormwater management facility/BMP maintenance
to an existing system made in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Township.
(8) Lots that are part of an approved subdivision utilizing overall
subdivision stormwater management facilities, such as detention
basins, are exempt from individual lot controls if the total quantity
of impervious surface area on the lot (existing plus proposed) is
equal to or less than that quantity accounted for, from the lot, in the
stormwater management design approved in conjunction with the
subdivision. This exemption does not relieve those lots from
utilizing on-lot controls where such controls are designated as part
of the overall approved subdivision stormwater management
system.
(9) Construction or reconstruction of buildings or additions to existing
buildings or other impervious surface (regulated activities) are
exempt where the following conditions are met:
(a) An area of impervious surface is removed from the site so that
upon completion of the regulated activity, the total increase of
impervious surface area is 1,500 square feet or less.
§ 132-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-5
1:360
(b) The area where existing impervious surface is removed
pursuant to § 132-5A(9)(a) above must be restored with a
minimum of six inches of topsoil and permanent pervious
groundcover.
(10) Grading and excavating permit applications (pursuant to Chapter
87) where the addition of impervious surface cover is 1,500 square
feet or less.
(11) Lot line adjustment subdivisions are exempt when no increase in
impervious surface is proposed.
(12)No exemption shall be provided for regulated activities as defined
in § 132-4D(5) and (6) of this chapter.
B. All regulated activities in Towamencin Township not proposed in
conjunction with a subdivision or land development, creating
impervious surface area in excess of 1,500 square feet but less than the
quantities identified in Table 132-5-1, below, and satisfying the
designated setback criteria are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter but must install stormwater management BMPs in accordance
with Appendix 132D100 of this chapter, Small Project Stormwater
Management. This requirement shall apply to the total development
even if development is to take place in phases. The starting date from
which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" is February 25, 2004. All
impervious surface area constructed on or after February 25, 2004,
shall be considered cumulatively. Impervious surface area existing on
the parent tract prior to this date shall not be considered in cumulative
impervious surface area calculations for exemption purposes. Any area
initially designated to be gravel or crushed stone shall be considered
impervious surface. Regulated activities creating impervious surface
area greater than those quantities referenced in Table 132-5-1 are not
exempt from the requirements of this chapter and shall submit a
drainage plan and application pursuant to Article IV of this chapter. For
regulated activities within the Neshaminy Creek Watershed, the
impervious surface exemption criteria identified in Appendix 132F101 of
this chapter shall be applicable.
100. Editor's Note: Appendix 132D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
101. Editor's Note: Appendix 132F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 132-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-5
1:361
Table 132-5-1 Impervious Surface Exemption Criteria
Additional Impervious
Surface Area
Exempt
Parcel Size
Minimum Setback*
(refer definition
below)
"Drainage Plan" -
NOT Required;
Infiltration BMPs
pursuant to "Small
Project Stormwater
Management"
guidelines (Refer
Appendix 132D) -
Required
Less than 1 acre 25 feet or greater Greater than 1,500
square feet but less than
or equal to 2,500 square
feet
1 acre or greater
but less than 1 1/
2 acres
35 feet or greater Greater than 1,500
square feet but less than
or equal to 3,500 square
feet
1 1/2 acres or
greater, but less
than 2 acres
50 feet or greater Greater than 1,500
square feet but less than
or equal to 4,400 square
feet
2 acres or
greater, but less
than 5 acres
100 feet or greater Greater than 1,500
square feet but less than
or equal to 10,000
square feet
5 or more acres 250 feet or greater Greater than 1,500
square feet but less than
or equal to 15,000
square feet
NOTES:
* The "Minimum Setback" is defined as that distance between the
down-slope property boundary (where surface stormwater runoff
from the regulated activity crosses that boundary) to the nearest
point of the proposed impervious improvements, or the stormwater
control structure discharge point, whichever is closer. Setback
distances may be adjusted at the discretion of the Township
Engineer based upon factors such as topography, surface flow path,
soil conditions and location of structures.
C. Additional exemption criteria:
§ 132-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-5
1:362
§ 132-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Township inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
§ 132-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision(s) of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 132-8. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
§ 132-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
(1) Exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such
measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, and property
or any other county, state, or federal regulations:
(2) Where drainage problems are documented or known to exist
downstream of, or are expected from, the proposed activity, the
Township may deny an exemption.
(3) The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any development activity the Township
concludes may pose a threat to public health and safety or the
environment or is a cause of pollution to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
D. Exemptions from any provision permitted by this section shall not
relieve the applicant from all other requirements of this chapter, except
where identified.
A. Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable local, state or federal code, rule,
regulation, act, or ordinance. To the extent that this chapter imposes
more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater management,
the specific requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
Township's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other Township ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain the requirements of this chapter addressing state
water quality requirements.
§ 132-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-9
1:363
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Township
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 132-9 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-9
1:364
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 132-10. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other similar entity.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or
maintained."
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activity and the natural
processes of a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture,
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
also, the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be
more or less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, equitable owner, tenant, or
contractor who, with written consent of the landowner, has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated activities as defined
in § 132-4 of this chapter, including his heirs, successors, and assigns.
§ 132-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-10
1:365
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of
two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In
this chapter, "nonstructural BMPs or measures" refers to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
waterways, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BMP MANUAL (Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual) - December 2006 and Most Recent Revisions) — Stormwater
structures, facilities and techniques to ensure effective stormwater
management to minimize the adverse impacts of stormwater on
groundwater and surface water resources to support and sustain the
social, economic and environmental quality of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Montgomery County Conservation
District, operating pursuant to the Conservation District Law [3 P.S.
§ 851(c)], and which has the authority under a delegation agreement
executed with PADEP to administer and enforce all or a portion of the
regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works which carries a
stream under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Township involved with the
administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter
by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the
§ 132-10 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-10
1:366
design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also refer
to "return period."
DETENTION BASIN — A water impoundment which creates temporary
water surface during rain events, made by constructing a dam or
embankment or by excavating a pit, for the purpose of detaining runoff
water for a period of time and releasing it slowly into the ground
or into its natural watercourse until the temporary water surface is
extinguished and the area is dry.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of this commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, landowner, tenant, partnership, association,
corporation, or other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent
thereof, that undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed. Also refer to "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWN-SLOPE PROPERTY BOUNDARY — That portion of the property
line of the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such
that overland, stream channel, swale, or pipe flow from the site would
be directed towards it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to transmit stormwater runoff, and shall include
streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — An area recorded, or to be recorded, in
the Montgomery County Recorder of Deeds Office, secured for the
preservation of natural drainageways, stream corridors and perennial
and/or intermittent streams, and for man-made drainage facilities
related thereto.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township after the
drainage plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior to or with
the final Township approval.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater
management system, if any, to be used for a given development site, the
content requirements of which are established in § 132-18.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials. Earth
disturbance activity is subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
92,102 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.103
102. Editor's Note: See now 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a.
§ 132-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-10
1:367
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is
worn away by water, wind, ice, chemical action, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN (E&S Plan)
— A plan which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation pursuant to 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The dominant land cover during the fiveyear
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity. If the
initial condition of the site is crop or farmed land, the land use shall
be considered as "pasture" for the purpose of stormwater management
calculations.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Refer to Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 153 of the Township Code.
FLOODWAY — Refer to Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 153 of the Township Code.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, channel, swale, or
diversion ridge. The space is required as a safety margin.
GRADE — (1) A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground,
showing the degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface, specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein;
(2) The proposed finished elevation of the surface of a roadbed, top of
an embankment or bottom of an excavation.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually
broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to
conduct surface water from cropland or developed areas.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies through natural seepage or man-made
seepage/infiltration structures.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare
soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and
103. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 132-10 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-10
1:368
provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or the Montgomery County Conservation District. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surface
area shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, parking areas,
driveways, roads, and sidewalks. Any areas containing concrete,
asphalt, compacted stone, compacted soils, or other equivalent surfaces
shall be considered impervious surface within this definition. In
addition, other areas determined by the Township Engineer to be
impervious within the meaning of this definition shall be classified
as impervious surface. Any area initially designated to be gravel or
crushed stone shall be regarded as impervious surface. Decks, parking
areas, and driveway areas are not counted as impervious areas if they
do not prevent infiltration.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to collect and
impound runoff so it seeps into the ground (including but not limited to
french drains, seepage pits, seepage trenches, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain; a structure at the
diversion end of a conduit; the upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks,
such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land.
(3) The following activities are excluded from this definition:
§ 132-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-10
1:369
LAND/EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving removing,
grading, tilling, digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation
or any other activity that causes an alteration to the natural condition
of the land.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MAXIMUM WATER DEPTH — The depth of water in the basin measured
from the lowest finished grade elevation of the basin to the maximum
water surface elevation during the one-hundred-year storm event.
MS4-MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — Pursuant to
40 CFR 122.26(b)(8), municipal separate storm sewer system is a
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains): i) owned or operated by a state, city,
town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body
(created to or pursuant to state law), including special districts under
state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage
district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian
tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency
under section 208 of the Clean Water Act104 that discharges into waters
of the United States; ii) designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater; iii) which is not a combined sewer; and iv) which is not part
of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
or watercourse from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not
result from discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances or origin.
The conversion of an existing single-family dwelling, detached
dwelling or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more
than three residential units, unless such units are intended to
be a condominium;
(a)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building; or
(b)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For purposes of this subsection, an
amusement park is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by proper authorities.
(c)
104. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 132-10 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-10
1:370
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act,105 which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS - USDA — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes flowing partly full (for computational purposes).
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point
where the Township's storm sewer system (MS4) discharges to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater
or artificial drain.
PADEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARCEL — A designated parcel, tract or area of land, established by
a plat, or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum flow rate of stormwater runoff
from a specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Towamencin
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.106
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the Township are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — A professional engineer,
landscape architect, professional land surveyor, or other person
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation equation used to
estimate peak stormwater flow rate.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed; any development that requires
105. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
106. Editor's Note: See now 25 Pa. Code § 92a.2.
§ 132-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-10
1:371
demolition or removal of existing structures or impervious surfaces at
a site and replacement with new impervious surfaces. Maintenance
activities such as top-layer grinding and repaving are not considered
to be redevelopment. Interior remodeling projects and tenant
improvements are also not considered to be redevelopment. Utility
trenches in streets are not considered redevelopment unless more than
50% of the street width, including shoulders, is removed and repaved.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that may have
an impact on stormwater runoff, contribute nonstormwater discharges
to a regulated small MS4 and that which are specified in § 132-4 of this
chapter.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
92,107 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law;108 a
construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of
the land, including land clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations,
embankments, land development, agricultural plowing or tilling,
operation of animal heavy use areas, timber harvesting activities, road
maintenance activities, oil and gas activities, well drilling, mineral
extraction, and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil,
rock or earth materials. The implementation and maintenance of
erosion and sediment control BMPs are required to minimize the
potential for accelerated erosion and sedimentation, including for those
activities which disturb less than 5,000 square feet. A written erosion
control plan is required for activities that disturb 5,000 square feet or
more of land.
RETENTION BASIN — An aboveground stormwater runoff storage
facility with a permanent water surface elevation.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent-chance).
RIPARIAN CORRIDOR — Those lands adjacent to designated streams,
wetlands, pond/lake areas, and lands adjacent to designated
intermittent watercourses within Towamencin Township. Riparian
Corridor Zone 1 shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide measured
horizontally on both sides from the top of bank of the identified
waterway. Clear cutting of trees, select cutting of trees, and clearing
of other vegetation is prohibited in Zone 1 unless approved by the
Township.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
107. Editor's Note: See now 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a.
108. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 132-10 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-10
1:372
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter
is accumulated or deposited by the movement of wind, water, or by
gravity. Once this matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water),
it is usually referred to as "sediment."
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or introduction of
sediment into the surface waters of the Commonwealth.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground for the purpose of groundwater
recharge.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a swale, stream channel or a pipe.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of stormwater flow
runoff computation developed by the NRCS that is based on relating
soil type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called a "curve
number" (CN).
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the Soil
Conservation Service into four runoff categories. The groups range
from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D
soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin, which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under the
Clean Streams Law109 and state regulations, protection of designated
and existing stream uses (refer to 25 Pa. Code Chapters 93 and 96),
including:
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such
as cold water fishery or potable water supply, which are listed
in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and
maintained, under state regulations.
(1)
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
of whether they have been designated in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.
Regulated earth disturbance activities must be designed to protect
and maintain existing uses and maintain the level of water quality
necessary to protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and
maintain water quality in special protection streams.
(2)
109. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 132-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-10
1:373
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. Refer
to "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources to a downstream
outlet, but exclude domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — A detention basin or
retention basin.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES —
Is abbreviated as "BMPs" throughout this chapter. Also refer to "best
management practices."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and
retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (DRAINAGE PLAN) — A plan
prepared by the developer or his representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site of interest in
accordance with this chapter. "Stormwater management plan" shall be
considered the same as "drainage plan" where referenced throughout
this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure, as
defined by 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, which encloses a regulated water
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants, such as sediment, and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to
protect the streambank, streambed and structural integrity of the
waterway to prevent these impacts.
(3)
§ 132-10 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-10
1:374
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or
channels of conveyance of surface waters, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — Refer to "forest management timber
operations."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point
of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of
overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOWNSHIP — Towamencin Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water; river; brook; creek; or a channel
or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
surface water of the commonwealth.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas, which meet
the characteristics and criteria established by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, the U.S. Army Corp of
Engineers and/or the Pennsylvania Fish and Wildlife Service.
§ 132-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-10
1:375

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 132-11. General requirements.
A. All regulated activities in the Township which do not fall under the
exemption criteria shown in § 132-5 shall submit a drainage plan
consistent with this chapter to the Township for review. These criteria
shall apply to the total proposed development even if development is to
take place in stages. The starting point from which to consider tracts as
parent tracts is February 25, 2004. All impervious surface area
constructed on or after February 25, 2004, shall be considered
cumulatively. Impervious surface area existing on the parent tract prior
to this date shall not be considered in cumulative impervious surface
area calculations for determining exemption applicability. No regulated
activities shall commence until the Township issues written approval of
a drainage plan, demonstrating compliance with the requirements of
this chapter, or issues a building or zoning permit where a proposed
activity is exempt from the requirements of this chapter related to
preparation of a drainage plan.
B. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law.110 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual) dated March 2012, as amended and
updated.
C. All regulated activities shall be designed in a manner to protect health,
safety, and property and meet water quality goals of this chapter by
minimizing disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded areas,
maintaining or extending riparian buffers, preventing erosive flow
conditions in natural flow pathways, minimizing thermal impacts to
surface waters of the commonwealth, and by disconnecting impervious
surfaces by directing stormwater runoff over pervious areas wherever
possible. Stormwater management facilities/BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained with all regulated activities to
meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean
Streams Law, and the Storm Water Management Act.111
D. To the maximum extent practicable, all regulated activities shall be
designed in a manner to incorporate techniques for low impact
development practices described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual.
110. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
111. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-11
1:377
E. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities, stormwater BMPs or open channels
consistent with this chapter.
F. The existing points of concentrated drainage flow that discharge onto
an adjacent downstream property shall not be altered without written
consent of the affected property owner(s) in the form of a drainage
easement. The Township Engineer shall determine the length and width
of the drainage easement as well as the extent of the properties from
which written consent must be obtained by the developer or applicant.
An increase in runoff shall be subject to review for the effect of
increased flow rate and velocity on the downstream receiving
stormwater facilities to evaluate the potential for flooding and erosion.
The applicant must provide supporting calculations showing a "no
harm" condition relative to the same prior to approval by the Township
Engineer.
G. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as
diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If
diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the developer must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge. The developer shall provide documentation indicating that
permission has been obtained from the affected downstream property
owner(s) for the purpose of discharging formerly diffused flow in a
concentrated manner onto the property owner's property and/or
improving the downstream off-site stormwater facilities as directed by
the Township Engineer.
H. Stormwater runoff peak rate control.
(1) In the design of stormwater management facilities,
postdevelopment rates of runoff from any regulated activity shall
not exceed 75% of the peak rates of runoff prior to development for
two- and ten-year-frequency storms and 100% of the peak rates of
runoff prior to development for the twenty-five-, fifty-, and onehundred-
year frequency storms. In all other cases where
unretained stormwater directly discharges from the site by
bypassing the stormwater management facilities, the
postdevelopment runoff rate shall not exceed the predevelopment
runoff rate.
(2) For all regulated activities within the Township, the tributary area
discharging drainage to any location along the site property
boundary shall not increase by more than 25% over the
predevelopment condition without written approval from the
§ 132-11 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-11
1:378
adjacent affected property owner(s). The preceding requirements
shall apply to each location of concentrated or diffused drainage
discharge from the development site.
(3) For redevelopment sites, one of the following minimum design
parameters shall be accomplished, whichever is most appropriate
for the given site conditions as determined by the Township
Engineer:
(a) Conform to the full requirements of this chapter.
(b) Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 20%
based upon a comparison of existing impervious surface area
to proposed impervious surface area.
(4) For all regulated activities within the Neshaminy Creek Watershed,
postdevelopment rates of runoff shall not exceed those peak rates
identified in Appendix 132F of this chapter.
I. Where the area of a site being impacted by a proposed development
activity not associated with a subdivision or land development differs
significantly from the total site area, only the proposed disturbed area
and other areas compacted due to construction activity shall be subject
to the peak release rate criteria of § 132-11H. The postdevelopment
runoff rate from unimpacted or undisturbed areas that do not flow into
or are bypassing the stormwater management facilities shall not exceed
the predevelopment runoff rate.
J. Whenever a watercourse is located within a development site, it shall
remain open in the natural state and location and shall not be piped,
impeded, or altered (except for road crossings), and drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, the removal of trees/vegetation, and any
alterations that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any
portion of the easement. The width of the easement shall be defined as
the Riparian Corridor Zone 1 limits, a minimum of 25 feet wide,
measured horizontally on both sides from the top of the bank of the
identified watercourse. Also, the property owner shall be responsible
for maintenance of vegetation within the easement as governed by the
requirements referenced under the definition of the riparian corridor.
For all subdivisions and land developments, the developer shall
stabilize all eroded stream/channel beds and banks and obtain all
permits necessary from PADEP to do so. The developer must submit
pictorial documentation of existing stream/channel banks to determine
whether existing banks must be stabilized.
K. For all regulated activities proposed in conjunction with a subdivision
and land development, whether or not those disturbance activities are
adjacent to a watercourse, sediment-reducing best management
practices (BMPs) must be provided to the watercourse in a manner
approved by the Township Engineer. Calculations must be included with
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-11
1:379
the subdivision and land development application which document the
amount of sediment expected to be removed from the watercourse on a
yearly basis (as defined pursuant to the Pennsylvania BMP Manual) as
a result of the proposed BMPs.
L. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval of the Township Engineer and by PADEP
through the Joint U.S. Army Corps of Engineers/PADEP Stream
Encroachment application or, where deemed appropriate by PADEP,
through the general permit process.
M. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located in or adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth
or wetlands shall be subject to approval by PADEP through the joint
permit application process or, where deemed appropriate by PADEP, the
general permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands
may be involved, it is the responsibility of the developer or his agent to
show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands;
otherwise approval to work in the area must be obtained from PADEP.
N. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
O. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are required, where soil
conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention
facilities. Soil conditions that are not considered suitable are identified
in § 132-12. Sinkhole-prone areas where karst bedrock exists and steep
slope areas as defined by Towamencin Township Code, Chapter 153,
Zoning, are not considered suitable for infiltration BMPs.
P. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and be located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features
while still meeting the other requirements of this chapter. As a selection
guide and design references for developing these methods, the
applicants' designers should use the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual.
Q. Roof drains must not be connected to streets or sanitary sewers. They
should be connected to storm sewers or roadside ditches only when
necessary and only when they discharge to infiltration or vegetative
stormwater BMPs. Infiltration/percolation of stormwater should be
provided by the means of dry wells, seepage or infiltration pits where
conditions permit.
R. Prohibition against nonstormwater discharges.
§ 132-11 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-11
1:380
(1) Prohibited discharges.
(a) No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the
Township's regulated small MS4, or discharges into surface
waters of the commonwealth, which are not composed entirely
of stormwater, except as provided in § 132-11R(1)(b) below, or
discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
(b) Discharges which may be allowed based on a finding by the
Township that the discharges do not significantly contribute to
pollution to the regulated small MS4 or to surface waters of the
Commonwealth are:
[1] Discharges from firefighting activities.
[2] Potable water sources, including waterline and fire
hydrant flushing.
[3] Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing
drains.
[4] Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
[5] Lawn watering.
[6] Irrigation drainage.
[7] Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill
material has been removed) and where detergents are not
used.
[8] Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
[9] Air-conditioning condensate.
[10]Water from individual residential car washing.
[11] Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
[12] Springs.
[13] Uncontaminated groundwater.
[14]Water from crawl space pumps or sump pumps.
[15] Diverted stream flows.
(c) In the event that the Township or PADEP determines that any
of the discharges identified in § 132-11R(1)(b) significantly
contribute pollutants to the regulated small MS4 or surface
waters of the commonwealth, the Township or PADEP will
notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-11
1:381
(d) Upon notice provided by the Township or PADEP under
§ 132-11R(1)(c), the discharger will have a reasonable time, as
determined by the Township, to cease the discharge consistent
with the degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
(e) Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's
responsibilities under state law.
(2) Prohibited connections. The following connections are prohibited,
except as provided in § 132-11R(1) above:
(a) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows any nonstormwater discharge,
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
enter the regulated small MS4 or the surface waters of the
commonwealth, and any connections to the storm drain system
from indoor waste water drains and sinks; and
(b) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the regulated small MS4 which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and
approved by the Township.
S. Hot spots.
(1) Hot spots are sites where the land use or activity produces a higher
concentration of trace metals, hydrocarbons, or priority pollutants
than normally found in urban runoff. Use of infiltration BMPs is
prohibited on hot spot land use areas. Examples of hot spots
include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
(b) Vehicle fueling stations.
(c) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
(d) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
(e) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
(f) Industrial sites (based on Standard Industrial Codes defined by
the U.S. Department of Labor).
(g) Marinas (service and maintenance).
(h) Outdoor liquid container storage.
(i) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
(j) Public works storage areas.
(k) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
(l) Commercial container nursery.
§ 132-11 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-11
1:382
§ 132-12. Volume controls, water quality requirements, and
infiltration BMPs.
(m) Other land uses and activities as designated by the Township.
(2) Stormwater runoff from hot spot land uses shall be pretreated. In
no case may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement. Guidance regarding acceptable methods of
pretreatment is located in The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual.
T. Additional stormwater management criteria applicable to properties
within the Neshaminy Creek Watershed. For regulated activities within
the Neshaminy Creek Watershed, the additional stormwater
management provisions identified in Appendix 132F of this chapter
shall be applicable.
U. Regulated activities requiring a drainage permit must comply with the
environmental performance standards of the Towamencin Township
Code, Chapter 153, Article VI, § 153-616.
A. For all regulated activities not exempt from preparation and submission
of a drainage plan pursuant to § 132-5 of this chapter, water volume
controls shall be implemented. Postdevelopment total runoff volume
shall not be increased from predevelopment total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation. The Design Storm Method, which requires detailed
stormwater runoff modeling based on site conditions, shall be utilized
to calculate the volume of runoff that must either be reused,
evapotranspired, or infiltrated through structural or nonstructural
means. Water volume controls will mitigate increased runoff impacts,
protect stream channel morphology, maintain groundwater recharge,
and contribute to water quality improvements. The low impact
development practices provided in the Pennsylvania BMP Manual shall
be utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent
practicable. For regulated activities within the Neshaminy Creek
Watershed, the volume control criteria identified in Appendix 132F112 of
this chapter shall be applicable.
B. The applicant must demonstrate how the required volume is controlled
through stormwater best management practices (BMPs) which shall
provide the means necessary to capture, reuse, evaporate, transpire or
infiltrate the total runoff volume.
C. Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall
be selected based on the suitability of soils and site conditions.
Infiltration BMPs shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
112. Editor's Note: Appendix 132F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-12
1:383
(1) A minimum soil depth of 18 inches between the bottom of the
infiltration BMPs and the top of bedrock or seasonally high water
table (i.e., "limiting zone"). The minimum required separation
between the limiting zone may be increased, if required by the
Township, should project specific conditions exist (such as
anticipated increased contaminants) which dictate greater
prevention of groundwater contamination.
(2) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional stormwater
load and dewater completely as determined by field tests. The
minimum acceptable infiltration rate for field-tested soils shall be
0.2 inches/hour (in/hr). A safety factor of 50% shall be applied to
field-tested infiltration rates to determine the rate to be utilized for
design purposes (e.g., for soil which measured 0.4 in/hr in the field,
the BMP design shall use 0.2 in/hr to insure safe infiltration rates
after construction).
(3) All infiltration facilities shall be designed to completely infiltrate
runoff volume within two days (48 hours) from the peak of the
design storm.
(4) When infiltration methods such as seepage pits, beds, or trenches
are proposed, the locations of existing and proposed septic tanks,
infiltration areas, and wells must be shown. A separation distance
of no less than 20 feet shall be provided between any septic system
and any facility used for stormwater management and infiltration.
(5) A minimum of 30 feet of undisturbed soil shall separate the
foundation wall of any building and an infiltration BMP.
(6) The infiltration system shall have positive overflow controls to
prevent storage within one foot of the finished surface of grade.
(7) Surface inflows shall be designed to prevent direct discharge of
sediment into the infiltration system.
(8) Special attention shall be paid to proper installation of infiltrationoriented
stormwater management systems during the construction
and to careful avoidance of soil compaction during site
development. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be
protected from sedimentation and compaction during the
construction phase, so as to maintain their maximum infiltration
capacity.
(9) Caution shall be exercised where salt or chloride would be a
pollutant since soils do little to filter this pollutant and it may
contaminate the groundwater. The qualified design professional
shall evaluate the possibility of groundwater contamination from
the proposed infiltration/recharge facility if it is anticipated that
such pollutants or similar pollutants may enter the facility.
§ 132-12 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-12
1:384
(10) The drainage plan must include safeguards against groundwater
contamination for uses which may cause groundwater
contamination, should there be a mishap or spill. The Township
may require the installation of a mitigative layer or an impermeable
liner in the BMP and/or detention basins where the possibility of
groundwater contamination exists. A detailed hydrogeologic
investigation may be required by the Township. If impermeable
liner or other containment measures are required to prevent
contaminated runoff from infiltrating into the ground, additional
measures conforming to the requirements of this chapter must be
implemented to improve the quality of stormwater runoff from the
development site.
(11) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization.
(12) The requirements for volume control and infiltration are applied to
all disturbed areas, even if they are ultimately to be a pervious or
permeable land use given the extent to which development-related
disturbance leads to compaction of the soils and reduces their
infiltrative capacity.
D. A soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to determine the
suitability of infiltration facilities. All applicants proposing regulated
activities that are not exempt from preparation and submission of a
drainage plan pursuant to § 132-5 of this chapter are required to
perform a detailed soils evaluation by a qualified geotechnical engineer,
geologist and/or soil scientist, in accordance with Appendix 132C113 of
this chapter, which at a minimum addresses soil permeability, depth to
bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation, and subgrade stability.
The general process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without
conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or hydraulic
conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration surface)
to determine the appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate.
Percolation tests are not recommended for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration BMP based on field-determined capacity at
the level of the proposed infiltration surface and based on the
safety factor of 50%.
113. Editor's Note: Appendix 132C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 132-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-12
1:385
§ 132-13. Design and construction criteria for stormwater
management facilities; best management practices.
(4) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed, it must be
demonstrated that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots
identified.
A. Stormwater runoff which may result from regulated activities identified
in § 132-4 shall be controlled by permanent stormwater runoff BMPs
that will provide the required standards within Article III. The methods
of stormwater control or best management practices (BMPs) which may
be used to meet the required standards are described in this chapter
and the "Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practice Manual,"
December 30, 2006, as amended. The choice of BMPs is not limited to
the ones appearing in this chapter and the manual; however, any
selected BMP must meet or exceed the runoff peak rate requirements of
this chapter.
B. Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
C. Collection system standards.
(1) Curb inlets. Curb inlets shall be located at curb tangents on the
uphill side of street intersections, and at intervals along the
curbline to control the maximum amount of encroachment of runoff
on the roadway pavement so that same does not exceed a width of
four feet during the design storm event. Design and location of
curb inlets shall be approved by the Township.
(2) Pipe materials. All storm sewer piping shall be Class III reinforced
concrete pipe, except when pipe class and strength is required to
be increased in accordance with PennDOT specifications. Piping
shall be saw-cut at ends, as needed, and not hammered or broken.
All pipe joints and lift holes must be mortared except where
designed for infiltration.
(3) Minimum pipe size. Minimum pipe diameter shall be 15 inches (or
an equivalent flow area of 1.23 square feet).
(4) Inlet and manhole construction. Inlet and manhole castings and
concrete construction shall be equivalent to PennDOT design
standards. Manhole castings and covers shall have the word
"STORM" cast in two-inch-high letters on the top of the cover. All
inlet grates shall be "bicycle safe" heavy-duty structural steel. All
storm sewer inlets must be identified with a storm drain marker
("environmental" type). Storm drain markers shall be stainless
steel affixed to the inlet hood with adhesive, rivets or bolts.
(Markers may be bolted to the grate in off-road locations). Markers
shall have a minimum diameter of 3 1/2 inches and include "No
§ 132-12 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-13
1:386
Dumping - Drains to Waterway" and a fish symbol. Alternate
designs/sizes may be used if approved by the Township.
(5) Open-end pipes must be fitted with concrete endwalls or wing walls
in accordance with PennDOT standards.
(6) Flow velocity. Stormwater collection systems shall be designed to
produce a minimum velocity of three feet per second when flowing
full. The maximum permissible velocity shall be 15 feet per second.
Pipe slopes shall not be less than 1/2 of 1% (0.005 ft/ft), with the
exception that terminal sections of pipe shall have a minimum slope
of 1% (0.01 ft/ft).
(7) Inlets and manholes shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding 300
feet, and shall be located wherever branches are connected or sizes
are changed, and wherever there is a change in alignment or
grade. For drainage lines of at least 36 inches diameter, inlets and
manholes may be spaced at intervals of 400 feet. Manholes shall be
equipped with open-grate lids.
(8) Stormwater collection facilities shall be designed and constructed
to intercept concentrated runoff prior to discharge over public/
private rights-of-way, sidewalks, streets, and driveways.
(9) The capacity of all Type "C" inlets shall be based on a maximum
surface flow to the inlets of four cfs, calculated based on the onehundred-
year-frequency design storm event. If the surface flow to
an inlet exceeds four cfs, additional inlets shall be provided
upstream of the inlet to intercept the excessive surface flow. The
maximum flow to Type "C" inlets located in low points (such as sag
vertical curves) shall include the overland flow directed to the inlet
as well as all bypass runoff from upstream inlets. The bypass flow
from upstream inlets shall be calculated using inlet efficiency
curves included in PennDOT Design Manual Part 2, latest edition. A
Type "C" inlet at a low point of a paved area may be designed to
accept a maximum of six cubic feet per second (cfs). Type "M"
inlets shall be designed to accept a maximum surface flow of six cfs
based on the one-hundred-year-frequency design storm event,
unless otherwise approved by the Township. Double inlets will not
be permitted where additional pipe and inlets can be placed
upstream to intercept excessive surface flow. A maximum of 12 cfs
shall be permitted to be collected by a Type "M" inlet located in an
isolated pervious area, provided the designer can verify that such
an inlet would not cause stormwater to accumulate on any
adjoining public or private property, outside of a storm sewer
easement, and that the depth of the accumulated stormwater
would not exceed 12 inches.
(10) A minimum drop of two inches shall be provided between the inlet
and outlet pipe invert elevations within all inlets and manholes.
When varying pipe sizes enter an inlet or manhole, the elevation of
§ 132-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-13
1:387
crown of all pipes shall be matched. Storm sewer pipes shall enter
and exit the sides of inlet boxes and shall not encroach into the
corner, wherever possible.
(11) Stormwater pipes shall have a minimum depth of cover of 18 inches
(including over the bell) or as designated by the American Concrete
Pipe Association (whichever is greater), and in no case shall any
part of the pipe project into the road subbase or curb. Where cover
is restricted, equivalent pipe arches may be specified in lieu of
circular pipe, to achieve required cover. Stormwater pipes
conveying swale flow under driveway crossings shall have a
minimum cover of 12 inches, including over the bell, but in no case
shall the cover be less than that required for the anticipated traffic
loading. For driveway culverts, cover may be less than 12 inches if
the design engineer verifies such pipe has sufficient strength for
the anticipated vehicle loading. Where cover is restricted, concrete
trench drain with bolt-down metal grate may be used.
(12) The capacity of all stormwater pipes shall be calculated utilizing
the Manning Equation for open channel flow as applied to closed
conduit flow. The Manning's roughness coefficient shall be 0.13 for
all concrete pipe. In cases where pressure flow may occur, the
hydraulic grade line shall be calculated throughout the storm
sewer system to verify that at least one foot of freeboard will be
provided in all inlets and manholes for the design storm event.
(13) Culverts shall be designed based on procedures contained in
Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts, HDS #5, U.S. Department
of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration. Where
pressure flow is anticipated in storm sewer pipes (non-open
channel flow), the applicant's designer shall be required to
calculate the elevation of the hydraulic grade line through the
storm sewer system. Wherever the hydraulic grade line elevation
exceeds the pipe crown elevation for the design flow, pipes with
watertight joints must be specified.
(14) Storm sewer structures (e.g., endwalls, inlets, pipe sections, etc.)
may not be located on top of or within 10 feet of electric,
communication, water, sanitary sewer, or gas services and/or mains
and structures, unless approval is received from the Township and
the authority or utility having jurisdiction over same.
(15) Stormwater pipes must be oriented at right angles to electric,
water, sanitary sewer, and gas utilities when crossing above or
beneath same. Crossing angles of less than 90° will only be
permitted at the discretion of the Township. When skewed
crossings are permitted, interior angles between alignment of the
storm sewer pipe and utility may not be less than 45°. Vertical and
horizontal design of storm sewers must be linear.
§ 132-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-13
1:388
(16) Roadway underdrain is required along both sides of all proposed
roadways, existing roadways proposed to be widened, and within
existing or proposed roadside swales as directed by the Township.
(17) Where a public storm sewer system is not located within a right-ofway
or dedicated public property, a twenty-foot-wide easement
shall be established to encompass the storm sewer system. For
multiple pipes or utilities, the width of the easement shall be a
minimum of 30 feet.
(18) A minimum of one foot of freeboard, between the inlet grate and
the design flow elevation, shall be provided in all storm sewer
systems (inlets and manholes) for the one-hundred-year-frequency
design storm event.
(19) Stormwater roof drains and sump pumps shall not discharge water
directly onto a sidewalk or a street and shall be constructed to
discharge to a dry well/seepage pit or above ground entirely on the
subject property, except where such discharge could flow across a
sidewalk or onto a street. If approved by the Township Engineer,
roof drains and sump pumps may be discharged directly to a storm
sewer system if such system discharges to a stormwater BMP or
water quality facility.
D. Open swales and gutters. Open swales shall be designed on the basis of
Manning's Formula as indicated for collection systems with the
following considerations:
(1) Roughness coefficient. The roughness coefficient shall be 0.040 for
earth swales.
(2) Bank slopes. Slopes for swale banks shall not be steeper than one
vertical to four horizontal.
(3) Flow velocity. The maximum velocity of flow as determined by
Manning's Equation shall not exceed the allowable velocities as
shown in the following table for the specific type of material, unless
otherwise approved by the Township and the Montgomery County
Conservation District. (NOTE: The source of the following design
criteria is the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Soil and Water Conservation Publication,
Erosion and Sediment Control Program Manual.
Table 132-13-1 Allowable Velocity
Allowable Velocity
Material
Velocity in Feet per
Second
(fps)
Well established grass on good soil
Short pliant bladed grass 4.0 to 5.0
§ 132-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-13
1:389
Table 132-13-1 Allowable Velocity
Allowable Velocity
Material
Velocity in Feet per
Second
(fps)
Bunch grass - soil exposed 2.0 to 3.0
Stiff stemmed grass 3.0 to 4.0
Earth without vegetation
Fine sand or silt 1.0
Ordinary firm loam 2.0 to 3.0
Stiff clay 3.0 to 5.0
Clay and gravel 4.0 to 5.0
Coarse gravel 4.0 to 5.0
Soft shale 5.0 to 6.0
Shoulders
Earth (as defined above)
Stabilized 6.0
Paved 10.0 to 15.0
(4) Swales shall be stabilized with biodegradable erosion control
matting to permit establishment of permanent vegetation. Swales
shall be of such shape and size to effectively contain the onehundred-
year, Rational Method design storm, or greater, and to
conform to all other specifications of the Township.
(5) To minimize sheet flow of stormwater across lots located on the
lower side of roads or streets, and to divert flow away from building
areas, the cross-section of the street as constructed shall provide
for parallel ditches or swales or curb on the lower side which shall
discharge only at drainage easements, unless otherwise approved
by the Township.
(6) Gutters and swales adjacent to road paving shall be permitted to
carry a maximum flow of four cubic feet per second prior to
discharge away from the street surface, unless it is proven to the
satisfaction of the Township by engineering calculations that the
road slopes or other factors would allow higher gutter or swale
capacity.
(7) Flows larger than those permitted in gutters and roadside swales
may be conveyed in swales outside the required road right-of-way
in separate drainage easements, or may be conveyed in pipes or
culverts inside or outside the required road right-of-way.
§ 132-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-13
1:390
(8) Existing and proposed swales shall be provided with underdrains
as deemed necessary by the Township should overland seepage
result in potential maintenance problems. Underdrains must
discharge into a natural drainage channel or stormwater
management system.
(9) Where drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away
from buildings, they shall be sodded, landscaped, or otherwise
protected as required and shall be of a slope, shape, and size
conforming with the requirements of the Township. Concentration
of surface water runoff shall be permitted only in swales,
watercourses, retention or detention basins, bioretention areas, or
other areas designed to meet the objectives of this chapter.
E. Bridge and culvert design. Any proposed bridge or culvert to convey
flow within a watercourse, perennial stream, intermittent stream or
ephemeral stream shall be designed in accordance with the following
principals:
(1) Culverts and bridges shall be designed with an open bottom to
maintain natural sediment transport and bed roughness, avoiding
acceleration of water velocity above the natural (preexisting)
condition. Rock (rip rap) lining (native material if possible) shall be
installed within the culvert as needed to prevent erosion within the
structure. Approximate top of rock lining must be at the level of the
existing stream bottom so as to maintain normal water level and
unimpeded movement of native animal species.
(2) The bottom of the opening shall be designed to match the bankfull
channel condition in terms of width and depth. The cross-sectional
area of the bankfull channel (measured at a reference location
upstream of the structure) shall be matched with area in the
crossing structure.
(3) Above the bankfull elevation, the width shall increase a minimum of
30% to disperse the energy of higher flow volumes and avoid
undermining of the supporting structure by secondary currents.
(4) The total cross-sectional area of the structure opening must be
equal to or greater than the flood-prone area (cross-sectional
stream area at a depth of twice the maximum bankfull depth,
measured at a reference location upstream of the structure). The
flood-prone area is approximately equal to the area flooded by a
fifty-year return flood.
(5) All bridges, culverts, and drainage channels shall be designed to
convey a flow rate equal to a one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
storm as defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Technical Release No. 55. All bridges and
culverts shall be designed to convey the one-hundred-year design
storm without increasing the extent and depth of the one-hundredyear
floodplain.
§ 132-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-13
1:391
F. Storm sewer design.
(1) Design flow rate.
(a) The storm sewer system shall be designed to carry the onehundred-
year frequency design storm peak flow rate. The
drainage area and runoff coefficient to each inlet shall be
indicated on the stormwater management plan. The onehundred-
year flow rate shall be determined by the Rational
Method formula, Q = CIA, where:
Q = Peak runoff rate measured in cubic feet per second
(cfs).
C = Runoff coefficient. The coefficient of stormwater
runoff includes many variables, such as ground slope,
ground cover, shape of drainage area, etc.
I = Intensity: average rainfall intensity in inches per hour
for a time equal to the time of concentration.
A = Area: drainage area in acres.
(b) Values for the rainfall intensity shall be based on NOAA Atlas
14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, rain data found in Table B-2 and
Figure B-2 of Appendix 132B of this chapter.114
(2) Consideration shall be given to future land use changes in the
drainage area in selecting the Rational ("C") coefficient. For
drainage areas containing several different types of ground cover, a
weighted value of "C" shall be used.
(3) In determining the peak flow rate to individual storm sewer inlets
(or other collection structures) the time of concentration method
(as referenced in § 132-14) shall be used for inlet drainage areas in
excess of one acre, unless otherwise approved by the Township. For
inlet drainage areas less than one acre, a five-minute time of
concentration shall be used unless otherwise approved by the
Township.
(4) In determining the required design flow rate through a storm
sewer piping system, if a five-minute time of concentration results
in a pipe size exceeding 30 inches (or equivalent flow area of 4.9
square feet), within any run of pipe, the time of concentration
approach may be used for sizing of pipes from that point on, by
adjusting the time of concentration.
(5) Overflow system. An overflow system shall be provided to carry all
bypass flow and/or flow in excess of storm sewer design capacity to
the detention basin (or other approved outlet point) when the
capacity of the storm sewer system is exceeded. Stormwater runoff
will not be permitted to surcharge from storm sewer structures.
114. Editor's Note: Appendix 132B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 132-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-13
1:392
G. Grading and drainage.
(1) After completion of rough grading, a minimum of six inches of
topsoil shall be returned to remaining disturbed areas prior to final
grading and seeding.
(2) Lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from buildings
and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools. Minimum 2%
slopes shall be maintained away from and around all structures.
Separation between the top of foundation wall (or slab) and final
grade shall comply with Township Building Code requirements.
(3) Construction. The developer shall construct and/or install such
drainage structures and/or pipe which are necessary to prevent
erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off such surface waters
to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural watercourse.
(4) Excavation. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in
slope than four horizontal to one vertical (4:1 = 25%), except under
one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope of steeper than 4:1, and a written
statement (certification) from a professional civil engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
experienced in erosion control, to this effect is submitted to the
Township Engineer for review. This statement shall indicate
the site has been inspected and that the deviation from the
slope specified herein will not result in injury to persons or
damage to property.
(b) A concrete, segmental block, or stone masonry wall,
constructed in accordance with Township requirements, is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
(5) Fill. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface
steeper in slope than four horizontal to one vertical (4:1 = 25%),
except under one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding, or erosion will not
result in property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property,
streets, alleys, or buildings.
(b) A written statement from a professional civil engineer, licensed
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in
erosion control, certifying the site has been inspected and that
the proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
endanger any property or result in property damage, is
submitted to and approved by the Township.
§ 132-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-13
1:393
(c) A concrete, segmental block, or stone masonry wall,
constructed in accordance with Township requirements, is
provided to support the face of the fill.
(6) Slopes and fences. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a
minimum of five feet from property or right-of-way lines of streets
or alleys in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without
encroaching on the abutting property. A protective fence shall be
required at the top of the wall (or embankment), pursuant to the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code,
where walls or slopes (steeper than two horizontal to one vertical)
are approved under the criteria in this chapter.
(7) Cleanup. All lots must be kept free of any debris or nuisances
whatsoever during construction.
(8) Design of erosion and sedimentation control facilities (particularly
stormwater/sediment basins) shall incorporate best management
practices as defined herein.
(9) Cut and fill operations shall be kept to a minimum. Wherever
feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and
supplemented. Cut and fills shall not endanger or otherwise
adversely impact adjoining property.
(10)No grading equipment shall be permitted to be loaded and/or
unloaded on a public street, and no grading equipment shall be
permitted to travel on or across a public street unless licensed for
operation on public thoroughfares.
(11) Grading equipment shall not be permitted to cross intermittent and
perennial streams. Temporary crossing shall only be permitted
where application is made, and approval is received, from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (where
applicable), the Montgomery County Conservation District, and
Towamencin Township.
(12) Design of energy dissipation for high-volume and/or high-velocity
discharge from storm sewer pipes and channels shall be in
accordance with Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 14,
"Hydraulic Design of Energy Dissipaters for Culverts and
Channels," as published by the Department of Transportation,
FHA, when deemed necessary by the Township, and as approved by
the Montgomery County Conservation District.
(13) To control the dissemination of mud and dirt onto public roads and
driveways, tire cleaning areas constructed of AASHTO #1 stone
(underlain by geotextile structural fabric) and conforming to
PADEP standards shall be installed at each point of access to the
site and individual lots (upon construction of internal streets in a
binder condition). When deemed necessary by the Township,
washing stations shall also be set up at every construction entrance
§ 132-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-13
1:394
in order to wash mud and dirt from exiting vehicles. Appropriate
measures must be taken to control runoff from such locations. The
developer shall be responsible for the placement of appropriate
signage identifying construction entrances and washing stations.
Construction entrances shall be maintained by the developer
during construction, as determined by the Township.
(14) In the event any mud and/or debris is transported from the site
onto a public roadway, the debris shall be removed immediately
and the roadway swept and/or washed as deemed necessary by the
Township at the owner's expense.
(15) Adequate provision shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavation and the sloping surfaces of
fills.
H. Stormwater detention/retention basins.
(1) If permanent ponds (retention basins) are proposed, the developer
shall demonstrate that such ponds are designed to protect the
public's health and safety. Should any stormwater management
facility require a dam safety permit under the PADEP Chapter 105
regulations, the facility shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning
dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger than a onehundred-
year event.
(2) During construction, duly authorized representatives of
Towamencin Township may enter at any reasonable time upon any
property within the Township to investigate whether construction
activity is in compliance with this chapter.
(3) When basins are provided, they shall be designed to utilize the
natural contours of the land whenever possible. When such design
is not practical, the construction of the basin shall utilize slopes as
flat as possible to blend the structure into the terrain. To minimize
the visual impact of detention basins, they shall be designed to
avoid the need for safety fencing. To meet this requirement,
detention basins shall be designed as follows:
(a) Maximum depth of detained runoff shall be 24 inches for a twoyear
or ten-year storm event.
(b) Maximum depth of detained runoff shall be 36 inches for a onehundred-
year storm event.
(c) The basin inflow and outflow structures shall not be located
directly across from each other and shall not be in close
proximity to one another. A length-to-width ratio in all
detention/retention basins and other such storage facilities of
at least 2:1 shall be provided to maximize the flow path
between the inflow point and the outlet structure. The distance
§ 132-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-13
1:395
between these two structures must be at least 50% of the
maximum length of the basin as measured at the top of berm
elevation. Alternatively, a means for extending the time of
surface flow from basin inflow point to basin outlet structure,
designed to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, may be
utilized.
(4) Except with the one-year design storm, basins shall be designed so
that they return to normal conditions within approximately 12
hours after the termination of the storm, unless the Township
determines that downstream conditions may warrant other design
criteria for stormwater release.
(5) Landscaping and planting in and around the perimeter of basins
shall be provided. Proposed planting shall also be in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,115 the Towamencin Township Engineering
Standards, and as recommended by the Township Engineer.
(6) If a stormwater management basin will serve as a temporary
sediment control device, the temporary sediment control measures
shall be shown, including perforated riser pipes or standboxes,
filter berms, cleanout stakes and other measures as may be
required by Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Chapter 102 Regulations. Plans for such facilities shall require
Montgomery County Conservation District approval prior to
implementation. Sedimentation basins shall be in place prior to any
earthmoving activities within their tributary drainage areas. A note
identifying the above criteria shall be on the erosion and
sedimentation control plan.
(7) Stormwater management basins shall be in place before the
creation of any new impervious surfaces on the site. As-built
drawings of the basins shall be submitted to the Township for
review. The basin shall not be considered functional until it is
proved by the developer that the basin meets the volume
requirements and the outflow characteristics of the original design
of the basin(s).
(8) Runoff shall not be directed to any infiltration structure until all
tributary drainage areas are stabilized.
(9) Where permanent retention (pond) facilities are proposed, there
shall be a safety ledge, 10 feet wide, no greater than 15 inches and
no less than 12 inches below the permanent water surface level.
(10) All basins shall have slopes of four horizontal to one vertical (4:1 =
25%), or flatter. The top or toe of any slope shall be located a
minimum of five feet from any property line. The maximum
115. Editor's Note: See Chapter 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 132-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-13
1:396
difference between the top of berm elevation and the invert
elevation of the outlet structure shall be seven feet.
(11) All portions of a detention basin bottom shall have a minimum slope
of 2%. For portions of basin bottoms with grades less than 2%, the
applicant shall provide a landscape design which minimizes
maintenance provisions and encourages infiltration. These
requirements may be altered when approved by the Township
Engineer.
(12) All basin embankments shall be placed in lifts not to exceed one
foot in thickness, and each lift shall be compacted to a minimum of
95% of Modified Proctor Density as established by ASTMD-1557.
Prior to proceeding to the next lift, the compaction shall be checked
by a soils engineer employed by the applicant/developer.
Compaction tests shall be run on the leading and trailing edge of
the berm along with the top of the berm. Verification of required
compaction shall be submitted to the Township prior to utilization
of any basin for stormwater management.
(13) Emergency overflow facilities/spillway shall be provided within
basins in order to convey basin inflow in excess of design flows, out
of the basin, or in the event the outlet structure becomes blocked
and is unable to convey flow. Emergency spillways discharging over
embankments shall be constructed of reinforced concrete
checkerblocks to protect the berm against erosion. Alternative
spillway erosion control lining may be utilized if approved by the
Township Engineer. The checkerblocks shall be backfilled with
topsoil and seeded. Checkerblock lining shall extend to the toe of
the embankment on the outside of the berm, and shall extend to an
elevation of three feet below the spillway crest on the inside of the
berm. Vegetated spillways may be utilized for spillways constructed
entirely on undisturbed ground (i.e., not discharging over fill
material). A dense cover of vegetation shall be rapidly established
in such spillways by sodding or seeding with a geotextile anchor.
The vegetated spillway must be stabilized before runoff is directed
to the basin. The minimum capacity of all emergency spillways
shall be equivalent to the peak flow rate of the one-hundred-year,
postdevelopment design storm (entering to the basin).
(14) In all cases, the discharge end of the basin shall be provided with a
properly designed outlet control structure (headwall, orifice
structure or other approved flow control structure), culvert pipe,
and endwall. Perforated riser pipes alone, without provision for
permanent outlet control structure (as stated above), and culvert
pipe are not permitted for permanent basins.
(15) The minimum top of basin berm width (at the design elevation)
shall be 10 feet. A cutoff trench (keyway) of impervious material
shall be provided under all embankments that require fill material.
§ 132-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-13
1:397
The cutoff trench shall be a minimum of eight feet wide and three
feet deep and have side slopes of one horizontal to one vertical.
(16) The minimum freeboard through the emergency spillway shall be
one foot. "Freeboard" is defined as the difference between the
design flow elevation through the spillway and the elevation of the
top of the settled basin berm.
(17) Anti-seep collars shall be installed around the pipe barrel and shall
be centered within the normal saturation zone of the berm. The
anti-seep collars and their connections to the pipe barrel shall be
watertight. The anti-seep collars shall be cast in place and extend a
minimum of two feet beyond the outside of the principal pipe
barrel. Precast collars shall be permitted if approved by the
Township. A minimum of two collars shall be installed on each basin
outlet pipe.
(18) A perforated sediment control structure, sized in accordance with
Montgomery County Conservation District requirements, shall be
provided at each basin outlet structure (if more than one is to be
utilized) for sediment control. Sediment control structures shall not
be removed until the entire area tributary to the basin has been
permanently stabilized and until approved by the Montgomery
County Conservation District.
(19) All basin outlet pipes shall be watertight reinforced concrete
having "O-Ring" joints. All joints shall be mortared. Crushed stone
bedding/backfill shall not be utilized through basin berms.
(20) The top of outlet structure box shall be at least six inches lower
than the elevation of the emergency spillway. Six inches, minimum,
is also required between the one-hundred-year water surface
elevation and the top of outlet structure box.
(21) Energy dissipating devices (rock lining/rip rap, or other approved
materials) shall be provided at all basin outlets and shall be sized in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Soil and Water Conservation Publication,
Erosion and Sediment Control Program Manual, latest revision.
(22) Stone gabion baskets or concrete or segmental block retaining
walls shall not be permitted for use in construction of detention/
retention basins.
(23) Access easement and stabilized drive to stormwater detention
facilities shall be provided for maintenance and operation. This
access easement shall be cleared and, when possible, be at least 20
feet in width. Multiple accesses shall be encouraged for major
facilities. The developer shall provide access easements and drives
of interlocked, reinforced pervious paving system (backfilled with
topsoil and seeded) or other similar paver acceptable to the
Township Engineer, over a six-inch bed of compacted PennDOT
§ 132-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-13
1:398
Type 3A coarse aggregate (or approved equivalent). Accessways
to basins shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and be no steeper
in slope than 10 feet horizontal to one foot vertical (10:1). In
addition, depressed curb and concrete apron shall be provided
where the accessway enters a street/driveway and the stabilized
driveway shall extend from the bottom of the interior basin berm
embankment to the point of access to the basin from a public
right-of-way or paved driveway within an access easement. Access
easements shall be owned and maintained by the individual lot
owner(s) or homeowner's association but shall be established to
permit access by Towamencin Township or its designee, for
emergency inspection and/or maintenance, at any reasonable time.
(24) If the basin is not designed to meet the requirements of
§ 132-13H3, a split-rail fence must be provided as follows:
(a) A level area (two-percent slope) eight feet in width shall be
provided on both the inside and outside of the fence, along the
entire length of the fence, for proper access by maintenance
equipment. The total width of this generally level area shall be
at least 16 feet.
(b) Each basin fence installation shall include two points of access
with ten-foot-wide self-closing, self-latch gates to allow for
maintenance equipment/vehicle access.
(c) Fences shall be split-rail consisting of locust posts (three rail),
four feet high, minimum, with assorted hardwood rails (eight
feet to 10 feet long), and epoxy-coated wire mesh (black or
green in color) installed on the outside of the fence.
(d) Split-rail fences shall also be required around any detention or
retention basin, where directed by Towamencin Township.
(25) All stormwater management facilities designed to permanently
retain water shall be constructed in a manner to allow such
facilities to be drained for periodic inspection or maintenance, as
approved by the Township Engineer.
I. General design requirements.
(1) Prior to finish grading of a development site and final overlay of
streets, roads, and driveways, temporary measures, acceptable to
the Township, shall be taken to ensure that all runoff intended to be
intercepted and collected by an inlet or other facility will be
collected. The design shall include such details, notes, or
specifications, including bituminous "eyebrows" at inlets, diversion
berms, etc.
(2) Water originating from other than natural sources, such as airconditioning
units, sump pumps, or other dry weather flow,
wherever practical and possible, shall be connected to a storm
§ 132-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-13
1:399
§ 132-14. Calculation methodology.
sewer, or street drainage structure, or other approved stormwater
conveyance facility that is designed as part of a stormwater
management BMP.
(3) All stormwater runoff and floodplain calculations and stormwater
management facilities design shall be prepared by a professional
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) When subdivisions or land developments are submitted to the
Township for approval in sections, a complete storm sewer design
for the proposed subdivision and land development shall be
submitted. The proposed design must include the entire tract and
not a portion.
(5) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
Township shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the occupancy or continuation of an adverse
hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed.
A. Any stormwater runoff calculations shall use generally accepted
calculation techniques that are based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex
Method. Table 132-14-1 summarizes acceptable computation methods.
Method must be selected by the applicant based on the individual
limitations and suitability of each method for a particular site. The
Rational Method may be used to estimate peak discharges from
drainage areas that contain less than 200 acres.
Table 132-14-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Designs
Method
Method
Developed By Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in
TR-55
HEC-1, HEC-HMS U.S. Army
Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State
University
Applicable where use of a
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary;
simpler than TR-20 or HEC-1
§ 132-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-14
1:400
Table 132-14-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Designs
Method
Method
Developed By Applicability
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
Applicable sites less than 200
acres, or as approved by the
Township Engineer
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the Township Engineer
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms according to the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0,
rain data corresponding to the Graterford 1E rain gage (No. 36-3437),
Schwenksville, Pennsylvania, as presented in Table B-1 of Appendix
132B of this chapter.116 For regulated activities within the Neshaminy
Creek Watershed, rain data corresponding to the Doylestown rain gage
(36-2221) shall be utilized. The SCS Type II rainfall curve data from
NOAA is listed in Figure B-1 in Appendix 132B of this chapter. This data
may also be directly retrieved from the NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2,
Version 3.0 website: hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds. If a hydrologic
computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is used for
stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be 24
hours.
C. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from
Table B-4 in Appendix 132B of this chapter.
D. Suggested runoff coefficients (C) for both existing and proposed
conditions for use in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table
B-4 in Appendix 132B of this chapter.
E. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate time of concentration for overland flow and
return periods from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, rain data
corresponding to the Graterford 1E rain gage (No. 36-3437),
Schwenksville, Pennsylvania, as presented in Table B-3 of Appendix
132B of this chapter. For regulated activities within the Neshaminy
Creek Watershed, rain data corresponding to the Doylestown rain gage
(36-2221) shall be utilized. The Rational Method rainfall curve data
from NOAA is listed in Figure B-2 in Appendix 132B of this chapter.
Times of concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the
116. Editor's Note: Appendix 132B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 132-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-14
1:401
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time
by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's Equation.
F. For the purposes of existing conditions flow rate determination for all
development activity, undeveloped land shall be considered as
"meadow" in good condition, unless the natural ground cover generates
a lower curve number (CN) or Rational "C" value (e.g., forest), as listed
in Tables B-2 and B-4 in Appendix 132B of this chapter. Wooded areas
shall use a ground cover of "woods in good condition." An area shall be
considered wooded if there is a contiguous canopy of trees existing over
an area of 1/4 acre or more.
G. For development and redevelopment sites, the ground cover used to
determine the existing conditions runoff volume and flow rate for the
developed portion of the site shall be based upon actual land cover
conditions. If the developed site contains impervious surfaces, 20% of
the impervious surface area shall be considered as "meadow" in good
condition in the model for existing conditions runoff volume and flow
rate.
H. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning Equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table B-5 in Appendix 132B of
this chapter.
I. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
J. The design of any stormwater management facilities intended to meet
the performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing
the design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage
Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than 20 acres in area,
the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation
method that produces a full hydrograph.
K. Infrequent storm. The rational runoff coefficients given in this chapter
are applicable for the two-year through ten-year frequency design
storm event. Less frequent, higher-intensity storms require
modification of the runoff coefficient because infiltration and other
losses have a proportionally smaller effect on runoff (Wright-
McLaughlin 1969). The adjustment of the Rational Method for use with
major storms shall be made by multiplying the rational formula by a
frequency factor Cf. Cf values are as follows: twenty-five-year frequency
design storm, 1.1; fifty-year frequency design storm, 1.2; one-hundredyear
frequency design storm, 1.25. The product of Cf and Rational
Coefficient C shall not exceed 1.0.
§ 132-14 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-14
1:402
§ 132-15. Erosion and sedimentation requirements.
L. The time of concentration (Tc) is the time required for water to flow
from the hydraulically most remote point of the drainage area to the
point of interest (design point). Use of the rational formula requires
calculation of a Tc for each design point within the drainage basin.
Travel time estimation for the rational method shall be based on NRCS
Technical Release No. 55 (2nd Edition). For design purposes, the time
of concentration may not be less than five minutes. Travel time (Tt) is
the time it takes runoff to travel from one location to another in a
watershed (subreach) and is a component of time of concentration. Tc is
computed by summing all the travel times for consecutive components
of the drainage conveyance system.
M. Water moves through a watershed as sheet flow, shallow concentrated
flow, open channel flow, or some combination of these. Sheet flow rates
shall be calculated using the NRCS TR-55 (1986) variation of the
kinematic wave equation. Sheet flow length may not exceed 50 feet
over paved surfaces and 150 feet over unpaved surfaces. Maximum
permitted sheet flow length shall be 150 feet unless site-specific
conditions exist (that can be demonstrated) that warrant an increase of
the sheet flow length. Under no circumstances shall sheet flow length
exceed 300 feet. Shallow concentrated flow time and open channel flow
time shall be calculated using standard engineering methodologies.
A. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter, the Montgomery County Conservation District, and
Towamencin Township, and to meet all requirements under
Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment
Control, and the Clean Streams Law.117 Various BMPs and their design
standards are identified in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual, No. 363-2134-008 (March 2012), as amended and
updated.
B. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be or are recommended to be applied where
infiltration BMPs are proposed include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity. Thirty-three-inch
super filter fabric fence (or other approved protection mechanism)
must be installed around proposed infiltration areas to prevent
encroachment and compaction by construction equipment.
117. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 132-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-15
1:403
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
received final stabilization. If necessary, thirty-three-inch super
filter fabric fence (or other approved protection mechanism) must
be installed in the vicinity of the infiltration area to prevent
contamination by runoff containing suspended sediment.
(3) Areas of the site to remain undisturbed shall be protected from
encroachment by construction equipment/vehicles to maintain the
existing infiltration characteristics of the soil. Four-foot-high
orange safety fence or other similar protection fence approved by
the Township must be installed around the entire limit of
disturbance/clearing prior to commencement of earthmoving
activities, and maintained until completion of all construction
activity.
C. Peak discharge rates from the site during land disturbance shall comply
with the appropriate sections in this chapter related to allowable
postdevelopment stormwater runoff rates, with the following additions:
(1) For purposes of calculating required detention storage during land
disturbance, peak discharges shall be calculated based upon the
runoff coefficients for bare soils during the period of maximum
anticipated disturbance from clearing and grading, in combination
with the entire quantity of proposed impervious surface
installation, indicated on the development plan. Runoff controls
shall insure that the peak rate of "during construction" runoff does
not exceed predevelopment runoff rates for the two-year frequency
through one-hundred-year frequency design storm events.
Detention storage during the period of land disturbance and prior
to establishment of permanent cover may require additional
detention facilities on a temporary basis. Such measures shall be
located so as to preserve the natural soil infiltration capacities of
the planned infiltration areas. Calculations based on the above
parameters must be submitted to verify compliance with this
requirement.
(2) Wherever soils, topography, cut and fill or grading requirements, or
other conditions, suggest substantial erosion potential during land
disturbance, the Township may require that the entire volume of all
storms up to a two-year storm from the disturbed areas be retained
on site and that special sediment trapping facilities (such as check
dams, etc.) be installed.
D. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of an erosion and sediment
control plan for construction activities.
E. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) has
regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan for any
§ 132-15 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-15
1:404
§ 132-16. Water quality requirements.
earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under 25 Pa.
Code § 102.4(b).
F. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,118 a PADEP NPDES
construction activities permit is required for any earth disturbance of
one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters or the
regulated small municipal separate storm sewer system, or five acres or
more regardless of the planned runoff (hereinafter collectively referred
to as "regulated earth disturbance activities"). This includes earth
disturbance on any portion of, part of, or during any stage of, a larger
common plan of development.
G. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate PADEP regional office or Montgomery
County Conservation District must be provided to the Township. The
issuance of an NPDES construction permit or permit coverage under
the statewide general permit (PAG-2) may satisfy the requirements of
§ 132-15D.
H. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by PADEP regulations, shall be available at the
project site at all times.
A. In addition to the performance standards and design criteria of Article
III of this chapter, the developer shall comply with the following water
quality requirements unless otherwise exempted by provisions of this
chapter.
B. Detain the one-year, twenty-four-hour design storm using the SCS Type
II distribution. Provisions shall be made so that the one-year storm
takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the facility from a point
where the maximum volume of water from the one-year storm is
captured (i.e., the maximum water surface elevation is achieved in the
facility). Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the
invert of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The
design of the facility shall consider and minimize the chances of
clogging the outlet orifice and prevent sediment buildup.
C. In order to protect and maintain water quality, additional stormwater
runoff created by the development project must be captured, stored,
and treated and the volume that must be treated, called the Water
Quality Volume (WQv), shall be as indicated below. The formula for
determining WQv, which shall be measured in acre-feet, is:
WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)]/12, where:
118. Editor's Note: See now 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a.
§ 132-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-16
1:405
P = Rainfall depth in inches, using the "90% storm," the volume of
rainfall for 90% of the storm events which produce runoff in
the watershed annually.
A = Project area in acres.
Rv = Volume runoff coefficient [0.05 + 0.009(I)], where I is the
impervious surface percentage (impervious area ÷ total
project area) x 100%.
D. To accomplish Subsections A and B above, the developer may submit
original and innovative designs to the Township Engineer for review
and approval. Such designs may achieve the water quality objectives
through a combination of BMPs (best management practices).
Infiltration BMPs shall be used wherever feasible. Wet ponds, artificial
wetlands, or other permanent BMPs acceptable to the Township, shall
be used if infiltration BMPs are deemed not feasible.
E. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the land
developer shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
F. The following additional factors must be considered and addressed
when evaluating the suitability of BMPs used to control water quality at
a given development site:
(1) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(2) Streambank erosion.
(3) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(4) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(5) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(6) Maintenance requirements.
(7) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(8) Recreational value.
§ 132-16 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-16
1:406
(9) Enhancement of aesthetic and property value.
G. The applicant is required to schedule a meeting with the Township
Engineer to discuss the design of the BMPs chosen prior to plan
submission.
H. Postconstruction runoff control requirements.
(1) No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with state water quality requirements
after construction is complete.
(2) The BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses
(e.g., drinking water use, cold water fishery use) and maintain the
level of water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams,
and to protect and maintain water quality in "special protection"
streams, as required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93 (collectively referred to herein as "state water quality
requirements").
(3) To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated
earth disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can
be met by BMPs, including site design, which provide for
replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff
conditions, so that postconstruction stormwater discharges do not
degrade the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of the
receiving waters. As described in the PADEP Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Policy (No. 392-0300-002, September 28,
2002), this may be achieved by the following:
(a) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater
infiltration conditions;
(b) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure
filtering out of chemical and physical pollutants from the
stormwater runoff; and
(c) Streambank and streambed protection: management of volume
and rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent
physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring
and erosion).
(4) PADEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure
design, implementation and maintenance of BMPs that control
runoff from new development and redevelopment (hereinafter
"development") after regulated earth disturbance activities are
complete. These requirements include the need to implement
postconstruction stormwater BMPs with assurance of long-term
operations and maintenance of those BMPs.
§ 132-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-16
1:407
(5) Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth
disturbance activities from the appropriate PADEP regional office
or Montgomery County Conservation District must be provided to
the Township. The issuance of an individual NPDES construction
permit [or permit coverage under the statewide general permit
(PAG-2)] may satisfy the requirements of § 132-16H(1).
§ 132-16 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-16
1:408
ARTICLE IV
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 132-17. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the final approval of
subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any building or
occupancy permit, or the commencement of any land disturbance activity
shall not proceed until the property owner or developer or his/her agent
has received written approval of a drainage plan from the Township, except
where exempt from the requirement to prepare a drainage plan pursuant
to § 132-5 of this chapter. Drainage plans required and approved by the
Township shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
§ 132-18. Drainage plan contents.
The drainage plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sedimentation control plan by title and date. The cover sheet
of the computations and erosion and sedimentation control plan shall refer
to the associated maps by title and date. All drainage plan materials shall
be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat, and well organized; otherwise, the drainage plan shall be disapproved
and returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included in the
drainage plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management and
water quality techniques, including construction specifications of
the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) Soil evaluations as they relate to the infiltration device(s) design.
B. Maps of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by
thirty-six-inch sheets and shall be prepared in a form that meets the
requirements for recording in the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of
Montgomery County. The contents of the maps shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used as
approved by the Township Engineer. Critical spot elevations shall
§ 132-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-18
1:409
be provided where proposed contours do not provide a sufficient
level of detail.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(4) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, including but
not limited to electric, gas, CATV, storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
and water lines, within 50 feet of property lines shall be shown on
the plans. The applicant should submit a plan showing existing
features as referenced in § 136-703C of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, Chapter 136.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(7) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be
added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(10) The date of submission.
(11) A graphic and written scale with a minimum scale of one inch
equals 50 feet.
(12) A North arrow.
(13) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(14) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(15) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(16) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels and
stormwater pipe systems, including hydraulic capacity.
(17) Construction details of proposed stormwater management facilities
shall include the following as applicable:
(a) Cross sections through the facility showing:
[1] Side slopes.
§ 132-18 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-18
1:410
[2] Bottom slopes.
[3] Embankment with slopes identified.
[4] Top of berm width and elevation.
[5] Emergency spillway elevation.
[6] Cutoff trench with side slopes, depth, and bottom width
identified.
[7] Permanent pool elevation.
[8] Water quality storm elevation.
[9] Maximum water surface elevation and infiltration bed
lining.
[10] Outlet structure, outlet pipe, anti-seep collars, and outfall
structure.
(b) Elevation views of the outlet structure and emergency spillway
showing:
[1] Maximum water surface elevation.
[2] Maximum design flow depth in spillway and resulting
freeboard to top of berm elevation.
[3] Spillway lining and side slopes.
[4] Top width and bottom width of spillway.
[5] Size and elevation of all controls devices in the outlet
structure.
(c) Additional details to construct the stormwater management
facility, including but not limited to:
[1] Low flow channels with dimensions.
[2] Energy-dissipating and sediment-removal devices, with
dimensions.
[3] Under drains.
(18) Overland drainage paths and drainage areas tributary to the
proposed facilities.
(19) A twenty-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(20) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of the stormwater management facilities that would
§ 132-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-18
1:411
be located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(21) A construction detail of any stabilization techniques to be applied
to sinkholes and the location of all notes to be posted, as specified
in this chapter.
(22) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture that can
be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan by the
Township. The statement shall be incorporated as a deed
restriction with proof of a recorded revised deed submitted to the
Township with the as-built survey for all stormwater management
facilities included in the approved drainage plan.
(23) The following signature affidavit for the Township must be included
on the plan:
"(Township Official or Designee), on this date ________, has
reviewed and hereby concludes that the drainage plan meets all
design standards and criteria of the Towamencin Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance No. ________."
(24) The drainage plan shall include an operation and maintenance plan
for all existing and proposed stormwater management/BMP
facilities, addressing long-term ownership and maintenance
responsibilities for such facilities, including schedule for operation
and maintenance activities.
(25) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities and
BMPs.
C. Supplemental information.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted.
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(2) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, where applicable,
including all reviews and approvals, as required by the
Montgomery County Conservation District.
(3) A geologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes as
specified in this chapter.
§ 132-18 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-18
1:412
§ 132-19. Plan submission.
For all activities regulated by this chapter, the steps below shall be followed
for submission. For any activities that require a PADEP joint permit
application and regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PADEP's Rules
and Regulations, require a PennDOT highway occupancy permit, or require
any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s)
shall be part of the plan.
§ 132-20. Drainage plan review.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows)
on adjacent properties and on any existing Township stormwater
collection systems that may receive runoff from the project site.
(5) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT District Office when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic
tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
(4) All stormwater management/BMP facility easements required by
this chapter must be shown on the drainage plan, including the
bearing and distance of each segment of the easement's boundary.
A. The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer as part of the
development plan submission for the regulated activity. If the plan is
part of a land development or subdivision application, the plans should
be submitted in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.119 All other projects should be submitted
as referenced in the following sections.
B. Four copies of the drainage plan and related application documentation
shall be submitted to the Township. Two copies of the plan will be
forwarded by the Township to the Township Engineer for review.
A. The Township Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency
with this chapter. The Township shall require receipt of a complete
plan, as specified in this chapter.
119. Editor's Note: See Chapter 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 132-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-20
1:413
B. The Township Engineer shall review the drainage plan for any
subdivision or land development against the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance120 provisions not superseded by this
chapter.
C. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Township Engineer shall
notify the Township, in writing, whether the drainage plan is consistent
with this chapter. Should the drainage plan be determined to be
consistent with this chapter, the Township Engineer will forward an
approval letter to the Township with a copy to the developer.
D. Should the drainage plan be determined to be inconsistent with this
chapter, the Township Engineer will forward a disapproval letter to the
Township with a copy to the developer citing the reason(s) for the
disapproval. Any disapproved drainage plan may be revised by the
developer and resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
E. For regulated activities specified in § 132-4D(1) through (4) of this
chapter, the Township Engineer shall notify the Township, in writing,
within a time frame consistent with the Township Building Code and/or
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, of whether
the drainage plan is consistent with this chapter and forward a copy of
the approval/disapproval letter to the developer. Any disapproved
drainage plan may be revised by the developer and resubmitted
consistent with this chapter.
F. For regulated activities requiring a PADEP joint permit application, the
applicant shall request that the Township notify PADEP of whether the
drainage plan is consistent with this chapter and forward a copy of the
review letter to the Township and the developer. PADEP may consider
the Township Engineer's review comments in determining whether to
issue a permit.
G. The Township shall not approve any subdivision or land development
for regulated activities specified in § 132-4D(1) and (2) of this chapter if
the drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with this chapter,
as determined by the Township Engineer. All required permits from
PADEP must be obtained prior to, or as a condition of, final plan
approval.
H. The Township shall not issue a building permit for any regulated
activity specified in § 132-4 of this chapter if the drainage plan has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
Township Engineer, or without considering the comments of the
Township Engineer. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained
prior to issuance of a building permit.
I. The Township's approval of a drainage plan prepared in conjunction
with a regulated activity that is not a subdivision or land development
shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year. This time period shall
120. Editor's Note: See Chapter 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 132-20 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-20
1:414
§ 132-21. Modification of plans.
§ 132-22. Resubmission of disapproved drainage plans.
A disapproved drainage plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Township Engineer's concerns documented in writing, to
the Township Engineer in accordance with § 132-19 of this chapter and be
subject to review as specified in § 132-20 of this chapter. The applicable
Township re-review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved
drainage plan.
commence on the date that the Township signs the approved drainage
plan. If stormwater management facilities included in the approved
drainage plan have not been constructed, or if an as-built survey of
these facilities pursuant to § 132-32E of this chapter has not been
approved within this time period, the Township may consider the
drainage plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits.
Drainage plans that are considered disapproved by the Township shall
be resubmitted in accordance with § 132-22 of this chapter.
J. The Township's approval of a drainage plan prepared in conjunction
with a subdivision or land development shall remain valid and protected
from any change in Township codes and ordinances for a period of five
years from the date of preliminary subdivision and/or land development
plan approval, pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.121
A. A modification to a previously submitted drainage plan for a
development site that involves a change in stormwater management
facilities or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of
stormwater management facilities, or that becomes necessary because
soil or other conditions are not as stated on the drainage plan as
determined by the Township Engineer, shall require a resubmission of
the modified drainage plan consistent with § 132-19 of this chapter and
be subject to review as specified in § 132-20 of this chapter.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved drainage plan
shall be submitted to the Township, accompanied by the applicable
review fee. A modification to a drainage plan for which a formal action
has not been taken by the Township shall be submitted to the Township,
accompanied by the applicable Township review fee.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 132-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-22
1:415

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 132-23. Schedule of inspections.
A. The Township Engineer or the Township assignee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater management/
BMP facilities with all cost being the responsibility of the applicant.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Township Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with this chapter, the Township shall revoke any
existing permits until the field conditions are brought into conformity
with the approved drainage plan or a revised drainage plan is submitted
and approved, as specified in this chapter.
§ 132-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-23
1:417

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 132-24. General.
The fees required by this chapter are per the Township Fee Schedule
for initial and subsequent submissions. The Township review fees shall
be established by the Township to defray review costs incurred by the
Township and the Township Engineer. All fees shall be paid by the applicant.
§ 132-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-24
1:419

ARTICLE VII
Operation and Maintenance
§ 132-25. Performance guarantee.
For all subdivisions and land development, the applicant shall provide a
financial guarantee to the Township for the timely installation and proper
construction of all erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater
management facilities/BMPs as required by the approved drainage plan and
by this chapter equal to the full construction cost of the required controls
plus construction contingency and construction inspection costs.
§ 132-26. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The drainage plan for the regulated development activity shall contain
a stormwater management/BMP facilities operation and maintenance
plan (O&M plan) prepared by a qualified design professional. The O&M
plan shall be subject to review and approval of the Township Engineer.
B. The O&M plan for the development site shall outline required routine
maintenance actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper
operation of the stormwater management/BMP facilities and shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all proposed stormwater management/BMP facilities, consistent with
the following principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, storm sewers, and other
stormwater management improvements are to be dedicated to the
Township, stormwater management/BMP facilities may also be
dedicated to and maintained by the Township, if accepted by the
Township.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
storm sewers and other stormwater management/BMP facilities
are to be privately owned and maintained, then the ownership and
maintenance of stormwater management/BMP facilities shall be
the responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
C. The drainage plan and O&M plan shall include the following:
(1) Description of how each stormwater management facility and BMP
will be operated and maintained, and the identity and contact
information associated with the person(s) responsible for such
operations and maintenance.
(2) Name of the project site, name and address of the owner of the
property, and name of the individual or firm preparing the plan. The
owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address, and
telephone number of the person or entity responsible for operation
and maintenance activities. In the event of a change, new
§ 132-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-26
1:421
§ 132-27. Maintenance for privately owned stormwater
management/BMP facilities.
information shall be submitted by the owner to the Township within
10 working days of the change.
(3) A statement, signed by the facility owner, acknowledging that the
stormwater management facilities and BMPs are fixtures that
cannot be altered or removed unless such alteration or removal is
approved by the Township.
D. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management/BMP
facilities shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances
and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run
with the land. The owner shall convey to the Township easements to
assure access for periodic inspections by the Township and emergency
maintenance, if necessary.
E. The O&M plan for stormwater management/BMP facilities, including
those approved pursuant to 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, shall be recorded
as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
F. The Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer, shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the drainage
plan. The Board of Supervisors reserves the right at any time to accept
the ownership and operating responsibility for any or all of the
stormwater management/BMP facilities. The right of the Township to
accept ownership in the future shall be stated in the maintenance
agreement (refer to § 132-27).
G. The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this chapter.
A. Prior to final approval of the drainage plan, the applicant shall sign and
record an O&M agreement prepared and approved by the Township
Solicitor covering all stormwater management/BMP facilities that are
to be privately owned. Said agreement, at a minimum, must contain the
provisions identified in the sample agreement, designated as Appendix
132E, which is attached and made part hereof.122
B. Other items may be included in the O&M agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all stormwater
management/BMP facilities. The O&M agreement shall be subject to
review and approval of the Township.
C. The property owner shall be responsible for the operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management/BMP facilities located on
the property owner's land in accordance with the approved schedule(s)
in the O&M plan. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement,
122. Editor's Note: Appendix 132E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 132-26 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-27
1:422
§ 132-28. Stormwater management easements.
§ 132-29. Township Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
the Township may perform the services required and charge the
property owner the appropriate fees and costs of these services.
Nonpayment of these fees and costs may result in a lien against the
property.
A. Easements shall be granted by the property owner as necessary to
provide for:
(1) Access to the property by the Township for facility inspections and
emergency maintenance.
(2) Preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and facilities, including flood routes for the onehundred-
year storm event.
B. The purpose of any easement shall be specified in the O&M agreement
signed by the property owner.
C. Stormwater management/BMP facilities easements are required for all
areas used for off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by
the Township.
D. All easements shall be recorded with the Montgomery County Recorder
of Deeds in conjunction with final drainage plan approval, issuance of a
building permit or recordation of a subdivision or land development
plan.
A. A financial deposit to the Township Stormwater Maintenance Fund
shall be required to be paid by the developer to help defray costs of
periodic inspections and maintenance expenses associated with all
stormwater management/BMP facilities, storm sewers, and culverts, as
well as any other such improvements required by PennDOT (within the
right-of-way of public roadways), that are to be maintained after
dedication by the Township. The amount of the deposit shall be
determined as follows:
(1) If the facilities are to be maintained by the Township, the deposit
shall cover the estimated costs for maintenance and inspections for
10 years. The Township Engineer will establish the estimated costs
utilizing information submitted by the applicant.
(2) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The Township Engineer shall
determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to
the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
B. If a stormwater management/BMP facility is proposed that also serves
as a recreation facility (e.g., ball field, pond), the Township may, but is
§ 132-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-29
1:423
not required to, reduce or waive the amount of the maintenance fund
deposit based upon the value of the land for public recreation purposes.
C. If at some future time a storage facility (whether publicly or privately
owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other
storage facilities, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit
will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to
the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit
remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to
the depositor.
§ 132-29 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-29
1:424
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 132-30. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
Township to inspect the condition of the stormwater/BMP structures and
facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 132-31. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the Township shall provide written notification of the violation.
Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish
a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Failure to comply within the
time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions of this
chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 132-32. Enforcement.
The Township is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter as follows:
A. The Township Engineer or other qualified persons designated by the
Township are authorized to conduct inspections regarding compliance
with the approved drainage plan.
B. The approved drainage plan and other applicable approved permit
plans shall be on file at the site throughout the duration of the
construction activity. Periodic inspections may be conducted by the
Township or designee during construction. A final inspection of all
BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities may be conducted by
the Township or designee to confirm compliance with the approved
drainage plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or ownership
entity to undertake any regulated activity under § 132-4 on any
property except as provided for in an approved drainage plan and
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to
the approved drainage plan.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or ownership
entity to modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any approved
stormwater management/BMP facility, areas, or structures as shown on
§ 132-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-32
1:425
the approved drainage plan without the written approval of PADEP or
the Montgomery County Conservation District and the Township.
E. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from a professional engineer
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a registered
surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania verifying
that all permanent facilities have been constructed according to
the approved drainage plan and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built drawings sealed by a professional engineer
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a registered
surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The asbuilt
drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
design plans shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for
review.
(3) Where an NPDES permit is required and approved by PADEP, a
copy of the notice of termination, approved by PADEP or the
Montgomery County Conservation District, must be submitted to
the Township.
(4) In no case shall the Township approve the as-built survey until the
Township receives a copy of an approved declaration of adequacy/
highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District Office (if
applicable).
F. After receipt of the certification of completion by the Township, a final
inspection shall be conducted by the Township or its designee to certify
compliance with this chapter.
G. Suspension and revocation of permits.
(1) Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked
by the Township for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the approved drainage plan/permit or O&M agreement.
(b) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to a
regulated activity.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, or pollution,
or which endangers the life or property of others.
(2) A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the Township when:
(a) The Township Engineer or his designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the stormwater management and
§ 132-32 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-32
1:426
erosion and sediment pollution control measure(s), or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(b) The Township is satisfied that the violation of the chapter, law,
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
(c) A permit which has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
H. Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Township may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater management/BMP facilities;
and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater management/BMP
facilities.
I. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Township may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with written
notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner to
correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation within
the allowed time period, the Township may revoke or suspend any, or
all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this
chapter.
J. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person or ownership entity to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All
such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
Township from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or
equity.
K. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals. Any building, land
development or other permit or approval for regulated activities issued
by the Township may be suspended or revoked by the governing body
for:
§ 132-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-32
1:427
§ 132-33. Public nuisance.
§ 132-34. Violations and penalties.
§ 132-35. Appeals.
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved drainage plan/permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act which
constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, or pollution, or which
endangers the life or property of others.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense, and penalties shall be
cumulative.
B. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Township
Board of Supervisors within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township Board of
Supervisors relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the
Montgomery County Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the
Board of Supervisors' decision.
§ 132-32 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 132-35
1:428
Chapter 133
STREETS, CURBS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 147.
§ 132-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-35
1:429

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 133-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Any word, term or phrase used in this chapter, but not specifically
defined herein, shall be defined as set forth in the Towamencin
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 136),
as last amended.
B. Word usage. The word "shall" is construed as mandatory.
C. The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances
where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Towamencin.
BUILDING — Any structure having enclosed walls and roof, intended
for support or sheltering a use or occupancy, and attached to the
land. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers used for human
habitation.
CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of any street, which is
that portion of a street between the curbs where there are curbs or that
portion of the paved surface customarily used by vehicles in the regular
course of travel over the street.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly appointed by Towamencin
Township.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association or body politic, including a trustee,
a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative thereof.
SIDEWALK AREA — The area between the street curbline and the rightof-
way line of a street as shown on recorded subdivision plans or as
established by ordinance.
STREET OPENING — Any ditch, excavation, tunnel or opening in or
under the surface of any street or within any street right-of-way; except,
however, work performed by any property owner or his agent or
contractor within that portion of the street right-of-way abutting his
property and lying between the curbline and the property line, or a line
12 inches beyond the curbline in the case of construction or repair of
curbs.
STREET or HIGHWAY — A right-of-way municipally or privately owned,
serving as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel and access.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Towamencin.
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-1
1:431

ARTICLE II
System of Street Names
§ 133-2. Continuation of street names.
Names of streets in the Township of Towamencin shall remain as shown on
the Official Map of Towamencin Township (on file in the Township offices)
unless changed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 133-3. Acceptance of new streets; resolution of dedication.
New public streets shall be accepted by the Board of Supervisors by a
resolution of dedication, which will state the name of the street and give a
description of its metes and bounds.
§ 133-4. Extensions; duplication of names.
If the new streets are extensions of existing streets, the existing names shall
be continued, and if not extensions, names recorded shall not duplicate or
closely approximate names already assigned.
§ 133-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-4
1:433

ARTICLE III
Street Openings
§ 133-5. Intent.
It is the intent of the Supervisors of Towamencin Township that, in order
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general community, the
opening of streets be regulated by permit.
§ 133-6. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any street opening without first
securing a permit therefor from the Township of Towamencin; provided,
however, that any person maintaining pipes, lines or underground conduits
in or under the surface of any street by virtue of any law, ordinance or
franchise may proceed with an excavation or opening without a permit
when emergency circumstances demand the work be done immediately for
the preservation of the public health, safety or welfare, provided that the
permit could not reasonably and practically have been obtained beforehand.
Such person, however, shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular
business day on which the office of the Township is open for business, and
the permit shall be retroactive to the date when work was begun. Any
work done in accordance with this section on an emergency basis shall still
comply with all of the specifications and standards as set forth hereinafter
in this chapter.
§ 133-7. Application.
Any person intending to make a street opening shall make written
application therefor to the Township on a form provided for that purpose,
not less than 10 working days prior to the commencement of work. No
work shall be commenced until the Township has approved the application
and issued a permit, except emergency work as provided under § 133-6
hereof. Each application shall be accompanied by an accurate drawing
clearly showing the extent of the proposed street opening and the location
and depth of the subsurface facilities to be installed and, when required by
the Township, the location and depth of all other surface facilities in the
vicinity of the work.
§ 133-8. Fee and deposit.
A. The applicant shall pay a fee or fees and may be required to post escrow
to guarantee satisfactory completion of the work associated with the
street opening in accordance with provisions set forth at the time of the
issuance of the street opening permit and in accordance with the fees
set forth in the then-current fee schedule which shall have been
adopted by resolution by the Board of Supervisors (refer to Chapter 76,
Fees).
B. The Township shall determine the amount of the escrow to be posted by
the permittee, basing the amount upon the current prices for similar
§ 133-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-8
1:435
§ 133-9. Certificate of insurance.
§ 133-10. Conditions for the grant of permit.
street repaving work, to which amount shall be added the cost of
any additional work which might be necessary to restore the street to
acceptable condition, plus the estimated costs of inspection and the
estimated costs of any other services which the Township might have to
perform during the course of the work.
C. The deposit may be in the form of cash, certified treasurer's check or
cashier's check payable to the Township.
D. Upon completion and final inspection of the work, the Township shall
make an accounting to the permittee of all costs incurred by the
Township in connection with the permit, to which the Township may
add any reasonable sum to cover anticipated costs of future
maintenance. The Township shall thereupon refund to the permittee
any amount of deposit in excess of that computed as aforesaid, or if the
deposit is found to be insufficient, the permittee shall immediately pay
to the Township any amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee
fails or refuses to pay such deficiency upon demand, the Township may
recover the same by action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until
such deficiency is paid in full, additional permits may be denied such
permittee.
A. The applicant shall furnish certificates of insurance as required by the
Township.
B. Prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall
be required to furnish a certificate of insurance. The certificate of
insurance required of the applicant shall indicate that he/she is insured
against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against claims
for property damages which may arise from or out of the performance
of the work, whether such performance is by himself, his subcontractor
or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him/her. Such insurance
shall include protection against liability arising from completed
operations. Such insurance shall provide complete third-party coverage
for the Township of Towamencin. The amount of such insurance shall be
prescribed by the Township Engineer in accordance with the nature of
the risks involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance for
bodily injury in effect shall be in an amount not less than $100,000 for
each person and $300,000 for each accident and for property damage
in an amount not less than $50,000. Failure of the applicant to file such
certificate shall be grounds for denying a permit.
A. The granting of any street opening permit shall confer a right upon the
permittee, subject to the terms and conditions of the permit, to
temporarily occupy and use the street surface during the course of
construction work covered by the permit and to thereafter occupy the
space within which the work is to be located, subject in every case to
§ 133-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 133-10
1:436
§ 133-11. Acceptance of permit.
By accepting the permit, the applicant agrees to perform the work in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit and of any special
conditions which may be attached thereto and to save the Township, its
officers, employees and agents from any costs, damages and liabilities
which may accrue by reason of the work.
§ 133-12. Expiration of permit.
Every permit issued hereunder shall expire at the end of six months from
the date of issuance. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work
within the specified time, he shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present
in writing to the Township a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the
Township, such an extension is necessary, the permittee may be granted
additional time for the completion of the work.
§ 133-13. Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the Township after notice
for violation of any condition of the permit or any ordinance of the
Township, including but not limited to completing the work as set forth
in the time constraints contained in the permit or performing the work in
accordance with the specifications as set forth hereinafter.
§ 133-14. Inspections.
The work shall be subject at all times to inspection by the Township or
its agents, and the permittee shall pay the costs of such inspection as
the Township may require. Notwithstanding anything contained herein,
the permittee shall be required to notify the Township Engineer before
commencing the work of the time and date the work will commence and
shall immediately notify the Township Engineer when said work is
completed.
§ 133-15. General standards.
Unless specifically permitted by the Township:
the specific right of the Township to require temporary or permanent
relocation or removal of any of the facilities entirely at the permittee's
expense in the event that said facilities are in conflict with the
Township's interest or the public interest in the use of the street.
B. In granting any permit, the Township may attach such special
conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public
land, private property and also the general health, safety and welfare of
the community, particularly for pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
§ 133-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-15
1:437
§ 133-16. Special standards.
§ 133-17. Pavement cuts, excavation and backfill.
A. No street opening shall be made within three years of construction,
reconstruction, reconditioning or newly applied pavement surface.
B. No street opening shall extend across more than 1/2 of the cartway at
one time.
C. Two-way traffic shall be maintained at all times. If the roadway must be
closed, the permittee must submit, in writing, why it must be closed for
review/approval by the Township. A detailed detour map, including
signs to be installed, shall be submitted. All roadway closures must be
authorized in writing by the Township.
D. Access to driveways and/or buildings abutting the street shall be
maintained, where possible.
E. Not more than 250 linear feet of any street shall be opened at any one
time.
A. The permittee shall conform to Pennsylvania Act 121, as amended from
time to time, PA One Call System (refer to 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.) and shall
take all precautions necessary to avoid damage to other utility lines and
to public and private property. In the event that damage does occur to
property of others, the permittee shall promptly and satisfactorily
repair all damage and restore the property to a satisfactory condition.
B. Provisions shall be made to accommodate the flow of storm drainage,
and no excavated material or trench shall be permitted to interfere with
the normal flow of surface water.
C. Traffic control shall be maintained in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 213, as amended from time
to time, and the permittee shall furnish and maintain upon the work
such signs, barricades, lights and flagmen as may be necessary to
properly protect the public and workers.
D. If blasting is performed, such operations shall be in charge of statecertified
persons only and shall be carried out in strict accordance with
federal, state, county or municipal laws or regulations governing the
same. All applicable permits shall be obtained by the permittee prior to
conducting any blasting activities.
E. The permittee shall be responsible to notify the Township Fire and
Police Departments and other public utility companies of the proposed
work, stating the nature and location of the work to be done, and shall
keep all said parties informed of the progress of the work. When access
to abutting properties is to be denied, the permittee shall notify the
affected parties in advance.
§ 133-15 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 133-17
1:438
§ 133-18. Restoration required.
Whenever final paving repairs are not completed to the satisfaction of the
Township or in accordance with the time constraints or the specification in
this chapter, the Township reserves the right, after notice to the permittee,
to complete final paving and any other necessary work, utilizing the escrow
funds posted under the provisions of § 133-8 of this chapter. If the amount
of escrow funds is insufficient to complete the required restoration work,
the permittee shall be required to reimburse the Township the actual cost
thereof.
§ 133-19. Restoration standards.
A. Cuts through bituminous wearing surfaces shall be scored on a neat,
straight line to the full trench width, using either a pneumatic spade or
a concrete saw. Cuts through portland cement concrete shall be sawed
to a sufficient depth to enable removal of concrete with a clean, straight
break.
B. Excavated material shall be laid compactly alongside the trench and
kept trimmed up to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public
travel. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be kept clean and free of
obstructions, and where necessary, temporary bridging or plank
walkways shall be provided. Excavated material shall be immediately
loaded into trucks and removed as the excavation is in progress.
Construction materials shall not be stored in the public street except
immediately in advance of installation. Loose earth and stone shall be
promptly cleaned from the streets and sidewalks, and dust shall be
regularly swept up and removed.
C. Backfilling shall follow immediately after installation of the facilities,
and only 2A aggregate conforming to the grading requirements
specified in Section 703 of PennDOT Specifications Publication 408
shall be used. Backfill shall be compacted by vibrating or mechanical
tampers only and in layers of proper depth to ensure ninety-five-percent
completion. No rolling or puddling will be acceptable as a means of
compaction. Excess material shall be promptly removed, and the street
hand-swept prior to paving repairs.
A. Temporary pavement repairs shall consist of not less than eight inches
of 2A aggregate laid on the properly compacted and evenly graded
trench, mounded over the center of the trench one inch and thoroughly
compacted by rolling or vibrating. The Township may require as a
special condition the placing of a two-inch-thick bituminous concrete
(ID-2) binder course or cold mix bituminous patch over temporary
paving. In all cases, the permittee is responsible to maintain temporary
pavement repairs in good condition, free of chuck holes and soft spots,
and to clean the street surface of any stone or earth which may be
carried over the street.
§ 133-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-19
1:439
§ 133-20. Future maintenance.
The permittee shall be responsible to correct any trench settlement or
deterioration in the final paving work. Such responsibility is without
limitation during the first two years after the date of the final completion
certificate. Thereafter, settlement for the trench area shall remain the
B. Final pavement restoration shall be made only when weather conditions
are suitable and shall be carried out as follows: All temporary paving
and aggregate shall be removed to a depth 11 1/2 inches below finished
street paving grade. Any soft or spongy spots shall be removed to firm
bearing and replaced with 2A aggregate and thoroughly compacted.
Edges of original paving shall be cut back on a straight line so that no
less than 12 inches of undisturbed subgrade is exposed, forming a
shoulder or ledge along either side of the trench. Edges of existing
paving shall be neatly cut to expose a sound, vertical face, and the
shoulder area shall be fully excavated to the required depth of 11 1/2
inches, regardless of the depth of existing street paving. The entire
width of trench and cutback shoulder area shall be fine-graded and
rolled or vibrated to an even grade 11 1/2 inches below the adjacent
street surface.
C. Final pavement repair shall consist of the following:
(1) An eight-inch-thick plain bituminous concrete base course, a twoinch-
thick ID-2 binder course and one-and-one-half-inch (minimum)
ID-2 bituminous concrete wearing surface.
(2) Said work shall be done in accordance with the detail as attached
hereto, made a part hereof and marked Exhibit A, "Road
Restoration Detail Prepared for Towamencin Township." Exhibit A
is on file in the Township offices.
D. Requirements for permanent repairs to surfaces other than bituminous
paving will be determined by the Township in each specific case. In
general, final restoration shall be equal to the original roadway cross
section.
E. Wherever unusual conditions exist or arise during construction, the
Township may change the permanent restoration requirements from
those given herein. In all cases, marks of construction beyond the area
of actual trench shall be satisfactorily restored. In cases where a
substantial portion of the original street paving is removed or damaged,
the Township may require the permittee to mill and/or resurface the
entire street area, in addition to constructing the final paving repairs
over trench areas. The Township may also elect to accept payment from
the permittee to the Township for final paving repairs, in a sum to be
determined by the Township based upon the then-current costs for such
work, plus 15%, and to apply the sum so paid toward the cost of
reconstruction of the entire street.
§ 133-19 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 133-20
1:440
general responsibility of the permittee to repair, unless specific release is
given by the Township.
§ 133-21. Final completion certificate.
After final inspection and acceptance of the work and after payment of any
refund or collection of any insufficiency due, the Township shall issue a
final completion certificate. The date of such final completion certificate
shall fix the two-year time period during which the permittee is absolutely
responsible for maintenance of permanent pavement repairs and trenches.
§ 133-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of Article III of this chapter shall
be liable, upon conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $1,000 and
costs of prosecution for each and every offense or, upon default in payment
of the fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Montgomery County Prison for
not more than 30 days, and whenever such person shall have been notified
by the Township Zoning Officer or by service of a summons in a prosecution
or other written notice that he is committing such violation of Article III
of this chapter, each day that he shall continue such violation after such
notification shall constitute a separate offense, punishable by a like fine or
penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like fines and penalties
are now by law collected.
§ 133-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-22
1:441

ARTICLE IV
Street Numbers
§ 133-23. Assignment of numbers; notice.
The Township shall assign street or road numbers to all buildings (including
mobile homes and trailers used for human habitation) in the Township
which have heretofore not been numbered and shall give notice to the
registered owner and to the occupant of each building of the number so
assigned, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to
relieve such owner and occupant of the duty to ascertain such assigned
street number.
§ 133-24. Placement of numbers.
Every owner and occupant of every building within the Township shall cause
the number so assigned or heretofore assigned to be posted, painted or
carved upon the street side of the building or on the entrance gatepost or
on any permanent structure located between the building and the street on
which it fronts, in such manner that it can be read during daylight hours
from the road or street by persons of normal vision traveling either direction
on said road or street. Nothing in this chapter shall require a school, church
or public building or other institution to display the assigned number if, in
lieu thereof, a sign is so placed identifying the building which can be read
during daylight hours from the road or street by persons of normal vision.
§ 133-25. New construction.
In all cases of new construction, the Township shall assign a number at the
time the building permit is issued, and such number shall be displayed no
later than the time the building is ready for use and occupancy.
§ 133-26. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or occupant who fails to display or to maintain a street number
in accordance with Article IV of this chapter shall be given notice by the
Township Zoning Officer to comply with Article IV of this chapter, upon
failure to comply within the 30 days after said notice, shall be in violation
of the provisions of this article and shall, upon summary conviction before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, as well
as the costs of prosecution. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to
have been committed for each seven days that a violation exists. Such fines
shall be collected as like fines and penalties are now by law collected.
§ 133-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-26
1:443

ARTICLE V
Sidewalk, Curbs, and Driveway Entrance Construction
§ 133-27. Permit required.
§ 133-28. Time for applying for permit.
A. The grading of sidewalk areas and the construction and repair of
sidewalks, curbs, gutters and driveway entrances along and within the
right-of-way of any public highway, road, street, avenue, public lane or
public alley in the Township shall be done by the owner or owners of the
lot or lots abutting thereon in accordance with the lines and grades as
shown on recorded subdivision plans or as established by this chapter
and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other
entity to grade any sidewalk area, construct or repair any sidewalk,
curb, gutter or driveway entrance within the Township except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall not be placed or replaced within the
right-of-way of any public highway, road, street, avenue, public lane or
public alley in the Township of Towamencin by any owner, person, firm,
association or corporation without first obtaining from the Township a
permit for such purpose and assuming liability for all and any damage
which might result from the performance of such work.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to grade any
sidewalk area or to construct or repair any sidewalk, curb gutter or
driveway entrance shall first obtain a permit (Township permit) therefor
from the proper Township official for issuing the aforesaid permit only
after the following conditions have been satisfied:
(1) The filing of a written application with said Township official upon
such form as approved by the Board of Supervisors setting forth the
location, purpose and description of the improvement.
(2) The approval of said application by the Township Engineer.
(3) The established fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by
resolution shall be paid to the Township at time of filing the written
application.
(4) In all cases of new construction of curb, sidewalk, gutter or
driveway entrance, or resetting/replacing any curb, sidewalk,
gutter or driveway entrance, and in the case of any other type of
work as specifically requested by the applicant, the engineer shall
furnish the applicant with necessary lines and/or grades, prior to
the issuance of the permit.
(5) The filing and receipt of a highway occupancy permit and/or
minimum use driveway permit from PennDOT for any construction,
§ 133-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-28
1:445
§ 133-29. Permit fees.
Applicants for a Township permit related to this chapter shall pay to the
Township at the time of application the fees set forth in the then-current
fee schedule which shall have been adopted by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors (refer to Chapter 76, Fees).
§ 133-30. Repair and replacement.
replacement or repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters or driveway
entrances within rights-of-way of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
B. Should a property owner request a Township permit under the
provisions of this chapter, he shall do so at least 10 days prior to the
proposed construction, reconstruction or repair of a curb, sidewalk,
gutter or driveway entrance when the line and grade have been
established by the Township and at least 30 days where no line or grade
has been established.
C. The Township permit shall be effective for a period of 90 days from date
of issuance and may, prior to expiration of the original or renewal
period, be renewed by the proper Township official for a period of 90
days upon written application and payment of a fee by the person, firm,
corporation or other entity to whom the original permit was issued,
providing that lines, grades, or reference points have not been
disturbed or destroyed. When such points have been disturbed, they
shall be reestablished at the applicant's expense.
D. The form of application and permit shall be adopted from time to time
by the Township Board of Supervisors by resolution. A copy thereof
shall remain on file at the office of the Township.
E. On neglect or refusal by the owner or owners of an abutting lot or lots
to grade any sidewalk areas, to construct, pave, repave or repair any
sidewalk, to construct, set, reset or repair any curb, gutter or driveway
entrance within the time period provided by the Board of Supervisors
by resolution, said Supervisors shall cause the same to be done and
shall collect from said owner or owners of the lot or lots the cost thereof
as provided for in the Towamencin Township Code.
A. The existence of any of the conditions noted in this chapter shall be
reason for the repair or replacement of any curb or sidewalk.
B. Sidewalk areas not graded, or sidewalks, curbs, gutter and driveway
entrances not laid in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and
with the established grades and lines as shown on recorded subdivision
plans, or as set forth in an ordinance, are hereby declared to be
nuisances and must be removed/replaced, regraded and/or relaid
according to the provisions of this chapter within 60 days after notice to
the owner or owners to do so by the Board of Supervisors. Upon failure
§ 133-28 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 133-30
1:446
of said owner or owners thereof to regrade said sidewalk area and/
or remove/replace or repair said sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway
entrance within the time stipulated, the Board of Supervisors shall
cause the same to be done in the manner herein provided, and Board
shall collect the cost thereof from the owner or owners of the lot or lots
as provided in the Towamencin Township Code.
C. Should a sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway entrance become, in the
opinion of the proper Township Official, a dangerous condition, notice
shall be given to the owner or owners of the lot or lots abutting thereon
to relay the sidewalk, curb, gutter and/or driveway entrance with the
material prescribed in the most recently adopted detail and
specifications as attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked
Exhibit B and described as "Curb and Sidewalk Installation
Specifications/Details for Towamencin Township." Exhibit B is on file in
the Township offices. Upon failure of said owner or owners to do so
within the time period provided by the Township by written notice, the
Township shall cause the same to be done in the manner herein
provided and shall collect the costs thereof from the owner or owners of
the lot or lots as provided in the Towamencin Township Code.
D. Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and driveway entrances which do not comply
with the most recently adopted Curb and Sidewalk Installation
Specifications/Details (Exhibit B, on file in the Township offices) shall
not be permitted to be repaired and must be replaced if:
(1) In the case of curbing or gutter, more than 25% of any scored
section is deteriorated or must be replaced, then the curb or gutter
shall be saw cut and the entire section replaced, with expansion
joints placed at both ends of the section (refer to Curb and
Sidewalk Installation Specifications/Details).
(2) In the case of concrete sidewalks, more than 25% of the area of any
scored block is deteriorated or requires replacement, then said
concrete block shall be replaced in its entirety; provided, however,
where a portion of such concrete block is removed for installation
or repairs to utilities, then the block shall be replaced in its entirety
(refer to Curb and Sidewalk Installation Specifications/Details).
(3) In the case of concrete driveway entrances, more than 25% of the
total area is deteriorated or requires replacement, then the entire
area shall be replaced (refer to Curb and Sidewalk Installation
Specifications/Details).
(4) In the case of a section of slab of sidewalk, there is a crack width in
excess of 1/2 inch at any one point along a length of one foot or
greater. Cracks of a lesser width may be filled with an approved
sealant material (refer to Curb and Sidewalk Installation
Specifications/Details).
(5) In the case of curb/gutter, it is out of horizontal or vertical
alignment with adjacent curb(s) in excess of 1/2 inch or when
§ 133-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-30
1:447
§ 133-31. General standards.
pedestrian or vehicle safety is in question (refer to Curb and
Sidewalk Installation Specifications/Details).
(6) Curb is determined to have less than four inches of reveal after
final paving; depressed curb is determined to have less than one
inch reveal after final paving (refer to Curb and Sidewalk
Installation Specifications/Details).
(7) A section of slab of sidewalk out of vertical or horizontal alignment
in excess of 1/2 inch or when pedestrian safety is in question (refer
to Curb and Sidewalk Installation Specifications/Details).
(8) Depressed curb has been paved over. If, after exposure by the
contractor performing the road restoration work, it is determined
that deterioration, alignment, and reveal after final paving will be
acceptable pursuant to these guidelines, the depressed curb or
portion of depressed curb may be left in place and not require
replacement.
(9) In the case of curbs, gutters or sidewalk, there is evidence of
structure failure as determined by the Township Engineer or his
authorized representative.
(10) There is any other instance which may create a pedestrian or
vehicle traffic safety hazard, as determined by the Township
Engineer or his authorized representative.
E. Where a curb has been snapped off, it must be replaced, and no capping
shall be permitted.
F. Any sidewalk that slopes toward the curb in excess of one inch per foot
shall be deemed to be hazardous to pedestrian traffic and shall be
removed and replaced in accordance with the specifications of this
chapter.
A. In areas where curb and sidewalks are required, all driveway entrances
shall be of the radius curb-ramp type or the depressed curb-ramp type.
In areas where curb and sidewalk have not been required, said
entrances shall be constructed as shown on the most recently adopted
Curb and Sidewalk Installation Specifications/Details (Exhibit B, which
is on file in the Township offices).
B. No surface runoff collection structures are permitted on newly
constructed sidewalks. All drainage pipe shall be installed under
sidewalk areas in conformance with the most recently adopted Curb
and Sidewalk Installation Specifications/Details.
C. No material or structure shall be placed in the cartway area adjacent to
curb, gutter, or driveway entrances which shall, in any way, impede the
flow of stormwater runoff in the cartway area of the street.
§ 133-30 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 133-31
1:448
§ 133-32. Construction standards.
The following construction standards as shown on the most recently
adopted Curb and Sidewalk Installation Specifications/Details (Exhibit B, on
file in the Township offices) are made a portion hereof:
D. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed in any area where, in
the opinion of Board of Supervisors, pedestrian traffic, inadequate sight
distances or other potentially hazardous conditions indicate the need,
for public safety reasons.
E. All traffic control signs and street name signs removed during
construction of curb, gutter, sidewalk, and/or driveway entrances shall
be replaced by the person, firm, corporation or other entity performing
the construction and shall be replaced on breakaway posts conforming
to PennDOT Publication 111M, as amended.
A. All curbing, sidewalk, and driveway entrances shall be constructed in
accordance with the most current editions of PennDOT Publication
Form 408, Specifications, and PennDOT Publication No. 72M,
Standards for Roadway Construction, except as otherwise specified in
this chapter and the Curb and Sidewalk Installation Specifications/
Details. All pedestrian crosswalks shall conform to PennDOT standards.
B. Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, all sidewalk shall be
constructed as indicated on the Curb and Sidewalk Installation
Specifications/Details and as follows:
(1) All sidewalk areas shall conform to the curb grades except that the
area shall have a two-percent ascending pitch measured from the
outside curb face to the right-of-way line of the street.
(2) Width of sidewalks shall be consistent with design standards set
forth in the most current edition of the Towamencin Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 136).
(3) All sidewalks shall be constructed of a minimum thickness of four
inches of 4,500 psi minimum compressive strength concrete after
28 days curing time with air entraining equivalent to 5% ±1% with
the exception of areas crossing driveways, which shall have a
minimum thickness of eight inches. All sidewalks shall have a fourinch
base of select granular material (PennDOT 2RC) except a sixinch
base shall be provided for areas crossing driveways.
Expansion joints shall consist of a one-half-inch preformed,
nonextruding, resilient bituminous joint fill to be placed the full
depth at the sidewalk every 20 feet and scored; traverse control
joints shall be placed every five feet.
C. Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, all driveway entrances
shall be constructed as indicated on the Curb and Sidewalk Installation
Specifications/Details (Exhibit B, on file in the Township offices) and as
follows:
§ 133-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-32
1:449
(1) Radius curb-ramp and depressed curb-ramp type driveway aprons
shall have the outside edge raised one inch above the flow line of
the gutter for Township streets and 1 1/2 inches above the flow line
of the gutter within PennDOT rights-of-way.
(2) Radius curb-ramp and depressed curb-ramp type driveway aprons
shall have a straight slope from the rear of the curb to the outside
edge of the sidewalk.
(3) All driveway entrances located within the rights-of-way of public
streets shall have a minimum of six-inch base of select granular
material (PennDOT 2RC).
(4) All concrete used on driveway entrance aprons within the rights-ofway
of public streets shall have a minimum compressive strength of
4,500 psi at 28 days and containing 5% ±1% air by volume.
(5) All driveway entrance aprons shall have a finish equivalent to that
of the adjoining sidewalk, while the finish for curb-ramp radius and
depressed curb-ramp shall be the same as adjoining curbing.
(6) The thickness of concrete sidewalk and apron at driveway
entrances shall be a minimum of eight inches and shall be
constructed with reinforcing steel of a design adequate to handle
the anticipated loading, and said design shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer.
D. Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, all concrete curbing shall
be constructed as indicated on the Curb and Sidewalk Installation
Specifications/Details (Exhibit B, on file in the Township offices), and as
follows:
(1) All curbing, unless otherwise allowed by the Township Engineer,
shall be constructed with a vertical face and shall be constructed to
the following dimensions: the depth shall not be less than 18
inches; the curb shall be seven inches thick at the top, eight inches
thick at the gutter line and eight inches thick at the bottom. The
height of curb above the gutter line shall be eight inches.
(2) Materials for construction of concrete curbing shall be as follows:
All concrete curbing shall be constructed on a four-inch-thick bed
of compacted select granular material (PennDOT 2RC). The
concrete shall have a 4,500 psi minimum compressive strength
when cured for 28 days with an air entrainment equivalent of 5%
±1%. No concrete shall be poured in freezing conditions without
the approval of the Township Engineer. Expansion joints shall
consist of a one-half-inch premolded, nonextruding, bitumastic
material and shall be used, for the entire depth of the curb, at a
distance of every 30 feet with scored control joints every 10 feet.
(3) Smooth rubbed finish. Smooth rubbed finish shall be produced on
newly hardened concrete no later than the day following form
§ 133-32 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 133-32
1:450
§ 133-33. Grades and lines.
§ 133-34. Maintenance of sidewalks and curbs.
removal. Surfaces shall be wetted and rubbed with carborundum
brick or other abrasives until uniform color and texture are
produced and/or until all visible voids have been eliminated. No
cement grout shall be used other than the cement paste drawn
from the concrete itself by the rubbing process.
(4) Immediately after finishing, all concrete shall be cured by using
either an approved, impervious, light-colored plastic covering
placed and maintained in contact with the concrete surface or an
approved, impervious light-colored liquid curing compound
sprayed on the concrete surface. The curing shall be continued for
at least five days.
(5) The Township Engineer may reject any concrete sidewalks, curbs,
and driveway entrances which do not conform to the requirements
of this chapter or the generally accepted standards of the American
Concrete Institute.
E. Handicapped accessible curb ramps shall be placed at all street
intersections and constructed as shown on the latest edition of the
PennDOT Curb Ramps and Sidewalks details RC-67M of PennDOT
Publication 72M, as amended. These details, as adopted and published
by PennDOT at the time of adoption of this chapter, are included as part
of Exhibit B, Curb and Sidewalk Installation Specifications/Details, on
file in the Township offices. The Board of Supervisors may grant a
waiver of the installation of handicapped accessible curb ramps at its
discretion. Materials used shall be as specified in this chapter.
A. The Township Engineer is hereby empowered to give or define grades
or lines for the placing or replacing of sidewalk, curb and gutter within
the boundaries of any public highway, road, street, avenue, public lane
or public alley within said Township, and no act on the part of any other
official or employee shall bind the Township or make it liable therefor.
B. For giving or defining grades or lines for the placing of sidewalks, curbs
or gutters within the boundaries of any public highway, street, road,
avenue, lane or alley, a charge payable to the Township will be made in
accordance with a standard rate adopted by resolution.
C. No sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be constructed or replaced except
after a Township permit is obtained, and the Engineer shall have given
the grades and lines after the necessary survey.
A. The owner of the abutting property shall be responsible for keeping the
sidewalks and curbs immediately in front of his property in good order
and repair and free of all obstructions. The owner of the abutting
property shall repair or replace any sidewalk or curb which
§ 133-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-34
1:451
§ 133-35. Safety measures.
Permittees, their contractors or agents shall protect the public by proper
guards, barricades and lights against any danger or injury while the
highway is open or the work is under construction. At all times an
unobstructed passage along the sidewalk of at least four feet in width and
a free passage for water in the gutter shall be maintained. No building
materials or other obstructions shall be placed within 25 feet of a fire
hydrant, and all such obstructions shall be removed from the highway
before the time of the expiration of the permit. No materials shall be mixed
upon the surface of the highway.
§ 133-36. Indemnification of Township.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity applying for any permit under
this chapter shall indemnify the Township against all liability of whatever
nature, excepting only that of the Township, arising during the performance
of work for which a Township permit is granted whether or not the said
liability arises as a result of the negligence of the person, firm, corporation
or other entity to whom the permit was issued.
§ 133-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether an individual, partnership, association or corporation,
including but not limited to owners, tenants, occupiers, contractors,
subcontractors and their agents, servants and employees who or which shall
violate any of the terms of Article V of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and the costs of prosecution and,
in default of the payment of such fine and costs, shall suffer imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 30 days. After notice, each day's continuance of
deteriorates or becomes hazardous. Such repair or replacement shall
be done in accordance with Township specifications as set forth in this
chapter.
B. Should the abutting owner fail to make such necessary repairs or
replacement of the sidewalk or curb, the proper Township official may
serve upon him a notice requiring such repairs or replacement. The
notice shall be served on the property owner by certified mail or by
leaving notice at his place of residence. Where the owner resides
outside the Township, the notice shall be served by posting the notice
on the premises in question and mailing a copy by certified mail to the
owner's last known address.
C. If such abutting property owner fails to comply with the requirements
of the notice within 60 days from the date of service, the Township may
make the necessary repairs or replace the sidewalk or curb. The cost of
the repairs or replacement shall be paid by the owner of the abutting
property, together with a penalty of 10%, or may be collected as
provided by law in an action of assumpsit or by filing a municipal lien
against the property.
§ 133-34 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 133-37
1:452
a violation shall constitute a separate offense. These penalties shall be in
addition to the remedies afforded in § 133-34C.
§ 133-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-37
1:453

ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Removal
§ 133-38. Responsibility for removal of snow and ice from sidewalks
and from around fire hydrants.
Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land fronting or
abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee,
or otherwise, shall remove and clear away or cause to be removed or
cleared away snow and/or ice from a path of at least 28 inches in width from
so much of said sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on said building or lot
of land. Such person shall also maintain a minimum three-foot clear space
completely around all fire hydrants located within all street rights-of-way
abutting the property. The requirements of Subsections A, B, and C below
shall also apply to fire hydrants.
§ 133-39. Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on
or within three feet of a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, or
loading and unloading areas of a public transportation system, except that
snow and ice may be mounded by the Township of Towamencin on public
cartways incident to the cleaning thereof or mounded on curbs incident to
the clearing of sidewalks in business districts.
§ 133-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of Article VI of this chapter shall
be subject to a civil enforcement proceeding and, upon a finding of liability,
shall pay a fine of not less than $50 or greater than $1,000.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, snow and ice shall be
removed from sidewalks within 24 hours after the cessation of any fall
of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
B. In the event snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in
Subsection A hereof, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put on
the sidewalk to make travel reasonably safe and shall, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause to be cleared a path in said
sidewalk of at least 28 inches in width.
C. If such owner, occupant, or tenant fails, neglects or refuses to comply
with Subsection A above hereof within the time limits prescribed
therein, the Township may proceed immediately to clear all snow and/or
ice from the sidewalk of such delinquent and to collect the expense
thereof, with any additional amount allowed by law, from such owner,
occupant or tenant, which may be in addition to any fine or penalty
imposed under this chapter.
§ 133-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-40
1:455
Chapter 136
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 31.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Driveways — See Ch. 67.
Fees — See Ch. 76.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 82.
Grading and excavating — See Ch. 87.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 100.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
124.
Sewers — See Ch. 127.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 132.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 133.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
§ 133-40 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 133-40
1:456
ARTICLE I
Authority, Title and Purpose
§ 136-100. Adoption of regulations; when effective; repealer.
§ 136-101. Title.
The title of this chapter is "An ordinance establishing rules, regulations
and standards governing the subdivision and development of land and the
dedication of streets, utilities and other public improvements, setting forth
the procedure to be followed by the Township Planning Commission and the
Board of Supervisors in applying and administering these rules, regulations
and standards, and providing penalties for the violation thereof."
§ 136-102. Short title.
This chapter shall be and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of Towamencin Township."
§ 136-103. Purpose.
The regulations are adopted for the following reasons:
A. The Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, adopted, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as last amended,123 regulations governing the
subdivision and land development of property within the Township.
B. These regulations shall become effective five days after adoption, and
shall remain in effect until modified, amended, or rescinded by the
Board of Supervisors.
C. All previous Township subdivision and land development regulations
and subsequent amendments thereto are hereby repealed.
A. To assist in the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of land;
B. To provide for the coordination of existing streets and public utilities
with new facilities;
C. To provide for efficient and orderly extension of community services
and facilities at minimum cost and maximum convenience;
D. To ensure conformance of land utilization with the Towamencin
Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended, and the Towamencin
Township Zoning Ordinance,124 as amended;
E. To promote thereby the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the Township;
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-103
1:457
§ 136-104. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. When provisions of this chapter
and all standards and specifications adopted under it impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulations, the
provisions of this chapter and its standards and specifications shall be
controlling unless specified to the contrary. The illustrations in this chapter
are not a part of the chapter, but are included for the purposes of
clarification only.
§ 136-105. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
F. To secure equitable handling of all subdivision and land development
plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for observance by
subdividers and developers, the Township Planning Commission and
the Board of Supervisors;
G. To provide for adequate open spaces, traffic, recreation, light and air;
H. To encourage and promote flexibility, economy and ingenuity in the
layout and design of subdivisions and land developments, including
authority for the Board of Supervisors to alter site requirements in
order to encourage other practices which are in accordance with
modern and evolving principles of site planning and development.
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this
chapter to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such
decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated
in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of
this chapter shall continue to be separately and fully effective;
B. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision
or provisions of this chapter to any lot, building, or other structure or
tract of land, to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of
such decision shall be limited to the person, property, or situation
immediately involved in the controversy, and the application of any such
provision to other persons, their heirs or assigns, property, or situations
shall not be affected.
§ 136-103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-105
1:458
ARTICLE II
Jurisdiction, Sanctions, Enforcement and Exemptions
§ 136-200. Jurisdiction and applicability.
A. Subdivision and land development control. It shall be unlawful for the
owner or any other person, firm or corporation owning or controlling
any land in the Township to subdivide any lot, tract, or parcel of land, or
to lay out, construct, open or dedicate for public use or travel any
street, sanitary or storm sewer drainage facility or other facility in
connection therewith, for the common use of occupants of buildings
located within the subdivision or land development, unless final plans of
such subdivision or land development shall:
(1) Have been prepared and signed by and sealed by a professional
engineer or land surveyor duly and currently registered in the
State of Pennsylvania;
(2) Submitted to and approved in writing thereon by the Board of
Supervisors subsequent to meeting the requirements of
preliminary and finals submissions, as required, and for
subdivisions;
(3) Recorded in the Montgomery County Recorder of Deeds Office.
B. It is the intention of the Board of Supervisors to exercise, through
adoption of this chapter, the maximum lawful jurisdiction over
subdivision and land development permitted by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,125 its amendments, or successors.
Without limitation, in the exercise of this power, the following are
subject to the regulations of this chapter:
(1) Any subdivision which involves the division of a parcel of land into
two or more parcels;
(2) Any land development involving the improvement of one or more
contiguous lots or;
(3) Any division or allocation of land or space for the development of
separate buildings, buildings structurally joined together or
separate areas within a building which will result in separate
occupancy or tenancy by separated familes, individuals,
businesses, corporations or other entities under a lease, rental, or
other arrangement;
(4) Any such division of a parcel of land which involves the installation
of streets and/or alleys not to be dedicated for acceptance by the
Township;
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 136-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-200
1:459
§ 136-201. Violations and penalties; permit issuance.
§ 136-202. Enforcement.
(5) Any such division of a parcel of land in which certain parcels might
not be divided immediately for purposes of transfer, sale, lease, or
any other form of conveyance;
(6) Any realignment of two or more parcels involving a resubdivision or
replatting of any existing approved plan even though such plan was
recorded prior to the enactment of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful to record any plan in any public office, unless the
same shall bear the approval of the Towamencin Township Board of
Supervisors.
B. Any owner, or agent of the owner, of any land located within a
subdivision who sells, transfers, or agrees to sell any land referenced
to, or by exhibition of, or by other use of a plan of a subdivision, before
the same has been approved by the Board of Supervisors shall be
subject to the penalties of Section 515 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,126 as last amended. The Board of
Supervisors may also enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by
injunction in addition to the penalties herein provided.
C. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer, or other document used in the process of selling
or transferring, shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties
nor from the remedies herein provided.
D. No use and occupancy permit shall be issued for any subdivision and/or
land development until:
(1) The base course of the street or drive on which the premises takes
access has been laid;
(2) All lots have been surveyed and survey markers have been
emplaced; and
(3) All applicable fees are paid to Towamencin Township, Montgomery
County and other authorities.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint one or more qualified inspectors
to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the accompanying design
standards and improvement specifications.
B. Inspection of actual construction under any approved subdivision plan
shall be the responsibility of the appointed inspector as the agent of the
Township, who shall undertake reasonable measures to provide an
adequate inspection of all projects.
126. Editor's Note: Section 515 of the Municipalities Planning Code was repealed 12-21-1988
by P.L. 1329, No. 170. See now 53 P.S. § 10515.1.
§ 136-200 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-202
1:460
§ 136-203. Exemption.
Any subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres (40,470 square meters), and not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempt
from review pursuant to this chapter.
C. Any action inconsistent with the provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a cease-and-desist order and other appropriate measures
deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors to obtain or produce
compliance with this chapter.
§ 136-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-203
1:461

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 136-300. Definitions, word usage and interpretation.
A. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have, for the purposes of this chapter, the meanings given
in the following clauses.
B. Any word, term or phrase used in this chapter, but not specifically
defined herein, shall be defined as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as last amended.127 Any word, term or
phrase that is not specifically defined either in this chapter or in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as last amended, shall be
given its normal and customary meaning as found in the most recent
edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future;
(2) Words of the masculine gender are intended to represent the
feminine as well;
(3) The singular includes the plural;
(4) The term "shall" is mandatory;
(5) The term "may" is permissive;
(6) The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or structure
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or
designed to be used or occupied";
(7) The word "Commission" and the words "Township Planning
Commission" shall mean the Towamencin Township Planning
Commission;
(8) The words "Zoning Hearing Board" shall mean the Towamencin
Township Zoning Hearing Board as granted jurisdiction under the
Municipalities Planning Code, as last amended, of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
(9) The words "Township," "Municipality" and "Governing Body" shall
mean the Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township as granted
jurisdiction under the Municipalities Planning Code, as last
amended, of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
(10) "Zoning Ordinance" shall mean the Zoning Ordinance of
Towamencin Township,128 as last amended;
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:463
(11) "Subdivision Ordinance" and/or "Land Development Ordinance"
shall mean the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of
Towamencin Township, as last amended;
(12) English measurement shall govern when a discrepancy between
English and metric system measurements occurs.
D. Definitions of words, terms and phrases.
ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICE — That which conforms to
accepted principles, tests or standards of nationally recognized
technical or scientific authorities.
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to
a lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."
ACCESSORY USE — See "use, accessory."
ACRE — A measure of land area containing 43,560 square feet (4,047
square meters).
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — An enterprise that is actively engaged
in the commercial production and preparation for market of crops,
livestock and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and
preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural,
silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The term
includes an enterprise that implements changes in production practices
and procedures or types of crops, livestock, livestock products or
commodities produced consistent with practices and procedures that
are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent with technological
development within the agricultural industry.[Added 5-23-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-7]
ALLEY — A right-of-way or service way which provides a secondary
means of public access to the side or rear of abutting properties and is
not intended for general vehicular circulation.
ALL-WEATHER SURFACE — A surfacing material for a driveway,
walkway or parking area which will function satisfactorily in all weather
conditions as determined by the Township Engineer. The following
surfacing materials shall be construed to be all-weather surfaces:
ALTERATION — Any change in, or addition to, the supporting or
structural components of a building, such as the bearing walls,
partitions, columns, beam or girders, or any modification which would
convert an existing building into a different structure or adapt it to
(1) Bituminous paving.
(2) Concrete paving.
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:464
a different use or any enlargement or diminution of a building or
structure.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, equitable owner, tenant or
contractor who, with the written consent of the owner, has filed an
application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including, but not limited to,
an application for a building permit, or for the approval of a subdivision
plat or plan or for the approval of a land development plan.
AUTHORITY — The authority supplying water and/or sanitary sewer
service to the Township or portion thereof.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) — The total volume of traffic during
a given time period (in whole days greater than one day and less than
one year) divided by the number of days in that time period.
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the
basis upon which the floodplain management provisions of this chapter
have been prepared; for purposes of this chapter, the one-hundredyear
flood, as delineated in the most recent Flood Insurance Study,
Towamencin Township, prepared by the Federal Insurance
Administration or the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation,
as referenced in the most recent Flood Insurance Study, Towamencin
Township, prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Within the
approximated floodplain, the base flood elevation shall be established
as a point on the boundary of the approximated floodplain closest to the
construction site in question.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground, but having 1/2 or more
of its height (measured from floor to ceiling) above the average level
of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less
than six feet eight inches (1.9303 meters). A basement shall be counted
as a story, for the purpose of height measurements or determining
square footage, only if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the
average level of the adjoining ground is more than four feet (1.2192
meters), or if used for business or dwelling purposes.
BUFFER — An area designated and functioning to separate the
elements and uses of land which abut it and to ease the transition
between them. Unless otherwise specified, buffers may be included as
part of the required setbacks and yard areas.
BUFFER SCREEN — A buffer comprised of natural and/or man-made
materials arranged in a certain specific depth, height, and density to
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:465
block the view from one site to another during all seasons of the year,
and to reduce the transmittal of noise and odor between sites.
BUILDER — A person who, by contract or other agreement, is charged
with the responsibility of construction of buildings or other structures,
or of making any construction improvements on any parcel of land.
BUILDING — Any structure having enclosed walls and roof, intended
for support or sheltering a use or occupancy, and attached to the
land. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers used for human
habitation.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building located on the same lot as a
principal building and incidental and subordinate to the principal
building. Any portion of a principal building devoted or intended to be
devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal area measured from the
outermost exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and
accessory buildings on a lot including all portions of the structure
which form the total footprint of the structure. The percent of building
coverage of any lot is measured by dividing the total area of all building
coverage within the lot by the lot area.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The two-dimensional area of a lot within
which a principal structure is permitted to be built and which is defined
by the required yard setbacks.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance of a building measured
from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade surrounding
the building to the highest point of the roof, provided that chimneys,
spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks, solar energy apparatus and
similar projections shall not be included in the height.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — That individual designated by the Board of
Supervisors to enforce the provisions of the official building code or
codes of the Township of Towamencin.129
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted, or is
intended to be conducted, the principal use of the lot on which it is
located.
BUILDING RESTRICTION LINE — See "building setback line."
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line extending the full required width
of a lot which is parallel to the ultimate street right-of-way at a
perpendicular distance therefrom equal to the required front yard
setback. The location of this line determines the closest point to the
street that any building may be located.
CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of any street, which is
that portion of a street between the curbs where there are curbs or that
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes.
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:466
portion of the paved surface customarily used by vehicles in the regular
course of travel over the street.
CELLAR (OR CRAWLSPACE) — A space partly underground and having
more than 1/2 of its height (measured from floor to ceiling) below the
average finished grade of the adjoining exterior ground surface, or
with a floor-to-ceiling height of less than six feet eight inches (1.9303
meters). A cellar shall not be included in determining the permissible
number of stories or square footage, nor shall it be used for dwelling,
office or business purposes.
CENTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES — The Governor's
Center for Local Government Services located within the Department
of Community and Economic Development.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-7]
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document issued by the Zoning
Officer and/or the Building Inspector pursuant to Township
ordinance(s) adopted for this purpose.
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY — Any change of tenant or resident, or the
sale or transfer of title or ownership of any structure, building, dwelling
unit or nonresidential occupied land area.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use which differs from the previous use of a
building, structure or land.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision established
in accordance with accepted engineering practice at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance and height as specified in Township ordinances or
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations and standards.
Where said ordinances, standards or regulations differ, the most
restrictive (safest) sight triangle area shall be required.
CLUSTER — A development design technique that concentrates
buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land area
to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of
environmentally sensitive features.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — See "open space, common."
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A plan comprised of maps, charts, and
descriptive matter officially prepared by Township Planning
Commission and duly adopted by the Board of Supervisors showing
among other things recommendations for the most appropriate use
of land; the most desirable density of population; a system of
thoroughfares, parkways and streets; parks and recreation areas; the
general location and extent of facilities for water, sewer, light, and
power; and for the general location, character, and extent of community
facilities within Towamencin Township in accordance with Article III
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as last
amended.130
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:467
CONDOMINIUM — A unit owned and maintained in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act,131 as amended, and in
accordance with the provisions for open space, roads and other
development features in the Zoning Ordinance,132 as last amended, and
subdivision and land development regulations.
CONSISTENCY — An agreement or correspondence between matters
being compared which denotes a reasonable, rational, similar,
connection or relationship.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or a
structure, including the placement of a mobile home.
CONVERSION — The change in the use of land or a structure.
COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A land use and growth
management plan prepared by the County Planning Commission and
adopted by the County Commissioners which establishes broad goals
and criteria for municipalities to use in preparation of their
comprehensive plans and land use regulations.[Added 5-23-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-7]
COURTYARD — Any open space, unobstructed from the ground to sky,
other than a yard as defined herein, that is on the same lot with, and
bounded on two or more sides by, walls of a building.
CRAWLSPACE — See "cellar."
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian travel.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with access closed at one end and with a
vehicular turnaround at the closed end.
CUT: —
DEFERRAL — Permission or approval granted by the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as last amended,133 which allows for a
delay in compliance with the exact provisions of this chapter as applied
to the subdivision and/or development of a specific piece of property or
portions of the same until a time to be determined at the discretion of
the Board of Supervisors.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per developable acre.
An excavation; the difference between a point on the original grade
of the ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final
grade.
(1)
(2) The material removed in an excavation.
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
131. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
133. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:468
DETENTION AREA — A water impoundment which creates a temporary
water surface during rain events, made by constructing a dam or
embankment or by excavating a pit, for the purpose of detaining runoff
water for a period of time and releasing it slowly into the ground
or into its natural water course until the temporary water surface is
extinguished and the area is dry.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets, and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat for subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, pedestrian ways and
parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"provisions of the development plan" when used in this chapter shall
mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Zoning, subdivision, site plan, official
map, floodplain regulation or other governmental regulation over the
use and development of land.
DISTRICT — A part, zone or geographical area within the Township
wherein certain and specific land use, zoning and/or development
regulations apply uniformly.
DRAINAGEWAY, NATURAL — Any natural waterways or watercourses,
formed to carry stormwater over land, and which are typically referred
to as "swales" and/or "intermittent streams."
DRIVEWAY — A private vehicular way providing access to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
DRIVEWAY, ACCESS — A paved way providing ingress/egress from a
street to a specific site or building within a site which additionally
provides circulation throughout the parking areas of the site.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof designed, used and
occupied exclusively for human habitation.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, designed, occupied or
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, for one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking,
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the
property owner to, and/or for, the use by the public, a corporation, or
other person in equity, which is subordinate to, but not inconsistent
with, the owner's general property rights.
EASEMENT, DRAINAGE — An easement secured for the preservation
of natural drainageways, stream corridors and perennial and/or
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:469
intermittent streams, and for man-made drainage facilities related
thereto.
EGRESS — An exit.
ENCROACHMENT — Any placement or obstruction in a delineated
floodway, right-of-way, easement, required yard, setback or adjacent
land.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly appointed by Towamencin
Township.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — An area with one or more of
the following characteristics:
EXCAVATION — Any act by which natural materials are dug into, cut,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated, as well as the
conditions resulting therefrom.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living and cooking together as
a single housekeeping unit, provided that not more than two of such
number are unrelated to all of the others by blood, marriage or legal
adoption. As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may
interpret the term "family" to apply to a group of individuals, not
exceeding four, not related to each other by blood, marriage or legal
adoption, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit.
Domestic servants shall be considered an adjunct to the term "family."
FAMILY MEMBER, IMMEDIATE — A person that is related by birth,
legal adoption, marriage or blood. For the purpose of this chapter,
(1) Slopes in excess of 15%;
(2) Floodplains and/or alluvial soils;
(3) Hydric soils;
(4) Soils classified as highly erodible or corrosive;
(5) Land incapable of meeting percolation requirements;
Land formerly used for landfill operations or hazardous industrial
uses;
(6)
(7) Geologic fault areas;
(8) Stream corridors;
(9) Mature stands of native vegetation;
(10)Aquifer recharge and discharge area;
(11)Wetlands.
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:470
an immediate family member shall be comprised of only the following
relations: spouse, child, parent, and sibling.
FILL: —
FLAG LOT — A lot with reduced frontage on a public street and where
access to the public street is by means of a private drive and/or
easement. Flag lots shall have a minimum pole width along a public or
private street of not less than 25 feet (7.62 meters).
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map prepared by the Federal
Insurance Administration or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) designating the boundaries of areas having special
flood hazards in Towamencin Township.
FLOODPLAIN — That area established in this chapter as the Floodplain
District; the "floodplain" definition contained therein shall be
considered the definition for "floodplain" for all purposes and uses of
this chapter.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. Such measures
are set forth in floodproofing regulations published by the Office of
the Chief Engineers, U.S. Army, publication number EP 1165-2-314
(June 1972, and as subsequently amended). Floodproofing measures
for all new construction and substantial improvements of structures
shall satisfy the requirements of the Completely Dry Space (W1) and
Essentially Dry Spaces (W2) classes referenced in these regulations.
In said publication, where reference is made to "below" (or above) the
"BFD" (base flood datum), it shall be interpreted as meaning below (or
above) the base flood elevation.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building
or structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required
for the conduct of the business or use, and basements, attics, and
penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. This term
does not include cellars, attics not used for human occupancy, nor any
floor space in an accessory building. This term does include enclosed
and unenclosed porches and floor space in a principal building intended
or designed for the parking of motor vehicles.
Any act by which natural materials are placed, pushed, dumped,
pulled, transported or moved to a new location above the natural
surface of the ground on, or on top of, the stripped surface, as well
as the conditions resulting therefrom.
(1)
Sand, gravel, earth, earthen or other materials of any composition
whatsoever placed or deposited by humans on or under the ground
surface.
(2)
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:471
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The numerical ratio of the floor area to the lot
area, as determined by dividing the total combined floor area by the lot
area.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when
practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through
developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for
commercial purposes, which does not involve any land
development.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
FRONTAGE — That dimension of a lot abutting on a street that is
between the side lot lines measured along the principal streets'
ultimate right-of-way line.
FRONT LOT LINE — See "lot line."
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."
GARAGE — A deck, building or structure, or part thereof, used or
intended to be used for the parking and/or storage of vehicles.
GENERAL CONSISTENCY; GENERALLY CONSISTENT — That which
exhibits consistency.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
GRADE — The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
GRADE, FINISHED — The final elevation of the ground surface after
development.
GRADE, NATURAL — The elevation of the ground surface in its natural
state, before man-made alterations.
GRADING — The changing of the natural topography through cutting
or filling by more than one foot (0.3048 meters) in elevation over an
area exceeding 2,000 square feet (185.8 square meters), or in which
the natural drainage pattern of a lot is altered.
GROUND COVER — Natural mulch or nondeciduous or low-growing
plants installed or planted in such a manner as to provide a continuous
cover over the ground.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room in a dwelling unit other than a kitchen,
bathroom, closet, pantry, hallway, cellar, storage space and garage.
HYDRIC SOILS — See "soils, hydric."
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The impervious coverage is a measure of
the intensity of the use of a piece of land. The percent of impervious
coverage of any lot is measured by dividing the total area of all
impervious surfaces within the lot by the lot area.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Ground cover material which does not
readily absorb rain. All buildings, structures, parking areas, driveways,
roads, sidewalks and any areas in concrete, bituminous, and packed
stone shall be considered impervious surfaces within this definition.
In addition, other areas determined by the Township Engineer to be
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:472
impervious within the meaning of the definition will also be classified
as impervious surfaces.
IMPROVEMENT — Grading, paving, curbing, roadways, street lights
and signs, fire hydrants, wells, water mains, sanitary sewers, on-lot
sewage disposal, storm drains, sidewalks, crosswalks and street shade
trees.
JUNK — Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or
not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage,
storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition.
LAKES and PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year-round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams, or result
from excavation. The shoreline of such water bodies shall be measured
from the spillway crest elevation rather than permanent pool if there is
any difference. Lakes are bodies of water two or more acres (8,094 or
more square meters) in surface area. Ponds are any water bodies less
than two acres (8,094 square meters) in surface area.
LAND — Ground, soil or earth including structures thereon, above, at,
or below the ground surface.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots,
tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential
buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a
single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of
the number of occupants or tenure; or
[1]
The division or allocation of land or space, whether
initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more
existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the
purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups or other features.
[2]
(a)
(b) A subdivision of land.
(1)
The following activities are excluded from this definition:
The conversion of an existing single-family dwelling, detached
dwelling or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more
than three residential units, unless such units are intended to
be a condominium;
(a)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building; or
(b)
(2)
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:473
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LOADING AREA — An area accessible from a street or way, in a building
or on a lot for temporary use of vehicles, while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land, established by a plat,
or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area contained within the property
lines of an individual lot and shown on a subdivision or plot plan or as
may otherwise be required by this chapter, excluding any area within
an existing or designated future street right-of-way or the pole of a flag
lot which sole purpose is to gain access to the rear or flag portion of the
lot.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more
streets at their intersections.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of a lot covered by impervious
surfaces.
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the ultimate right-ofway
line and the rear lot line, measured from the midpoint of the front
ultimate right-of-way line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT, FLAG — See "flag lot."
LOT FRONTAGE — See "frontage."
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public or
private space. The street lot line shall be coterminus with the ultimate
street right-of-way line for such portion of the lot as abuts the street,
and shall not be the center line of the street, or any other line within
the street line even though such line may be the property boundary line
by deed.
LOT LINE, FRONT — Any lot line which is also a street line except that
in the case of a corner lot, the owner shall have the option of choosing
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For purposes of this subclause, an
amusement park is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by proper authorities.
(c)
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:474
which of the two lot lines which are street lines is to be considered the
front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of
being parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself a street
line, and except that, in the case of a corner lot, the owner shall have
the option of choosing which of the two lot lines that are not street lines
is to be considered a rear lot line. In the case of a lot having no street
frontage or a lot of an odd shape, the lot line furthest (at its furthest
point) from any street shall be considered a rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF — The smallest lot area established by the
Zoning Ordinance,134 as last amended, on which a use or structure may
be located in a particular zoning district.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot abutting two streets which is not a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines at the
required or proposed building setback line. In a case where there is
only one side lot line, lot width shall be measured between such lot line
and the opposite rear lot line or ultimate right-of-way line.
MEADOW — An informal open space consisting of native plants and
grasses left undisturbed to allow for the process of natural
succession.[Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in
a land use dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them
in jointly exploring and settling their differences, culminating in a
written agreement which the parties themselves create and consider
acceptable.
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or
not coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and
dolomite, sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth fill, slag, iron ore, zinc
ore, vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse,
peat and crude oil and natural gas.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No.
01-7]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MODULAR HOME — A single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, made by assembling one or more factory-produced threedimensional
sections into an integral living unit, whose construction
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:475
materials and specifications conform to those of conventionally built
units.
MONUMENTS — A permanent marker, made of stone or concrete, set
by a registered professional surveyor at points along street right-of-way
and tract boundaries.
MOTOR HOME — A travel trailer which combines the living section and
the power source into a single unit.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
NONCOMMERCIAL SWIMMING POOL — An accessory recreational
structure designed to contain water depth of 24 inches (60.96
centimeters) or more for use by the residents of the principal use and/
or their guests.
OCCUPANCY — The use of a building, lot or portion thereof for a
specific purpose.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — See "certificate of occupancy."
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated or reserved for public or private
use and enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. Open
space shall not include land occupied by nonrecreational structures,
roads, street rights-of-way, parking lots, land reserved for future
parking, or any portion of required minimum lot areas as required by
this chapter.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Land and/or water within or related to a
development, not individually owned or dedicated for general public
use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment
of the residents of the development and may include such
complementary structures and improvements as may be required and/
or appropriate but shall not include common parking area, roadways
and structures not primarily intended for the recreational use and
benefit of the designated users.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping in an unroofed area of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise, or one or more motor vehicles not having
valid inspection stickers issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
OVERFLOW PARKING — Any parking in addition to the minimum
parking requirements that are established by the Zoning Ordinance,135
as last amended.
(1) Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals;
(2) Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities;
(3) Endangers or injures personal or real property.
135. Editor's Note: Chapter 153, Zoning.
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:476
OWNER — The owner of record of a parcel of land or equitable owner
acting on behalf of the owner of record.
PARCEL — See "lot."
PARKING AREA — Any public or private land area designed, designated
and/or used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots, garages,
private driveways and legally designated areas of public streets.
PARKING AREA, COMMON — An off-street area containing parking
space for six or more vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space with dimensions as
required by applicable Township ordinance, available for the parking
of one motor vehicle, exclusive of passageways, driveways, or other
means of circulation or access. A garage or garage area shall not be
considered a parking space except as otherwise provided by Township
ordinance. A parking space shall have adequate base stone and be
paved with concrete, asphalt or other material with like qualities.
PEDESTRIAN — An individual traveling by foot.
PERMIT — Written governmental permission issued by an authorized
official empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by
law but not allowed without such authorization.
PERMIT, BUILDING — A permit issued by the designated Township
official prior to construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or
addition to a building, structure or part thereof.
PERMITTED USE — A use allowed by right in a zoning district subject
to the restrictions applicable to that use and zoning district.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic; including a trustee,
a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative thereof.
PLOT PLAN — A drawing which indicates the uses, locations,
dimensions, and orientations of all physical features on a lot including,
but not necessarily limited to, property lines, streets, buildings,
structures, access to buildings or structures, driveways, parking areas,
walkways, patios, other impervious surfaces, large trees, on-site sewer
or water systems, easements, deed restrictions, detention basins, and
other significant natural features located on a lot, and the uses of all
contiguous lots.
PRESERVATION or PROTECTION — When used in connection with
natural and historic resources, shall include means to conserve and
safeguard these resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall
not be interpreted to authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry,
mining or other lawful uses of natural resources.[Added 5-23-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-7]
PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land use for agricultural purposes
that contains soils of the first, second or third class as defined by
the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource and
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:477
Conservation Services County Soil Survey.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-7]
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominate use of a lot.
PROHIBITED USE — A use that is not permitted in a zoning district.
PROPERTY MARKER — An iron pin, or other material of construction
acceptable to the Township Engineer, placed on a property line.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any improvement or other facility which is,
or is intended to be, the responsibility of, or located within a right-ofway
or easement of, the Township.
QUORUM — A majority of the full membership of the Township
Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors
as is required by the Municipalities Planning Code, as last amended,136
to take official action or render a decision regarding a land use
application.
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of land separating a street from adjacent
property.
RETENTION AREA — A water impoundment which generally contains
water throughout the year, made by constructing a dam or embankment
or by excavating a pit, for the purpose of retaining runoff water for a
period of time and releasing it slowly into the ground or into its natural
watercourse.
REVIEW — An examination of applications, sketches, plans, or
submissions of an applicant in accordance with the procedures
established by the Township for this purpose.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land, usually linear in configuration, set aside for
use as streets, roads, pedestrian ways or other means of travel and/or
for the location of other public utilities.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING — The legal right-of-way as established by
the commonwealth or other appropriate governing authority and
currently in existence.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE — The right-of-way established by the
Towamencin Township Comprehensive Plan, as last amended, and
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and designated on the
Official Right-of-Way Map on file in the Township Office. The ultimate
right-of-way is intended to provide adequate width for future street and/
or utility improvements within the Township.
RUNOFF — The volume of surface water discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but
runs off the surface of the land.
SANITARY SEWER — A public or private utility system designed to
collect, centrally treat and dispose of sewage from customers in
136. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:478
compliance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources or of the Township, or the Authority.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter
is accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water, or by gravity. Once
this matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually
referred to as "sediment."
SETBACK — The distance between a lot line and the closest portion of a
building, structure, use or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered
steps.
SETBACK LINE — That line that is the required minimum distance from
the ultimate street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes
the area within which the principal structure must be located. (See
"building envelope.")
SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PRIVATE —
SEWER, STORM — A system of conduits that collect and route
stormwater to a surface water discharge point.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance of unobstructed view established in
accordance with accepted engineering practice from a predetermined
driver's eye height to the furthest visible point a predetermined
distance above the street surface.
SIGN — Any device used to identify or call attention to a business,
residence, location, event, organization or notice by any means,
including, but not limited to, words, letters, figures, design, symbols,
fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
SIGN AREA — The gross area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of such sign.
SITE — A parcel of land intended to have one or more structures,
buildings or uses, or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
SITE AREA — All land area within a site as defined by deed and
determined by field survey excluding rights-of-way of existing public
roads.
ON-LOT — An on-lot septic system comprised of a septic tank
and disposal field intended to service effluent disposal from one
building or a group of buildings on a single lot under single
ownership in compliance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, the Montgomery County
Health Department, and/or the Township.
(1)
COMMUNITY SYSTEMS — A sewage disposal system designed
and intended to serve more than a single lot or more than one
building or dwelling unit under separate ownership in compliance
with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources,
the Montgomery County Health Department and/or the Township,
whichever is more stringent.
(2)
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:479
SITE PLAN — The map of the property showing the proposed location
of facilities, structures and other improvements.
SLOPE — The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal,
usually expressed in percent or degrees. (See "grade.")
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever
origin that overlies bedrock and can be readily excavated.
SOIL, AGRICULTURAL — Soils classified in the Soil Survey of
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, and U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service. The term, unless otherwise specified, refers
to land capability units I, II and III, which may be considered prime
agricultural soils.
SOILS, ALLUVIAL/FLOODPLAIN — Areas subject to periodic flooding
and listed in the Soil Survey of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, and
U.S. Department of Agricultural Soil Conservation Service, as being
"on, or in, the floodplain" or "subject to flooding." The following soil
types are alluvial and/or floodplain soils:
SOILS, HYDRIC — Soils that are categorized as poorly drained that can
support hydrophytic plants, but may not do so in many cases. For the
purpose of this chapter, hydric soils are general wetland indicator soils.
(See "wetlands.")
SOIL SURVEY — A report entitled "Soil Survey of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania," published April 1967, and inclusive of any amendments,
by the Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture, which is available in the Township or through the
Montgomery County Conservation District.
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope exceeds 15% which,
because of its slope, is subject to high rates of stormwater runoff and,
therefore, erosion.
STORY — That part of a building located between a floor and the floor
or roof next above. The first story of a building is the lowest story
having 1/2 or more of its walls above grade level. A "half story" is a
story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
(1) Alluvial Land.
(2) Alton Gravelly Loam, flooded.
(3) Bowmansville Silt Loam.
(4) Hatboro Silt Loam.
(5) Marsh.
(6) Pope Loam.
(7) Rowland Silt Loam.
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:480
STREET — A right-of-way municipally or privately owned, serving as a
means of vehicular and pedestrian travel and access.
STREET, ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A street connecting districts or
communities, serving large volumes of fast-moving through traffic.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street carrying a higher volume of fastmoving
traffic than a feeder street.
STREET, CONTROLLED ACCESS — A street connecting districts or
communities, serving large volumes of fast-moving through traffic,
which is physically divided by barriers and which has a limited amount
of entrances and exits.
STREET, FEEDER — A street connecting local access streets to streets
of a higher order, such as collector streets or controlled access streets,
and which carries a lesser volume of traffic.
STREET LINE — See "lot line, front."
STREET, LOCAL ACCESS — A street used primarily as the principal
means of access to local properties, and which carries a small volume
of traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE — A right-of-way, which is not publicly owned,
serving as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel and access.
STREET, SERVICE OR MARGINAL ACCESS — A street parallel and
adjacent to an arterial street providing access to abutting properties by
a cartway separated from the arterial street by a reserve strip.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — See "alteration."
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
surface.
SURVEYOR — An individual registered with and licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the practice of surveying.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT — An area of land
developed for a compatible mixture of residential units for various
income levels and nonresidential commercial and workplace uses,
including some structures that provide for a mix of uses within the same
building. Residences, shops, offices, workplaces, public buildings, and
parks are interwoven within the neighborhood so that all are within
relatively close proximity to each other. Traditional neighborhood
development is relatively compact, limited in size and oriented toward
pedestrian activity. It has an identifiable center and a discernible edge.
The center of the neighborhood is in the form of a public park,
commons, plaza, square, or prominent intersection of two or more
major streets. Generally, there is a hierarchy of streets laid out in a
rectilinear or grid pattern of interconnecting streets and blocks that
provides multiple routes from origins to destinations and are
appropriately designed to serve the needs of pedestrians and vehicles
equally.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:481
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — See "right-of-way, ultimate."
USE — Includes the phrases "arranged," "designed" and "intended to
be used" and shall mean a specific purpose for which land, buildings or
structures are designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained,
or any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or
intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a lot,
parcel or tract of land.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use located on the same lot with a principal use,
and clearly incidental and subordinate to, and in connection with, the
principal use.
USE, MUNICIPAL — Any use created or facility utilized by Towamencin
Township, any authority created by Towamencin Township under the
Municipality Authorities Act137 or in any authority in which the
Township participates, for the provisions of governmental functions
or public services or the maintenance of the public health, safety, or
welfare including, but not limited to, the public administration, police,
fire, recreation and public work uses.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use on a lot and/or of a building or
structure thereon.
UTILITIES — Those services customarily rendered by public utility
corporations, municipalities, or municipal authorities, to include, but
not necessarily limited to, electricity, gas, telephone, cable TV, water
and sewage, and the appurtenances used in connection with the
supplying of such services, including, but not limited to, buildings,
wires, pipes and poles.
VILLAGE — An unincorporated settlement that is part of a Township
where residential and mixed-use densities of one unit to the acre or
more exist or are permitted and commercial, industrial or institutional
uses exist or are permitted.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
WAIVER — Permission or approval granted by the Board of Supervisors
in accordance with this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as last amended, consisting of a modification of or
deviation from the exact provisions of this chapter as applied to the
subdivision and/or development of a specific piece of property or
portions of the same.
WATER SUPPLY, INDIVIDUAL — A system for supplying and
distributing potable water to a single dwelling and accessory building
thereto from a source located on the same lot.
WATER SYSTEM, PRIVATE CENTRALIZED — Any privately owned
system for the supplying and distribution of potable water from a
common source to two or more dwelling units and/or lots.
WATER SYSTEM, PUBLIC — Any supply system owned and/or operated
by an authority or other approved public entity.
137. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:482
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface
or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil condition,
including swamps, marshes, bogs, or similar areas which meet the
characteristics and criteria for wetlands as established by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, the U.S. Army
Corp of Engineers and/or the Pennsylvania Fish and Wildlife Service.
WOODLANDS — Areas, groves, or stands of mature or largely mature
trees, the majority of which are greater than six inches (15.24
centimeters) caliper measured four feet (1.2192 meters) above grade
covering an area greater than 1/4 of an acre (1,011.75 square meters);
or groves of mature trees without regard to minimum area consisting
of more than 10 individual specimens which are greater than 12 inches
(30.48 centimeters) caliper measured four feet (1.2192 meters) above
grade.
YARD — An open, unoccupied area located on the same lot with a
building, structure and/or use and which is unobstructed from the
ground to the sky except for public utility lines or facilities, landscaping
and parking as restricted by the applicable zoning district.
YARD, FRONT — A required or existing yard between the front yard
line and the ultimate street right-of-way line and extending the entire
length of the street line. In the case of a corner lot, the yards extending
along all streets are front yards. In the case of a lot other than a corner
lot that fronts on more than one street, the yards extending along all
streets are front yards.
YARD LINE — A line drawn parallel to and within a lot line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required yard.
YARD, REAR — A required or existing yard between the rear yard line
and the rear lot line and extending the entire length of, and parallel to,
the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A required or existing yard between a side yard line and
a side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. In the
case of a lot having no street frontage or a lot of odd shape, any yard
that is not a front yard or a rear yard shall be considered a side yard.
ZONE — A specifically delineated area or district in the Township
within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use,
placement, spacing and size of land, buildings and structures.
ZONING — The dividing of the Township into districts or zones and the
establishment of regulations governing each and every zone.
ZONING ENVELOPE — The three-dimensional space within which a
structure is permitted to be erected on a lot and which is defined
by maximum height regulations, bulk, area and yard setback
requirements.
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map of Towamencin Township.
§ 136-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-300
1:483
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer designated with the
exclusive powers and duties of administering and enforcing the Zoning
Ordinance.138
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance
of 1956, as last amended.139
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-300
1:484
ARTICLE IV
Procedure for Subdivision and Land Development
§ 136-400. Plan processing procedures.
To discharge the duties imposed by law, the Township has adopted the
following plan processing procedures which shall be followed by all
applicants for approval of a subdivision or land development plan:
§ 136-401. Schedule of plan processing steps.
A. Plans shall be submitted in the following order:
(1) Tentative sketch plan (recommended, but optional).
(2) Preliminary plan (major or minor, as applicable).
(3) Final plan.
B. An applicant shall submit to the Township the required copies of each
plan, as is designated in the Township subdivision and land
development submissions and procedures for application.
C. Amended preliminary or final plan. In the event that a preliminary or
final subdivision or land development plan is amended, changed,
revised, or altered in any respect after the original submission date, the
developer or subdivider may be asked to extend the time period for
consideration of the plan.
D. When the decision results in a denial of a specific plan, then the
applicant, when and if he should reapply, shall do so in accordance with
the plan sequence as outlined in this chapter.
E. Application for approval of a subdivision or land development plan shall
be received by the Township. Submittal and processing fees for plans
and specifications for such plans shall accompany the application.
When a preliminary plan is submitted which is not in conformance with
the Zoning Ordinance,140 as last amended, any approval of such plan
shall be, and shall be presumed to be, conditioned upon obtaining any
and all necessary relief from such ordinance by the Zoning Hearing
Board. Upon the grant of such a preliminary plan approval conditioned
upon the favorable decision of the Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant
shall submit an application for such zoning relief. Upon the grant of a
final unappealable decision by the Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant
shall provide evidence thereof and shall so note same on the plan.
A. Applications for subdivision or land development accompanied by the
required copies of the proposed plan and appropriate fees, as
designated in the Township subdivision and land development
application, shall be received by the appropriate Township official.
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-401
1:485
Failure to submit a completed application or appropriate fees shall
result in the application being returned as an incomplete application.
Any incomplete application shall not be considered a formal
application.
B. Towamencin Township application fees shall be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors by resolution from time to time. The appropriate fees shall
be received in accordance with the current fee schedules of
Towamencin Township, Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal
Authority and the Montgomery County Planning Commission.
Applicants shall pay for review of all applications and other matters
pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
C. Applicants shall furnish an escrow fund sufficient to pay all fees and
costs required for the administration of this chapter. The escrow fund
shall be paid when preliminary plans (and/or final plans) are submitted
for review and approval. The escrow fund shall be sufficient to
guarantee the payment of:
(1) The services of the Township engineers, Township consultants, and
Township Solicitor related to review and consideration of the
application, and all other costs for planning, engineering, traffic
surveys, and professional certification and administrative costs as
deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors in reviewing plans;
(2) The actual cost of all sanitary sewerage, drainage, water, and
materials tests.
D. The date of official acceptance of the application shall be considered to
be the date of the first regular meeting of the Township Planning
Commission following the filing of the application, or 90 days after final
order of court remanding an application to the Township, as the case
may be. The ninety-day review period begins upon this date. The
applicant may agree, in writing, to waive the ninety-day review period.
[Amended 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
E. Upon submission, a cursory examination of the plan will be conducted
to ensure basic compliance with the plan submission requirements of
this article and the subdivision and land development submissions and
procedures for application.
F. The Township may distribute copies of the plan to the following for
review:
(1) Township Board of Supervisors.
(2) Township Planning Commission.
(3) Montgomery County Planning Commission, along with applicable
fee.
(4) Township Engineer.
§ 136-401 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-401
1:486
(5) Township Traffic Engineer.
(6) Township landscape architect/consultant.
(7) Township Zoning Officer.
(8) Township Fire Marshal.
(9) Township Fire Chief.
(10) Township Police Chief.
(11) Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Authority, along with
applicable fee.
(12) Township record file.
(13) Upon request, to an adjacent municipality (in which case, applicant
shall provide additional copies of all application documents for
each and every requesting adjacent municipality). [Added
5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
G. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to obtain the following permits
or approvals, if applicable:
(1) Highway occupancy permit (state, county or Township).
(2) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
(a) Approval for planning module for land development;
(b) Water quality management permit;
(c) Stream encroachment permit;
(d) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit.
(3) Montgomery County Conservation District.
(a) Erosion and sedimentation approval;
(b) Stormwater management permit.
(4) North Penn Water Authority (or other appropriate Water Authority).
(5) Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Authority.
(6) Montgomery County Health Department.
H. The Board of Supervisors shall act on the plan within 90 days of the
date of official acceptance of the preliminary plan or prior to the end of
any extension of time agreed to by the applicant. The following optional
consequences shall result from action by the Board of Supervisors:
(1) If the Board of Supervisors approves the preliminary plan without
conditions, the Township Manager will so certify and the applicant
§ 136-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-401
1:487
§ 136-402. Recording of plan.
will then submit final plans in accordance with this chapter and the
subdivision and land development submissions and procedures for
application;
(2) The Board of Supervisors may conditionally approve a preliminary
plan, in which case the applicant must agree, in writing, to accept
the conditions of the approval;
(3) If the Board of Supervisors disapproves the preliminary plan, the
Township Manager will notify the applicant, in writing, and will
describe the requirements which have not been met and shall cite
the provisions of state law or Township ordinance relied upon.
I. Approval of the preliminary plan by the Board of Supervisors will be
tentative only, shall confer no vested rights on the parties in interest,
and changes or modifications therein may subsequently be required if
the Board of Supervisors determines the same to be necessary.
J. Any final plan for which the record plan is not recorded within five
years of the date of approval of the preliminary plan must be submitted
as an entirely new plan.
A. Upon approval of a final plan of subdivision or land development, the
Township shall record such plan, at the applicant's expense, in the
office of Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. The
approved final plan shall bear the official signature and Seal of
Towamencin Township. The plan shall be recorded within 90 days of the
date of final approval or the date the approval of the governing body is
noted on the plan, whichever is later. [Amended 5-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-7]
B. After a subdivision or land development plan shall have been officially
recorded, the streets, parks and public improvements shown thereon
shall be considered to be part of the Official Map summary of the
Township. Streets, parks, and other public improvements shown on a
subdivision or land development plan to be recorded may be offered for
dedication to the Township by formal notation thereof, or the
subdivider, developer or builder may note on such plan that such
improvements have not been offered for dedication to the Township.
Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision or land
development plan that shall have been recorded as provided herein
shall be deemed to be a private street, park, or improvement until such
time as the same shall have been offered for dedication to the Township
and accepted, by ordinance or resolution, or until it shall have been
condemned for use as a public street, park, or other improvement.
§ 136-401 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-403
1:488
§ 136-403. Required improvements and contracts.
Before the Board of Supervisors shall cause its approval to be endorsed
upon the final plans of any subdivisions or land development, except in the
case of subdivisions wherein the Board of Supervisors imposes no condition
or conditions for the approval of the plan as a requirement for the approval
thereof, the owners shall enter into a written agreement with the Township
in the manner and form set forth by the Township Solicitor which shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. To construct or cause to be constructed, at the owner's expense, all
streets, curbs, sidewalks, fire hydrants, streetlights, drainage facilities,
water and sewer facilities, street name signs, stop signs, other required
highway signs, monuments, capped sewers, parks and other
improvements shown on said final plan when required to the standards
and specifications of the Township;
B. To maintain, at the owner's cost, the streets, curbs, sidewalks, drainage
facilities, water and sewer facilities, street signs, parks, monuments,
fire hydrants, streetlighting, capped sewers and other improvements,
until the same are accepted or condemned by the Township for public
use, and for a period of 18 months thereafter to repair or construct the
same or any part of one of them when such repair or reconstruction
shall be specified by the Board of Supervisors as necessary by reason of
faulty construction, workmanship, or materials;
C. To install, or cause to be installed, at the owner's expense and without
any cost to the Township for any part of such installation, streetlighting
facilities on all streets within and abutting the subdivision;
D. To pay all costs, charges or rates of the utility furnishing electric service
for the lighting of the streets on or abutting said subdivision, for the
lights installed by the owner, until such time as streets shown on the
subdivision plans shall be accepted as public streets of the Township by
resolution, or by condemnation proceedings, and to indemnify and hold
harmless the Township from and against all suit, actions, claims, and
demands for electric service to the streets shown on said plans, or any
part thereof, to the time that said streets shall be accepted as public
streets of the Township in manner hereinabove set forth;
E. To pay the inspection fees required by the Township;
F. To obtain the rights-of-way and/or easements and releases required
when any street, drainage facility or other improvement wherein a
subdivision abuts or traverses land of persons other than the person
holding legal title to the lands of the subdivision at his own cost, and
obtain from the owner of the land so abutted or traversed full releases
from all damages which may result from change in grade, construction,
or otherwise, of the street, drainage facility or other improvements and
such releases shall ensure to the benefit not only of the owner of the
subdivision, but to the Township as well;
§ 136-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-403
1:489
§ 136-404. Financial guarantee for improvements.
In order to assure the Township that the streets, drainage facilities, water
and sewer facilities, curbs, sidewalks, street signs, fire hydrants,
streetlighting facilities, monuments, parks, and capped sewers shown on
said final plans, and other improvements shown on said final plans, which
the Board of Supervisors shall require the owner to install, at his own
expense, shall be constructed and installed in strict accordance with the
plan, finally approved, and with the standards, regulations and
specifications of the Township, and shall be maintained until accepted
or condemned by the Township, the owner shall furnish to the Township
financial security or cash as the Board of Supervisors shall approve and
shall deposit with the Township an amount sufficient to cover the cost
of all improvements and of lighting the streets until the same shall be
accepted by the Township, as estimated by the Township Engineer or Board
of Supervisors plus an additional 10%. In addition, the owner shall pay all
legal expenses and engineering fees incurred by the Township related to the
project and shall pay the Township for administrative costs in accordance
with the Township's fee schedule.
G. To promptly remove or cause to be removed snow from the streets as
may be required for safe traverse of the streets prior to dedication;
H. To promptly reimburse to the Township attorney and engineer fees;
I. Payment of all applicable fees;
J. Such other provision(s) as deemed necessary or desired by the Board of
Supervisors or Township Solicitor.
K. The applicant shall not be required to provide financial security for the
cost of any improvements for which financial security is required by and
provided to the Department of Transportation in connection with the
issuance of a highway occupancy permit pursuant to Section 420 of the
Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway
Law."141 [Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
A. In lieu of posting financial security or depositing securities as above
provided, the owner may elect to deposit with the Township funds in an
equivalent amount to be held in escrow per an agreement prepared by
the Township Solicitor which shall be entered into by the owner, the
Township and the escrow agent, if any. Such escrow agreement shall
provide that, as the work of constructing the required public
improvements progresses, the Township or escrow agent holding said
funds will release and refund at the request of the owner, from the
funds deposited, sums equivalent to the estimated value of work
completed, less 10% retainage, upon delivery of a certificate of
completion signed by the owner, the Township Engineer, the Township
Manager and the Township Solicitor. Otherwise, said funds are to be
141. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 136-403 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-404
1:490
held by the Township or escrow agent to the benefit and use of the
Township in the event the owner fails or neglects to perform the terms
provided for under § 136-403 hereof.
B. After the owner shall have completed all of the improvements required
by said escrow agreement and has received the final payment provided
under the aforementioned escrow agreement, and has received the
final payment provided under the aforementioned procedure, after the
Board of Supervisors shall have accepted the streets, facilities and
other improvements as public streets, public facilities, and public
improvements in the manner provided, the remaining escrow shall be
reduced to 15% of the fund and shall serve to guarantee the
maintenance, repair or reconstruction of the said improvements by the
owner, for a period of 18 months thereafter, required under the
provisions of § 136-403 hereof, and said remaining fund will, upon
faithful compliance with those provisions, be released and refunded to
the owner upon the signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the
Board of Supervisors. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the owner
from substituting a maintenance bond by a company satisfactory to the
Board of Supervisors, and, in such case, the 15% remaining in the funds
shall be released and refunded at the same time that the maintenance
bond is accepted by the Township Board of Supervisors.
C. The improvements guarantee, whether in the form of bond or deposit
agreement, shall be conditioned upon:
(1) The owner constructing or installing, or causing to be constructed
or installed, the streets, drainage facilities, water and sewer
facilities, curbs, sidewalks, street signs, lighting facilities, capped
sewers, shown on said plans, as the Board of Supervisors may
require the owner to construct or install;
(2) The owner maintaining, at his own cost, the streets, curbs,
drainage facilities, water and sewer facilities, sidewalks, street
signs, parks, monuments, capped sewers and other improvements,
until the same are accepted or condemned by the Township for
public use and for a period of 18 months thereafter repairing and
reconstructing the same or any part of the improvements when
such repair or reconstruction shall be specified as necessary, by
reason of faulty construction, by the Board of Supervisors;
(3) The payment by the owner of the costs of lighting the streets in the
subdivision until such time as the streets are accepted by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors or by condemnation
proceedings;
(4) The payment of any and all fees and administrative costs required
by the Township;
(5) The faithful performance by the owner of the contract provided for
in this chapter.
§ 136-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-405
1:491
§ 136-405. Registration of agricultural subdivisions.
A. Criteria. The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of 10 acres (40,470 square meters) or more, not involving any
new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling unit, shall
be exempted from these subdivision regulations. To ensure compliance
with the criteria for exemption, no owner shall effect a subdivision or a
division of land, even for agricultural purposes in parcels of more than
10 acres (40,470 square meters), unless the owner received a
certification of exemption from the Board of Supervisors based upon
the owner's proof that:
(1) The parcels shall each be more than 10 acres (40,470 square
meters) in size;
(2) All parcels shall be used for agricultural purposes;
(3) No new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling
unit shall be involved.
B. Application. To apply for the certification, the owner shall submit the
required proofs in the form required by this chapter for minor
subdivision plans and, in addition to a notarized statement
acknowledging ownership, the following statement shall appear on the
plan with the signature of the owner:
"All lots shown hereon are at least 10 acres (40,470 square meters)
in area and are to be used exclusively for agricultural purposes in
accordance with the Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance, as last
amended, and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as last
amended."
C. Action. If the Board of Supervisors finds that all of the criteria are met,
the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors shall sign the plan. If the
Board of Supervisors finds that all of the criteria are not met, the Board
of Supervisors shall notify the owner that the proposed subdivision is
required to comply with all of the procedures and requirements of these
regulations.
§ 136-405 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-405
1:492
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 136-500. Applicability.
§ 136-501. General design standards.
The following principles of subdivision and land development, general
requirements, and minimum standards of design shall be observed by the
applicant in all instances:
A. The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered
minimum standards and requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
B. Where literal compliance with the standards specified herein is clearly
impractical, the Board of Supervisors may, upon the written request of
the applicant, modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable
utilization of property while securing substantial conformance with the
objectives of this chapter. Such modifications, together with the reasons
therefor, shall be in writing.
C. Where areas or instances of design arise not directly addressed by this
chapter, the guidelines, policies, and standards of practice of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources, the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service, the U.S. Department of Transportation,
Montgomery County Soil and Water Conservation District, the
American Society of State Highway and Transportation Officials, the
American Society of Civil Engineers, the Institute of Traffic Engineers
and other generally recognized design authorities shall be consulted
and observed by the applicant. In all instances where the minimum
standards of design are not sufficient to protect the health, welfare, and
safety of the public, the Board of Supervisors, upon the advice of the
Township Planning Commission and Township Engineer, reserves the
right to require higher standards of design.
A. All subdivisions shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the Township. All subdivisions shall
conform to the streets, drainage right-of-way, school sites, public parks
and playgrounds, etc., as shown on the officially adopted
Comprehensive Plan of Towamencin Township, as last amended.
B. All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets,
public lands or other proposed uses so that remnants and landlocked
areas shall not be created. Exceptions may be made at the discretion of
the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendations from the Township
Planning Commission, when a limited number of lots (comprising no
more than 15% of the total area of any tract) are created, which clearly
will not affect the ultimate development of a particular tract. The
§ 136-500 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-501
1:493
burden of proof is on the applicant to show that limited subdivision will
not affect the ultimate development of the entire tract.
C. Whenever possible, applicants shall preserve trees, groves, waterways,
scenic points, historic spots and other community assets and
landmarks. The applicant should refer to the Comprehensive Plan of
Towamencin Township, as last amended, to help identify features
worthy of preservation.
D. Subdivision and land developments should be laid out so as to avoid the
necessity for excessive cut or fill unless specifically warranted by
terrain or location.
E. Floodplain areas shall not be subdivided or developed except in strict
compliance with the standards and requirements of the floodplain
section of this article142 and the Township Zoning Ordinance,143 as last
amended.
F. Where no centralized water supply is available to the subdivision or
land development, the Board of Supervisors may require the subdivider,
developer, or builder to obtain from the Department of Environmental
Resources certificates of approval as to the quality and adequacy of the
water supply proposed to be utilized by the subdivider, developer, or
builder, and approval of the type and construction methods to be
employed in the installation of the individual water supply system, in
accordance with current state and Township regulations. Consideration
should be given to the probability of an eventual interconnection with a
centralized water system in the future.
G. The subdivision plat shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to require the minimum feasible amounts of land coverage,
and the minimum feasible disturbance of soil and site by grading,
excavation and other land alterations.
H. The subdivision plat shall be planned, designed, constructed and
maintained to avoid substantial probabilities of:
(1) Accelerated erosion;
(2) Pollution, contamination, or siltation of water bodies including
ponds, lakes, rivers, and streams;
(3) Damage to vegetation to remain in the subdivision;
(4) Injury to wildlife and fish habitats.
I. Where the subdivision or land development is inaccessible to sanitary
sewers, the Board of Supervisors shall require the subdivider,
developer or builder to obtain from the Department of Environmental
Resources, the Montgomery County Health Department and
142. Editor's Note: See § 136-519, Floodplain areas.
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-501 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-501
1:494
§ 136-502. Community facilities.
Towamencin Township certificates of approval of the sewage disposal
facilities to be provided by the subdivider, developer or builder, in
accordance with current state regulations.
J. Applicants shall observe the ultimate rights-of-way for contiguous
existing streets as prescribed by the Ultimate Right-of-Way Map for the
Township. Additional portions of the corridors for such streets shall be
offered for dedication, when required by the Township, to the
governmental agency having jurisdiction. Applicable building setback
lines shall be delineated as measured from the ultimate right-of-way.
Additional right-of-way may be necessary at intersections for turning
lanes.
K. Proposed subdivision and land development shall be coordinated with
the existing nearby neighborhood so that the community, as a whole,
may develop harmoniously.
L. Improvement construction requirements will be completed under
specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation;
Montgomery County Public Works Department, Roads and Bridges
Division; Department of Environmental Resources; the Montgomery
County Conservation District; the Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin
Municipal Authority; Towamencin Township or other appropriate
agencies or the specifications included herein, whichever specifications
shall result in the more favorable interpretation of this chapter.
M. Construction of facilities. The subdivider, developer or builder shall,
where specified by the governing body, construct and install with no
expense to the Township the streets, curbs, sidewalks, water mains,
sanitary and storm sewers, streetlights, fire hydrants, street signs,
shade trees, monuments and other facilities and utilities specified in
this article. The construction and installation of such facilities and
utilities shall be subject to inspection by appropriate Township officials
during the progress of the work, and the subdivider shall pay for
inspection.
A. In reviewing subdivision plans, the Township Planning Commission
shall consider whether community facilities in the area are adequate to
serve the needs of the additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision
and shall make such report thereon as it deems necessary in the public
interest.
B. Subdividers shall reserve land for both public and quasi-public
community facilities and will reserve areas for facilities normally
required in residential neighborhoods, including churches, libraries,
schools and other public buildings, and parks, playgrounds and
playfields.
§ 136-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-502
1:495
C. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
suitably prepared to provide for such use.
D. Prior to the preparation of plans, subdividers of large tracts shall
review with the Township Planning Commission the minimum
standards for various community facilities applicable to the tract being
subdivided.
E. Parks, recreation, and open space land. Except as already provided
within the MRC District, the Township Planning Commission shall
consider the need for suitable open areas for recreation and shall make
a recommendation thereon. Standards to be used by the Township
Planning Commission in determining space for recreation shall be as
follows:
Dwelling Units
Minimum Playground and
Neighborhood Park Acreage
1 to 49 1.5 to 2.5
50 to 100 2.5 to 3.5
100 to 200 3.5 to 5.0
200 to 400 5.0 to 7.0
For each additional 100 units 1.0 to 2.0
NOTE: A fee may be required in lieu of dedication.
(1) Provision shall be made for suitable open space for parks,
playgrounds, and recreational areas (hereafter called "open
space"), with consideration being given to the preservation of
natural features, including large trees, groves of trees, waterways,
scenic points, historic points, and other community assets.
(2) Amount. Land for open space shall be provided in any subdivision
or land development as follows:
(a) Single-family residential. For any subdivision or land
development of one or more units, there shall be set aside for
open space 2,000 square feet (185.8 square meters) of land for
each and every dwelling unit, excluding existing dwelling
units. Such land shall meet the requirements of Subsection
E(3) hereof.
(b) Multifamily residential.
[1] The following shall apply:
§ 136-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-502
1:496
Multifamily Residential
Dwelling Units Per
Developable Acre Percent of Total Gross Area
1 to 4 3% + 2% x No. of Dwelling
Units/Acre
5 to 8 8% + 1% x No. of Dwelling
Units/Acre
[2] Such land shall meet the requirements of Subsection E(3)
hereof.
(c) Nonresidential.
[1] Open space shall be provided in conjunction with
development of all nonresidential uses including, but not
limited to, the following, except as hereafter provided for:
Shopping Center, Commercial, and Village Commercial,
Planned Business Campus, Limited Industrial, and
Institutional, by setting aside 10% of the gross area of the
tract being developed. Such land shall meet the
requirements of Subsection E(3) hereof.
(d) Fee in lieu of.
[1] In lieu of requiring the open space for residential or
nonresidential uses as set forth above, the Board of
Supervisors and applicant may agree for the payment, in
lieu of the dedications as set forth in this chapter, of
certain payments or capital contributions.
[2] With regard to Shopping Center, Commercial and Village
Commercial, Planned Business Campus, Limited Industrial
and Institutional, a payment as adopted by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors for each 3,000 square feet (278.7
square meters) or part thereof of building area.
(3) Open space land.
(a) Land to be provided for open space in connection with a
subdivision or land development shall be suitable for its
intended purpose. The following shall not be included in the
calculation of required open space land:
[1] Impervious surface coverage; for example, public or
private streets or parking areas;
[2] Retention/detention basins;
[3] Public or private utility easements;
[4] Any area conveyed to the owner or occupant of a dwelling
such as yard areas;
§ 136-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-502
1:497
[5] More than 30% of required buffer yard areas.
(b) The land to be provided shall be set aside as contiguous parcels
unless the subdivision or land development is of such a size as
determined by the Board of Supervisors as to warrant the
development of separate open spaces, to serve different parts
of the tract. Any parcel provided as open space shall be
accessible from a public street.
(c) Land required to be set aside under Subsection E(2) above
shall be offered for dedication to the Township of Towamencin
for open space use. As part of the provision of public
improvements with respect to development of the subdivision
or land development, the developer shall make provisions for
improvements, if any, required to make the open space area
usable for its intended purposes. Such improvements shall be
shown on the plans prior to final approval by the Township
together with a note setting forth that the parcels are offered
for dedication to the Township. Provision for the cost of
improvements shall be made in the development agreement
and necessary funds escrowed or otherwise provided for in the
same manner as other funds are provided for the costs of other
public improvements. A Phase I environmental study shall be
completed by the applicant for all lands to be dedicated to the
Township. Five copies of the study shall be submitted to the
Township for review.
(d) In the event that the Township does not wish to accept the
dedication of the proposed open space land required to be set
aside under Subsection E(2) above, the developer shall, as part
of the final approval of the development plan, present a plan
subject to the approval of the Township for the perpetual
maintenance of such open space land as, for example, a
homeowners' association or similar entity.
(e) Where the Board of Supervisors and applicant/developer
determine, in their judgement, not to require the provision of
land pursuant to Subsection E(2)(a), (b), or (c) above, as a
whole or in part thereof, for open space, the developer shall be
required to pay a fee in lieu of the provision of open space as
set forth by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for each
proposed dwelling unit or each 3,000 square feet (278.7 square
meters) of building area of a nonresidential use in the
subdivision or land development. Such a fee shall be payable at
the time of final approval of the development plan. All monies
paid under the provisions of this subsection shall be set aside
in a separate account to be used for the acquisition and
improvement of parks, and open space.
(f) Fees collected under this section will be deposited in an
interest-bearing account identifying it as being set aside for
§ 136-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-502
1:498
recreational purposes and will be used within a period of three
years in accordance with the Township Park and Recreation
Plan. It is understood that said plan, from time to time, may
be amended and funds collected under this chapter shall be
used in order to effectuate the plan as currently existing or as
further amended.
F. Minimum land area. An individual area of less than two acres (8,094
square meters) shall not be reserved for recreation purposes if it will be
impractical or impossible to secure additional lands in order to increase
its area unless such smaller area is approved by the Township Planning
Commission and Supervisors as, for example, to provide a tot lot.
G. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and
location suitable for use as a playground, playfield, or for other
recreation purposes, and shall be relatively level and dry, not within an
area subject to flooding; and shall be improved by the developer to the
standards required by the Board of Supervisors upon the
recommendation of the Township Planning Commission which
improvements shall be included in the performance guarantee.
H. Open space. When open space is required by the Township, the
subdivision or land development plan shall contain or be supplemented
by such material as required to establish the method by which open
space shall be perpetuated, maintained, and administered. The plan
and other materials shall be construed as a contract between the
landowner(s) and the Township, and shall be noted on all deeds.
I. Plotting of recreation areas.
(1) When applicable, the location of the open space shall conform to
the Towamencin Township Comprehensive Plan and Park and
Recreation Plan, as last amended. In addition, due consideration
must be given to the preservation and maintenance of natural
features, including large trees, groves, walkways, scenic points,
historic spots, and other community assets.
(2) When open space is intended for active recreational purposes:
(a) At least one side of the recreation area shall abut a street for a
minimum distance of 50 feet (15.24 meters) for access; and
(b) A Type-B buffer, as described in this chapter, shall be provided
when such activities abut residential uses.
J. Open space designation. All land held for open space shall be so
designated on the plans. The plans shall contain the following
statement for lands in Subsection J(1), (2) and (3) below: "Open space
land may not be separately sold, nor shall such land be further
developed or subdivided." All subdivision plans shall further designate
the use of open space, the type of maintenance to be provided, and a
§ 136-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-502
1:499
planting plan or schedule. In designation use and maintenance, the
following classes may be used:
(1) Lawn. A grass area, with or without trees, which may be used by
the residents for a variety of purposes and which shall be mowed
regularly to insure a neat and tidy appearance.
(2) Natural area. An area of natural vegetation undisturbed during
construction, or replanted. Such areas may contain pathways.
Meadows shall be maintained as such and not left to become weedinfested.
Maintenance may be minimal, but shall prevent the
proliferation of weeds and undesirable plants such as honeysuckle
and poison ivy. Litter, dead trees and brush shall be removed, and
streams shall be kept in free-flowing condition.
(3) Recreation area. An area designated for a specific recreation use
including, but not limited to, tennis, swimming, shuffleboard,
playfield, and tot lot. Such areas shall be maintained so as to avoid
creating a hazard or nuisance, and shall perpetuate the proposed
use.
(4) Agricultural area. An area designated for family vegetable plots or
to be leased for an agricultural use.
K. Open space performance guarantee. The Board of Supervisors may
require that all landscaping, planting, and installation of recreation
facilities be provided by the developer. In such event, the guaranteed
installation of all improvements shall be provided in accordance with
this chapter.
L. Conveyance and maintenance of open space. All open space shown on
the final development plan as filed in the office of the Township
Secretary of Towamencin Township and subsequently recorded in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County, must be
conveyed in accordance with one or more of the following methods:
(1) Dedication in fee simple to the Township of Towamencin.
(a) The Township may, but shall not be required to, accept any
portion or portions of the open space, provided:
[1] Upon the recommendation of the Towamencin Township
Planning Commission, it is determined that such land is
suitable regarding size, shape, location, access and/or the
Township Open Space and Recreation Plan, the Board of
Supervisors may determine that such lands will benefit the
general public of Towamencin Township;
[2] The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such
lands;
[3] There is no cost involved to the Township;
§ 136-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-502
1:500
[4] The Board of Supervisors may adopt a resolution for
acquisition of such land upon the acceptance of a deed of
dedication for the landowner, provided the applicant has
agreed to contribute to an open space escrow fund of a
suitable amount, which shall be used only for the purposes
of open space capital improvements and maintenance.
(2) By conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a
corporation, homeowners' association, funded community trust,
condominium or other legal entity.
(a) The terms of such instrument of conveyance must include
provisions suitable to the Township for guaranteeing:
[1] The continued use of such land for the intended purpose;
[2] Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the
open space requiring maintenance;
[3] The availability of funds required for such maintenance;
[4] Adequate insurance protection;
[5] Provisions for payment of applicable taxes;
[6] Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation, or
otherwise;
[7] Such other covenants and/or easements that the Township
shall deem desirable to fulfill the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
(b) The following are prerequisites for such a corporation or
association:
[1] Membership must be mandatory for each buyer and/or
lease and any successive buyer and/or lease;
[2] It must be responsible for liability insurance, taxes,
recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or
otherwise, and the maintenance of recreational and other
facilities;
[3] Members or beneficiaries must pay their pro-rata share of
the costs, and the assessment levied can become a lien on
the property;
[4] It must be able to adjust the assessment to meet
conditions;
[5] Such corporation or association shall not be dissolved nor
shall it dispose of the open space, by sale or otherwise,
except to an organization conceived and established to
own and maintain the open space. The corporation or
§ 136-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-502
1:501
association must first offer to dedicate the open space to
the Township before any such sale or disposition of the
open space.
(c) The dedication of open space, streets, or other lands in
common ownership of the corporation, association or other
legal entity, shall not be subject to reversion for possible future
use for nonrecreational development.
(d) It is mandatory that the recorded plan and the deeds indicate
that there shall be no additional development. The open space
shall be restricted against any future building, development or
use except as is consistent with that of providing for the
continuance of agricultural uses and/or open space for
recreation, conservation, and aesthetic satisfaction of the
residents, or uses for noncommercial recreational or cultural
purposes compatible with the open space objectives may be
permitted only with the express approval of the Township,
following approval of the building site and operational plans by
the Township.
(e) All documents pertaining to the conveyance and maintenance
of the open space shall meet the approval of the Township
Solicitor as to legal form and effect and of the Township
Planning Commission as to suitability for the proposed use of
the open space.
(3) By conveying the restrictive covenants, conservation easements or
other legal device running to the Township of Towamencin or a
controversy, corporation, funded community trust, or other legal
entity, a portion of a building lot in excess of the minimum lot size
as required by the Zoning Ordinance,144 as last amended, may
qualify as open space, provided:
(a) The terms of such instrument of conveyance must include
provisions to the Township for guaranteeing the continued use
of such land for the preservation of open space.
(b) Each owner of the open space shall be responsible for liability
insurance, taxes, recovery of loss sustained by casualty,
condemnation or otherwise, and the general maintenance
thereon.
(c) It is mandatory that the recorded plan and the deeds indicate
that there shall be no structures or fences. The open space
shall be restricted against any future building, development or
use except as is consistent with that of providing for the
continuance of open space.
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-502
1:502
§ 136-503. Streets.
(d) All documents pertaining to the conveyance of these rights for
open space purposes shall meet the approval of the Township
Solicitor as to legal form and effect and to the Township
Planning Commission as to suitability for the proposed use of
the open space and be approved by the Board of Supervisors as
part of the final plan approval.
A. General.
(1) All street pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and
structure, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all
construction standards and specifications as set forth in this
chapter, the Towamencin Township Engineering Standards,145 as
last amended, along with the Towamencin Township Streets, Curbs
and Sidewalks Ordinance,146 as last amended, or as required by the
Township Engineer in the plan review process. Such improvements
shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be
submitted by the developer for final plan approval. [Amended
7-10-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
(2) All access driveways and private streets shall be constructed to the
standard applicable for public streets.
(3) Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges.
(4) Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the
Board of Supervisors, shall be constructed at the full expense of the
applicant without reimbursement from the Township. The sharing
expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to
the subdivider, as determined by the Board of Supervisors, will be
fixed by special agreement between the Board of Supervisors and
the applicant.
(5) Subdivisions that adjoin or contain existing Township, county, or
state streets that do not conform to widths as set forth in this
subsection shall have dedicated additional width along either one
or both sides of said street. If the subdivision is along one side only,
1/2 of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
(6) All new streets and rights-of-way intended for public use shall be
dedicated to the Township unless waived by the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Location of streets.
145. Editor's Note: The Towamencin Township Engineering Standards are included in Ch. 136A,
which immediately follows this chapter.
146. Editor's Note: See Ch. 133, Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks.
§ 136-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-503
1:503
(1) Conformance with adopted plans. The proposed street pattern shall
be properly regulated to existing streets, to the Township plan of
streets and to such county and state road and highway plans as
have been duly adopted by that agency.
(2) Arrangement. Streets shall be arranged in a manner to meet with
the approval of the Board of Supervisors, considered in relation to
both existing and planned streets, and located so as to allow proper
development of surrounding properties. Local access streets shall
be laid out to discourage their use as feeder or higher class streets.
Township Planning Commission shall provide a recommendation to
the Board of Supervisors regarding the proposed street
arrangement.
(3) Local access streets shall be so designed as to discourage through
traffic.
(4) If, in the opinion of the Township Planning Commission, it is
desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, streets
shall be extended to the boundary of such property.
(5) Streets shall be logically related to topography so as to produce
reasonable grades, satisfactory drainage and suitable building
sites. Streets shall be so arranged to be generally parallel rather
than cross contour lines as well as to prevent the necessity for
excessive cut and fill.
(6) Streets shall be laid out as to avoid hazard areas such as
floodplains, cliffs and steep slopes, large ravines, etc. A dual means
of access which does not go back through the same hazard area
shall be provided for all lots when one of the streets into a
subdivision crosses through a hazard area.
(7) Grading. The street shall be graded to the full width of the right-ofway,
in conformance with Township specifications.
(8) Provisions of streets for future development. Access shall be given
to all lots and portions of the tract in the subdivision and to
adjacent unsubdivided territory. Streets giving such access shall be
improved to the limits of the subdivision when required by the
Township. Remnants, reserve strips and landlocked areas shall not
be created.
(9) New streets. New streets shall be laid out to continue existing
streets at equal or greater right-of-way and cartway widths, where
practical.
(10) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited, unless designed
as cul-de-sac or designed for access exclusively to neighboring
tracts.
§ 136-503 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-503
1:504
(11) Street names. Continuations of existing streets shall be known by
the same name. Names for new streets shall not duplicate or
closely resemble names of existing streets. All street names are
subject to the approval of the Township. The Township has a list of
approved street names which shall be utilized by the applicant to
name streets.
C. Private driveways.
(1) Where private drives are permitted (drives not to be offered for
dedication and included within the lot area of residential,
commercial and industrial land developments for purposes of
internal circulation, service and access to parking and loading
areas), the minimum width of cartway for an internal private drive
shall conform to Towamencin Township Engineering Standards,147
as last amended. A private drive shall not be a through street and
shall be intended only for the internal use of the land development.
(2) All driveways shall conform with Towamencin Township
Engineering Standards, as last amended, along with the
Towamencin Township Driveway Ordinance,148 as last amended,
with the most stringent standards being applicable.
D. Partial or half streets.
(1) New half or partial streets and temporary turnaround will not be
permitted, except where essential to the reasonable subdivision of
a tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards
of this chapter and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for
dedication of the remaining part of the street can be obtained.
(2) Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the
other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the
subdivider to the Township. The Township may authorize a new
perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the
entire required street right-of-way width within his own subdivision
boundaries.
(3) The subdivider shall provide the entire required right-of-way or as
much thereof as is possible within his property, along all existing
streets that traverse or abut his property.
(4) Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the
Township's Comprehensive Plan, as last amended, or Traffic Study,
as last amended, or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for
realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of
the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to
improve and dedicate such areas for widening or realignment of
147. Editor's Note: The Towamencin Township Engineering Standards are included in Ch. 136A,
which immediately follows this chapter.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Driveways.
§ 136-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-503
1:505
such roads. Such frontage roads and streets shall be improved and
dedicated by the applicant to the full width as required by these
subdivision regulations.
(5) Where a subdivision borders an adjacent undeveloped parcel, the
Township may require improved stub streets to the adjacent
property line. Temporary turnarounds may be required. All
turnarounds shall be located adjacent to the developer's property
line. Such turnarounds shall be improved without curbs and paved
to the edge of the right-of-way. Additional temporary right-of-way
may be necessary for the turnaround. As the street is continued,
they shall be removed and the street shall be improved to the
typical street standards including a private drive which enters the
improved street.
(6) Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in
satisfying yard or area requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, as
last amended, whether the land is to be dedicated to the Township
in fee simple or an easement is granted to the Township.
E. Street classification.
(1) Existing streets. Each street abutting or affecting the design of a
subdivision or land development which is not already classified in
the Towamencin Township Comprehensive Plan, as last amended,
or Township Ultimate Right-of-Way Map shall be classified
according to its function, design and use by the Township Engineer.
(2) Proposed streets. All proposed streets, including private streets,
shall be classified and designed in accordance with their
anticipated average daily traffic (ADT) levels in accordance with
the following chart:
Street Classification Trip Generation (ADT)
Local access Less than 250
Feeder 250 to 1,000
Collector 1,000 to 3,000
Controlled access Greater than 3,000
Arterial highway N/A
F. Street right-of-way widths. The minimum public or private street rightof-
way shall be 50 feet (15.24 meters) or as specified in the Official Map
of Towamencin Township, as last amended, and/or as set forth in the
Towamencin Township Engineering Standards,149 as last amended.
G. Street cartway width. Street cartway width shall be as specified in the
Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as last amended.
149. Editor's Note: The Towamencin Township Engineering Standards are included in Ch. 136A,
which immediately follows this chapter.
§ 136-503 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-503
1:506
H. Street engineering criteria. Engineering criteria for streets shall be as
specified in the Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as last
amended.
I. Street intersections. Streets shall be laid out as specified in the
Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as last amended.
J. Site distance at intersections. Site distance at intersections shall be as
specified in the Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as last
amended, or PaDOT regulations, whichever provides for the greater
distance.
K. Access.
(1) When subdivisions result in lots abutting a feeder or controlled
access street, a service or marginal access street shall be provided
or the frontage shall be reversed so that the lots contiguous to such
street will front on an internal street with no direct access to the
higher order street. Such service or marginal access street may
also be required for lots abutting feeder streets at the discretion of
the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Screening, through the use of appropriate plant materials, fences
or walls subject to site plan review, shall be provided in a strip of
land along the rear property line of lots with reversed frontage to
buffer lots from the higher order street.
(3) Where subdivisions abut higher order streets and a service road or
reverse frontage is provided, the improvements to the higher order
street shall be provided as part of the construction improvements
for the project.
(4) Where a subdivision results in lots with frontage on such a higher
order street that the provision of a service road or reverse frontage
becomes impractical or unnecessary, the lot or lots in said
subdivision shall have driveways so laid out that it is possible to
turn passenger vehicles on the lot and it is not necessary to back
any passenger vehicle into the street.
(5) No subdivision containing reserve strips controlling access to
streets shall be approved except where the control and disposal of
land comprising such strips has been placed in the control of the
Township under conditions approved by the Board of Supervisors.
L. Access strips to rear lots within R-200 Districts.
(1) General. Whenever a lot is to be created which does not have the
bulk of the lot directly abutting a road, it shall be connected to the
road by an access strip which is held in fee simple ownership as a
part of the interior (rear) lot. The area within the access strip shall
not be used in calculating the minimum lot area required by the
Zoning Ordinance,150 as last amended.
§ 136-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-503
1:507
(2) Width. All access strips to rear lots shall have a minimum width of
50 feet (15.24 meters) throughout their entire length, except that
in the case of a rear lot used or to be used strictly for a single
residential unit this may be reduced to 25 feet (7.62 meters).
(3) Location. The location of the access strip must, in the opinion of the
Township Board of Supervisors, be deemed logical and proper
relative to the bulk (body) of the rear lot and surrounding property
configurations, and shall not, in its opinion, adversely affect
environmental features such as woods, steep slopes, streams,
floodplains, etc.
(4) Alignment. Any access strip shall not traverse a slope such that the
driveway therein would be required to be in excess of 10%
gradient; nor should any access strip generally contain a horizontal
turn greater than 45°.
(5) Spacing. There shall be no more than two abutting access strips to
rear lots, including existing access strips on parcels adjacent to
where the new ones are proposed. Each access strip or group of
two shall be separated from the next one by a distance at least
equal to the minimum width of one lot as required in the R-200
Residential District.
M. Driveways. All driveways shall conform to the Township Driveway
Ordinance,151 as last amended, PennDOT, or the Towamencin Township
Engineering Standards,152 as last amended, whichever is greater.
N. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) The cul-de-sac bulb will have a left-hand orientation where
practical as identified by the Towamencin Township Engineering
Standards, as last amended.
(2) The maximum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be determined by
the anticipated traffic volume generated from the street. Except for
within the R-200 District, the maximum anticipated traffic volume
permitted on a cul-de-sac is 250 ADT, as determined by the trip
generation rates within this chapter. Within the R-200 District a
maximum of 15 lots shall be permitted to take access from any
permanent cul-de-sac.
(3) A feeder street with radiating culs-de-sac may be permitted in
order to protect natural features or to provide for open space.
(4) Culs-de-sac shall be readily identifiable as such by traffic moving on
the street to which it is connected, such as by "Way" names.
150. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Driveways.
152. Editor's Note: The Towamencin Township Engineering Standards are included in Ch. 136A,
which immediately follows this chapter.
§ 136-503 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-503
1:508
(5) Where it is proposed that a road be constructed to an abutting
property line with the intention that such road will be extended
onto the adjoining property at a future date, a temporary cul-de-sac
shall be built to the above requirements and easements provided
where the paving exceeds the dedicated right-of-way. The
temporary cul-de-sac shall be built to abut the adjacent property.
O. Private streets in R-200 Districts.
(1) Intent. In keeping with the intent of the R-200 Residential District
to maintain a low-density character and minimize the extension of
suburban-type services and improvements into that district, private
roads are allowed provided they meet the criteria of this section.
(2) Number of lots served. Any accessway which serves as the access
to more than one lot or use shall be considered a private road
rather than an individual driveway, and must be constructed in
accordance with the applicable standards for local access streets.
Whenever more than eight residential lots share a private road, the
provision of a public road is required.
(3) Reconstruction of private road to public standards. The Board of
Supervisors reserves the right to order the reconstruction of the
private road up to Township standards and subsequent dedication
as a public road if they deem the road at any time to be a safety or
health hazard. Costs of such improvements shall be assessed
against the landowners who own the road and be borne totally by
them.
(4) Ownership. The private road shall be owned jointly by all abutting
property owners who have rights to utilize said road, and all shall
be jointly responsible for its maintenance and related costs. An
association of the landowners who have rights to use the road shall
be formed, and must be established and administered in a form
acceptable to the Township Board of Supervisors, and approved by
them prior to or at the same time as subdivision or land
development approval.
(5) Design standards. Where private roads are provided, they shall be
planned and constructed in accordance with the same standards
applicable to public local access streets relative to right-of-way
width, cul-de-sac radius, grades, culverts, drainage, horizontal and
vertical curves, tangents between curves, sight distance,
intersection alignment, intersection radius, interconnection to
adjacent parcels, and similar regulations.
(6) Further subdivision. Further subdivision of any lot fronting on the
private road which would create an additional lot fronting thereon
is prohibited if it would violate the maximum length of culs-de-sac,
or any other provision of this chapter, unless the private road is
reconstructed and dedicated as a public road. The homeowners'
association which controls the road must approve the
§ 136-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-503
1:509
§ 136-504. Sidewalks.
reconstruction and dedication in accordance with the procedures
established in their bylaws prior to the commencement of that
upgrading (unless the Township orders such pursuant the above).
(7) Statement in deed and plan. The responsibilities, authority, and
limitations required shall be clearly stated on the subdivision plan
which creates a private road and as a part of the deed to each lot
having rights to utilize same.
(8) Piecemeal creation of private roads within access strips. An access
strip containing an individual driveway may be upgraded into a
private road at any time, provided the right-of-way width and all
other requirements can be met by separating and establishing the
access strip as a private road right-of-way, widening the existing
driveway to the minimum standards for a private road, and creating
the required turnaround or cul-de-sac at the terminus of the
common-use area. All requirements for private roads shall be
applied thereto. Such transformation is encouraged rather than the
creation of a separate access strip to an adjacent rear lot.
P. Street signs.
(1) The developer shall provide, at his expense, all necessary street
signs as may be required by the Township.
(2) A proposed street that is in alignment with an existing and named
street shall bear the name of the existing street.
(3) In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing
street name in the North Penn School District, or in the same postal
zip code, despite the type of suffix.
(4) A list of acceptable street names is available from the Township.
The Township has the final decision on the names of all streets.
A. Where required.
(1) Sidewalks shall be required at any location unless it is determined
by the Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the
Township Planning Commission, that sidewalks are not necessary
for public safety or convenience.
(2) Sidewalks are not required along either side of any road in the
R-200 Residential District, except where deemed necessary for
safety by the Township Board of Supervisors, such as near schools,
bus stops or similar areas of high pedestrian concentration.
B. Locational requirements.
§ 136-503 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-504
1:510
§ 136-505. Parking facilities.
(1) Sidewalks, pedestrian and bicycle paths shall be located within a
public right-of-way, a public easement, or a common open space
area. Any such system shall be interconnected and not disjointed.
(2) All sidewalks, pedestrian or bicycle paths located within the street
right-of-way shall be no closer than four feet (1.2192 meters) to the
curb.
(3) Sidewalks, pedestrian or bicycle paths may be located away from
streets upon approval of the Board of Supervisors if all the
following conditions are met:
(a) Such a system be all-weather and easily cleaned of snow;
(b) They shall be convenient for the most frequent trips, such as
children walking to school bus stops;
(c) If they are not located within a dedicated right-of-way or open
space, they shall remain as private property and the
responsibility for their maintenance shall be clearly
established.
C. Design requirements. Sidewalks shall be as specified in the
Towamencin Township Engineering Standards,153 as last amended,
along with the Towamencin Township Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks
Ordinance,154 as last amended, or as required by the Township
Engineer in the plan review process. [Amended 7-10-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-06]
A. General requirements.
(1) All automobile parking facilities shall be provided off-street in
accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance,155 as
last amended, and this chapter.
(2) The minimum design standards set forth herein shall not apply to
multistory or otherwise enclosed parking structures.
(3) A parking stall is that area specifically designated by pavement
markings, or some other means, designed to permit each motor
vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the movement of any other motor vehicle.
(4) At no time shall angle or perpendicular parking be permitted along
public or private streets. All parking lots and bays permitting
153. Editor's Note: The Towamencin Township Engineering Standards are included in Ch. 136A,
which immediately follows this chapter.
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 133, Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks.
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-505
1:511
parking other than perpendicular shall be reviewed by the
Township Engineer with special attention to circulation and access.
(5) All automobile parking facilities shall provide parking spaces for
the handicapped or disabled in accordance with the following table
and the Americans With Disabilities Act, whichever provides for the
greater number of spaces:
Total Parking Spaces on
Lot
Required Minimum Number of
Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20, plus 1 for each over 1,000
(6) All driveways for parking facilities shall conform with the design
requirements for driveways in this chapter.
B. Reduction of parking requirements.
(1) In order to prevent the establishment of a greater number of
parking spaces than is actually required, the Board of Supervisors,
upon the recommendations of the Township Planning Commission,
may permit a conditional reduction of parking spaces if the
following conditions are satisfied:
(a) The applicant shall show a hardship in accordance with
§ 136-800 herein.
(b) The design of the parking lot, as indicated on the land
development plan, must designate sufficient space to meet the
parking requirements of the Zoning Ordinance,156 as last
amended. The plan shall also illustrate the layout for the total
number of parking spaces.
(c) The conditional reduction shall provide for the establishment
of no less than 80% of the required number of parking spaces,
as specified in the Zoning Ordinance, as last amended. This
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-505 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-505
1:512
§ 136-506. Utility installation and relocation.
All required utility installation and relocation shall be designed and
performed in accordance with this chapter and the Towamencin Township
Engineering Standards, as last amended.
§ 136-507. Traffic control signalization.
All required traffic control signalization installation and relocation shall
be designed and performed in accordance with this chapter and the
Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as last amended.
§ 136-508. Off-street loading facilities.
initial phase of the parking provision shall be clearly indicated
on the plan.
(d) The balance of the parking area shall be reserved and shall not
include areas for required buffer yards, setbacks, or areas
which would otherwise be unsuitable for parking spaces due to
the physical characteristics of the land, or other requirements
of this chapter. The parking area which is reserved shall be
located and have characteristics so as to provide amendable
open space should it be determined in the future that
additional parking spaces are not required. The developer shall
provide a landscaping plan for the reserved area with the land
development plan.
C. Parking location. For all nonresidential uses, all parking areas shall be
located as specified in the Towamencin Township Engineering
Standards,157 as last amended.
D. Parking area circulation. All parking aisles shall be designed in
accordance with the Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as
last amended.
E. Table of parking dimensional requirements. The parking dimensional
requirements shall be no less than those listed in the Towamencin
Township Engineering Standards, as last amended.
F. Parking area construction details.
(1) All parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with the
Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as last amended.
(2) All construction requirements shall be in accordance with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Publication 408
Specifications, as last amended, and/or as required by the
Township Engineer. [Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-01]
157. Editor's Note: The Towamencin Township Engineering Standards are included in Ch. 136A,
which immediately follows this chapter.
§ 136-505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-508
1:513
§ 136-509. Curbs. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
Concrete, granite block or similar block type curbs shall be designed and
installed in accordance with the Towamencin Township Engineering
Standards, as last amended.
§ 136-510. Landscape requirements.
All land developments shall be required to install, maintain, and guarantee
plant materials as required herein for the visual and other environmental
benefits these plants will provide, as well as for the specific benefits of
buffering or screening, or otherwise creating spaces. A landscape plan
prepared by a registered landscape architect shall be submitted as part
of the preliminary plan submission for all residential land development
of 10 acres (40,470 square meters) or more and for all nonresidential
development.
A. Off-street loading facilities shall be designed in accordance with the
Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as last amended.
B. All required loading facilities shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) They shall be provided and maintained as long as the use exists
which the facilities were designed to serve;
(2) They shall not be reduced in total extent after their provision,
except when such reduction is in conformity with the requirements
of this article;
(3) Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of
particular uses to assure the availability of required facilities to the
delivery and pickup vehicles they are designed to serve;
(4) All driveways shall conform with the design requirements for
driveways;
(5) All accessory driveways and entrance ways shall be graded, have
bituminous surface, and be drained to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent nuisances of
dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across public ways;
(6) Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at
no time constitute a nuisance, a hazard, or an unreasonable
impediment to traffic.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AREA OF DRIPLINE — The line marking the outer edges of the
branches of the tree.
§ 136-508 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-510
1:514
CALIPER OF A TREE — The diameter of the trunk of a tree measured
four feet (1.2192 meters) (d.b.h.) above the ground level ("d.b.h." is the
diameter at breast height).
GUYING — The fastening of a tree with a nylon strap to two or three
hardwood stakes that would allow the new tree to sway, but not be able
to blow over. They should be removed after one to two years.
HEDGEROWS — A line of plants that may occur naturally where seeds
collect and are left undisturbed, such as along fencelines, property
lines, or between fields or that is specially planted, e.g., to act as a wind
break.
MATURE TREE — Any tree of six inches (15.24 centimeters) or more in
caliper, whether standing alone, in tree masses, or woodlands. A mature
tree shall be a healthy specimen, and shall be a desirable species as
determined by the Township.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any tree afflicted with a disease or infested with
insects which threatens to injure or destroy other trees in the Township;
dead or dying trees; a tree or limb(s) that obstructs streetlights, traffic
signs, sight lines, free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; a tree that
poses a threat to safety.
ROOT BALL — The portion of a tree that contains the roots and soil
which can either be balled and burlapped (B & B) or in a container
designed to transport a tree to a new location.
STREET TREE — Trees planted along a roadway that are in line with
other trees that run parallel with and are intended to line the roadway
with trees.
TOPPING OFF TREES — The severe cutting back of the limbs of the
crown of a tree to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree.
WOODLAND — A stand of predominantly native vegetation covering at
least 1/4 acre (1,011.75 square meters).
B. Conservation of existing vegetation. All land development shall be
designed so as to minimize loss of mature trees over six inches (15.24
centimeters) in caliper, hedgerows and woodlands. As determined by
the Board of Supervisors, the preservation of existing desirable mature
trees, hedgerows and woodlands may be counted in lieu of the
landscape requirements herein, thereby reducing the amount of new
plant material except street trees that would otherwise be required to
be planted. It shall be incumbent on the applicant to prove that the plan
minimizes disturbance of these trees and woodlands, given the
permitted development proposed. The plan shall reflect the following:
(1) A plan of existing vegetation to remain as part of the landscape
plan for a land development shall be prepared and submitted as
part of the preliminary plan submission. The existing vegetation
shall be physically protected throughout the construction process.
§ 136-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-510
1:515
Prior to major clearing or construction, a temporary physical
barrier such as a snow fence shall be erected a minimum of one
foot (0.3048 meters) beyond the dripline on all sides of stands
or vegetation or individual trees shown to remain. The barrier
shall be placed to prevent disturbance to, or compaction of, soil
inside the barrier and shall remain in place until construction is
complete. The specific method of preserving existing vegetation
shall be noted on the landscape plan.
(2) A plan of the existing vegetation to be lost due to the buildings,
clearings, roads and/or grading shall be prepared and submitted as
part of the preliminary plan submission. All mature trees over six
inches (15.24 centimeters) in caliper as measured one foot (0.3048
meters) above the ground level which are to be lost shall be
identified by species and caliper. A tabulation of this data shall be
provided as a note on the plan.
(3) The developer shall be required to plant the identical number of
trees to be removed elsewhere on this site or plant the identical
number of trees to be removed in Township parks in accordance
with a plan prepared by the developer and approved by the
Township Engineer. All replacement trees shall be a minimum of
2 1/2 inches (6.35 centimeters) as measured one foot (0.3048
meters) above the ground level.
C. Street trees. Street trees shall be required in accordance with the
Towamencin Township Engineering Standards,158 as last amended.
D. Buffer yards. Buffer yards are required between subdivisions and land
developments and along existing streets. The extent of buffering
required shall be determined by the type of use proposed and the
adjacent uses and streets surrounding the proposed development. The
buffer yard standards are provided in the Towamencin Township
Engineering Standards, as last amended.
E. Landscaping of off-street parking areas. Within the parking facility,
landscaping shall be in accordance with the Towamencin Township
Engineering Standards, as last amended.
F. Detention basin landscaping. Within any detention basin, landscaping
shall be in accordance with the Towamencin Township Engineering
Standards, as last amended.
G. Landscape requirements for multifamily developments. For all
multifamily developments, the following minimum landscaping shall be
provided either on lot or within the general open space in addition to all
other required street tree, parking and buffer requirements:
158. Editor's Note: The Towamencin Township Engineering Standards are included in Ch. 136A,
which immediately follows this chapter.
§ 136-510 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-510
1:516
§ 136-511. Lots and blocks.
(1) Any of the following minimum landscaping shall be required for
each dwelling unit:
(a) One two-and-one-half-inch (6.35 centimeters) caliper shade
tree and one of the following:
[1] One four- to five-foot (1.2192 to 1.524 meters) evergreen
tree;
[2] Two flowering trees;
[3] Eight shrubs.
(2) All approved plant material shall conform to the plant material
listed in the Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as last
amended.
A. The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the following:
(1) Provision of adequate sites for type of buildings proposed;
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot size, dimension, and minimum lot
area per dwelling unit in the case of residential blocks;
(3) The limitations and opportunities of the topography;
(4) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation and access.
B. Double-frontage lots are prohibited, except where employed to prevent
vehicular access to major traffic streets. Deed restrictions limiting
access to lower order streets may be required by the Township.
C. Residential blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet (487.68
meters) and, so far as practical, a minimum length of 500 feet (152.4
meters). In the design of blocks longer than 1,100 feet (335.28 meters),
special consideration shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory
fire protection.
D. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers
of lots, except where reverse frontage lots bordering a major traffic
street are used.
E. Pedestrian interior walks may be required where necessary to assist
circulation or provide access to community facilities. Such crosswalks
shall have a right-of-way width of not less than 10 feet (3.048 meters)
and a paved walk of not less than four feet (1.2192 meters).
F. In nonresidential subdivisions, block lengths and widths shall be
reviewed by the Township Engineer and approved by the Township
Planning Commission.
§ 136-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-511
1:517
§ 136-512. Easements.
G. Where lots consist of an area that is more than double the minimum
required area for the zoning district, the Board of Supervisors may
require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and
the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve
such potential lots, all in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance,159 as
last amended, and this chapter.
H. For parcels that are within two municipalities, proposed lot lines shall
follow the Township boundaries rather than cross them in order to
avoid jurisdictional problems.
I. If remnants of land exist after subdividing, they shall be incorporated
into existing or proposed lots, or dedicated to public use for recreation
or open space, if acceptable to the Township.
A. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
B. The restrictions of the easement shall prevail.
C. Where a site is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be provided a
drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the
line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to
preserve natural drainage as determined by the Township Engineer, or
as may be required or directed by the Department of Environmental
Resources. The owner shall properly grade and seed slopes and fence
any open ditches when it is deemed necessary by the Township.
D. Rights-of-way and easements required for roadway construction and
maintenance, sanitary sewer systems, storm drainage systems, water
systems and any other utilities and for any other specific purpose shall
be required by the governing body as needed, with the location and
width in each case to be determined by the governing body.
(1) The building setback shall be 10 feet (3.048 meters) from all
existing and proposed fuel transmission line easements or rights-ofway
and all other utility easements. The total building setback from
the property line shall not be less than that required by the
applicable zoning district for the particular yard involved.
(2) Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put within
the area of any type of easement. The area shall be maintained as a
lawn unless further use is allowed, in writing, by the governing
body.
(3) The owner of any lot, upon written request by the Township and at
the owner's sole expense, shall remove unauthorized items which
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-511 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-512
1:518
have been placed, planted, set or put (without prior knowledge of
this regulation) within the area of any easement.
(4) To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to rear
and side lot lines.
(5) Minimum easement widths. Drainage easements shall be as
required in the Towamencin Township Engineering Standards,160
as last amended.
(6) Easements required to be obtained by developers shall provide for
the maintenance, repair and replacement of the facilities, including
the right of passage for such work. The Township shall have the
right of review and correction of all easements obtained by
developers from other property owners which shall be turned over
to the Township. The developer shall convey, at no cost to the
Township, all requested easements.
(7) No right-of-way or easement for any purpose whatsoever shall be
recited or described in any deed unless the same has been shown
on the approved record plan. Any error found in a deed shall be
immediately corrected and recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds for Montgomery County at the sole expense of the
subdivider or owner.
E. Public utilities. All water, cable TV, and gas mains and other
underground facilities shall be installed prior to street paving at
locations approved by the Township for the full width of the right-ofway.
F. Underground utilities. All gas and water mains shall be installed
underground. All electric, telephone, cable TV and communication
services, both main and service lines, shall be provided by underground
cables and installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and
practices of the utility or other company providing such services, except
where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township governing
body that underground installations herein required are not feasible
because of physical conditions of the land involved. All main
underground cables which are within the right-of-way of a street shall
be located as specified by the governing body.
(1) In order to promote and facilitate the undergrounding of utility
distribution lines, a letter of endorsement shall be required from
the suppliers of utility service (not limited to electrical, telephone
or cable television) wherein the utility acknowledges that
underground utilities are feasible and shall be installed as part of
the improvement plan. A statement relative to the intent of the
developer to provide underground utility service shall be placed on
the final plan requisite to final approval of such plan.
160. Editor's Note: The Towamencin Township Engineering Standards are included in Ch. 136A,
which immediately follows this chapter.
§ 136-512 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-512
1:519
§ 136-513. Mixed residential cluster developments.
(2) The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed as to limit or
interfere with the construction, installation, operation and
maintenance of public utility structures or facilities which may
hereafter be located within public easements or rights-of-way
designated for such purposes.
(3) Light standards are to be placed as required by this chapter. The
power source for such standards shall be placed underground, as
required.
A. The density, parking lot area and building requirements shall in all
respects conform to the Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance,161 as
last amended.
B. Preliminary approval of the site plan must be obtained for the entire
proposed development. Final approval may be obtained section by
section, but such development sections shall be specified on the
preliminary plan and must be numbered in the proposed order that they
are to be developed. Such order of development must be adhered to,
and if changes are required, plans must be refiled and reviewed and
approved.
C. Bonding procedures, as required by this chapter, shall be resolved
before final approval of the land development plan, and shall guarantee
the improvements by the builder of the streets, sidewalks, curbs,
streetlighting, street trees, drainage facilities, utilities and other
facilities that the governing body may deem necessary.
D. Arrangement of buildings and facilities. Arrangements of buildings
shall be in favorable relation to the natural topography, existing
desirable planting, bodies of water, views within and beyond the site,
and exposure to the sun and other buildings on the site.
E. Access and circulation.
(1) Access to the dwellings and circulation between buildings and
other important project facilities for vehicular and pedestrian
traffic shall be comfortable and convenient for the occupants.
(2) Access and circulation for fire-fighting and other emergency
equipment, moving van, fuel trucks, garbage collection, deliveries
and snow removal shall be planned for efficient operation and
convenience.
(3) Walking distance from the main entrance of a building to a street,
driveway or parking area shall usually be less than 100 feet (30.48
meters); exception to this standard should be reasonably justified
by compensating advantages, such as desirable views and site
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-512 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-513
1:520
preservation through adaptation to topography. In no case shall the
distance exceed 200 feet (60.96 meters).
F. Yards. Yards shall assure adequate privacy, desirable outlook, adequate
natural light and ventilation, convenient access to and around the
dwellings, and other essential uses.
G. Grading.
(1) Grading shall be designed for buildings, lawns, paved areas and
other facilities, to assure adequate surface drainage, safe and
convenient access to and around the buildings and for the
screening of parking and other service areas and the conservation
of desirable existing vegetation and natural ground forms.
(2) Grading around buildings shall be designed to be in harmony with
natural topography.
H. Streets.
(1) Streets shall be provided on the site where necessary to furnish
principal traffic ways for convenient access to the living units and
other important facilities on the property.
(2) Streets shall conform to the design requirements and specifications
of this chapter and Towamencin Township Engineering
Standards,162 as last amended.
I. Driveways.
(1) Driveways shall be provided on the site where necessary for
convenient access to the living units, garage compounds, parking
areas, service entrances of buildings, collection of refuse and all
other necessary services. Driveways shall enter streets at safe
locations.
(2) Driveways shall be planned for convenient circulation suitable for
traffic needs and safety and shall conform to the standards and
requirements of this chapter.
(3) All driveways shall be paved and constructed in accordance with
the recommendations of the Township Engineer.
J. Parking areas.
(1) Paved parking areas shall be provided to meet the needs of the
residents and their guests without interference with normal street
traffic.
162. Editor's Note: The Towamencin Township Engineering Standards are included in Ch. 136A,
which immediately follows this chapter.
§ 136-513 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-513
1:521
§ 136-514. Mobile home developments.
The provisions of the mixed residential cluster developments (§ 136-513)
shall also apply to mobile home developments in addition to the following:
(2) Parking areas shall conform to the standards and requirements of
this chapter herein and those of the Towamencin Township Zoning
Ordinance,163 as last amended.
K. Sidewalks.
(1) Street sidewalks and on-site walks shall be provided for
convenience and safe access to all living units from streets,
driveways, parking areas or garages and for convenient circulation
and access to all facilities.
(2) Width, alignment and gradient of walks shall provide safety,
convenience and appearance for pedestrian traffic. Small jogs in
the alignment shall be avoided.
(3) The alignment and gradient of walks shall be coordinated with the
grading plan to prevent the passage of concentrated surface water
on or across the walk and to prevent the pocketing of surface water
by walks.
(4) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
L. Planting. The appeal and character of the site shall be preserved and
enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other site
features; and additional new plant material shall be added for privacy,
shade, beauty of buildings and grounds and to screen out objectionable
features. The requirements of this chapter regarding landscape,
planting and buffering and the Towamencin Township Zoning
Ordinance, as last amended, shall be met.
A. Each mobile home development shall be divided and marked off into
mobile home spaces, each which shall contain only one mobile home
pad. No mobile home shall be permitted to occupy a mobile home space
until a mobile home pad has been constructed thereon.
B. Mobile home pad. The area of a mobile home pad shall be improved to
provide for the adequate placement of a mobile home. The mobile home
pad shall be designed so as not to heave, shift, or settle unevenly under
the weight of the mobile home because of frost action, drainage,
vibration or other forces acting under such structure.
C. Skirts. All mobile homes within a mobile home development shall have
the space between the floor of the mobile home and the mobile home
stand completely enclosed. Such enclosure may be provided by a
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-513 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-514
1:522
§ 136-515. Nonresidential developments.
permanent masonry foundation or "skirting" which should consist of
panels specifically designed for the purpose of screening the underside
of a mobile home by forming an extension of the vertical exterior
walls of the mobile home and covering the entire distance between the
bottom of the exterior walls and the ground elevation below.
D. Anchoring. A mobile home must be fastened to a pad to prevent damage
due to wind, erosion, and flooding or other natural forces. The
anchoring system shall be able to withstand a wind velocity of up to 90
miles per hour.
E. Site design. All regulations of the Towamencin Township Zoning
Ordinance,164 as last amended, shall be adhered to in mobile home
developments. In addition thereto, the following regulations shall
apply:
(1) Adaptation to tract assets. Each mobile home unit or other dwelling
or structure shall be fitted to the terrain with a minimum
disturbance of the land and a minimum elevation difference
between the floor level of the unit and the ground elevation under
it. Existing trees and shrubs, rock formations, streams, floodplains,
steep slopes, and other natural features of the tract shall be
preserved to the maximum extent practical. Favorable views shall
be emphasized by the plan.
(2) Courts and spaces. Groups or clusters of units, so placed as to
create interior spaces and courtyards, shall be incorporated
whenever feasible.
(3) Orientation. Mobile homes are encouraged to be arranged in a
variety of orientations and are strongly encouraged to have many
units with their long sides facing the street, rather than their ends,
in order to provide variety and interest. Site layout shall be
designed to insure that mobile home units are offset to block long
uninterrupted vistas between the units.
(4) Street layout. Gridiron layouts and street patterns, unrelated to the
topography of the site, are to be avoided. The following regulations
shall apply:
(a) Access limitations. Direct access from a mobile home lot shall
not be permitted onto the street(s) from which the mobile
home development gains primary access and any through
streets of the development.
(b) Access to site. Direct access should be provided to the site via a
road or at least a feeder-type classification.
164. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-515
1:523
§ 136-516. Grading, soil erosion and sediment controls.
§ 136-517. Drainage.
A. Lotting of individual lots for commercial purposes shall be avoided in
favor of a comprehensive design of the land to be used for such
purposes.
B. Additional width of streets adjacent to areas proposed for
nonresidential use may be required as deemed necessary by the Board
of Supervisors to assure the free flow of through traffic from vehicles
entering or leaving parking areas.
C. When two adjacent lots proposed for nonresidential uses front on a
primary street, the applicant may be required to provide ingress and
egress as well as common parking facilities. When three or more
adjacent lots are proposed for nonresidential uses, the applicant may be
required to provide a service road for common ingress and egress.
D. Adjacent residential uses shall be protected from potential nuisance of
the proposed nonresidential developments, including the provisions of
extra depths in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential
developments and provisions for a permanently landscaped evergreen
buffer strip and controlled lighting, as required by the Towamencin
Township Zoning Ordinance, as last amended.
E. Streets carrying nonresidential traffic shall not normally be extended to
the boundaries of the adjacent existing or potential residential areas,
nor connected to streets intended for predominantly residential traffic.
F. For commercial uses, the developer may be required to provide
separate access for service vehicles and loading areas from the
vehicular access ways and parking areas intended for patron use. This
may be accomplished by using an alley and separate access point for
service vehicles to move from the road to the loading area. The
applicant may also be required to screen the loading area when deemed
necessary by the Township.
A. All grading shall be in accordance with the Towamencin Township
Grading and Excavating Ordinance,165 as last amended.
B. All soil erosion and sediment controls shall be in accordance with the
Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as last amended.
A. General.
(1) Lots. All lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from
all buildings and to allow the collection of stormwater in water
detention basins or other approved locations. A minimum slope of
2% shall be used for directing water away from structures.
165. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Grading and Excavating.
§ 136-515 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-517
1:524
(2) Stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff shall not be increased above
the predevelopment condition. This discharge shall also take into
consideration point discharge from the tract. Stormwater detention
must be provided unless waived by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Drainage swales. When drainage swales are used as a means to
control storm drainage, they shall not be placed on a slope of less
than 1.5%. Drainage design computations shall be submitted to
determine swale linings.
(4) Unnatural drainage. Whenever construction stops or concentrates
the natural flow of storm drainage in such a way as to affect
adjoining properties, approval of the adjacent property owners
should be obtained in writing and a copy filed with the Township.
Approval of plans by the Township does not authorize or sanction
drainage adversely affecting adjoining properties.
(5) Drainage from non-natural sources. Water originating from other
than natural sources, such as sump pumps or other dry weather
sources, wherever practicable shall be discharged into natural
watercourses on the property.
(6) Storm drainage system. The storm drainage system shall be
designed and constructed to adequately control the drainage on
and from the subdivision or land development.
(7) Any development which creates a significant change in the
characteristics of the watershed, thus increasing the volume and
velocity of surface water runoff, shall not be permitted until
methods have been proposed which will reduce the likelihood of
erosion, sedimentation and stormwater drainage. Such
improvements must satisfy the requirements and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
(8) Stormwater discharges from construction activities affecting five
or more acres (20,235 square meters) of land may require a permit
from PaDER. A permit or permit waiver shall be obtained from
PaDER by the applicant. 166
B. The following note shall appear on the record plan whenever
permanent water detention basins are required:
166. Editor's Note: Original Subsection B, Storm drainage design, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 1-17-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1. It also provided for the
renumbering of original Subsection C as Subsection B.
§ 136-517 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-517
1:525
§ 136-518. Responsibility for soil erosion and sediment controls;
stormwater management.
"The property owner shall have the responsibility for the perpetual
maintenance of the permanent water detention basin, basin outlet
structures and pipes which are located on his property. No changes
shall be made to the structures, pipes or finish grading without prior
written approval from the Township. The Township has the right to
enter the lot to perform any required maintenance which has not been
properly performed or carried out in a timely manner. The property
owner shall be responsible for the cost of any maintenance which is
performed by the Township. The Township shall lien the property for
said costs until the Township has been reimbursed in full."
A. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading
or other development, or where mud or debris has been deposited by
construction equipment on adjacent streets, it shall be the
responsibility of the person, corporation or other entity causing such
sedimentation to remove it from all affected surfaces, drainage systems
and watercourses, or streets and to repair any damage at his expense
within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Township
Engineer.
B. Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses, both existing
and proposed, within any proposed subdivision or land development
shall be the responsibility of the developer until such time as one of the
following is accomplished:
(1) An easement by these facilities is offered for dedication by the
developer and is accepted by the Township; maintenance shall then
be the responsibility of the Township.
(2) If an easement acceptable to the Township is established, the
maintenance shall then be the responsibility of the individual lot
owners over whose property the easement passes. For land
developments, the maintenance shall then be the responsibility of
the owner.
(3) A homeowners' association or other approved legal entity,
approved by the Township, assumes responsibility for the
maintenance of the development, including the maintenance of the
watercourses and/or drainage facilities.
C. It is the responsibility of any person, corporation or other entity doing
any act on or across a stream, watercourse or swale, or upon the
floodplain or right-of-way during the period of the activity, to return it to
its original or equal condition after such activity is completed.
D. No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the flow of,
alter, construct any structure or deposit any material or thing or commit
any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any stream or
§ 136-517 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-518
1:526
§ 136-519. Floodplain areas.
watercourse without having obtained prior approval from the Township
and/or the Department of Environmental Resources, whichever is
applicable.
E. Each person, corporation or other entity which makes any surface
changes shall be required to:
(1) Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it into the common
natural watercourse of the drainage area;
(2) Pay the prorated cost of off-site improvements to the common
natural watercourse, based on a fully developed drainage area;
(3) Provide and install at his expense, in accordance with Township
requirements, all drainage and erosion control improvements
(temporary and permanent) as required by the erosion and
sediment control plan.
F. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface
waters without risk to persons or property. The drainage system shall
ensure drainage at all points along streets, and ensure conveyance of
drainage away from buildings.
G. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
H. Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer
facilities, and private package sewage treatment plants (including all
pumping stations and collector systems) shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into the floodwaters. In addition, they should be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and
impairment.
I. Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
J. Utilities. All utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems
being placed in identified flood-prone areas should be located, elevated
(where possible) and constructed to minimize the change of impairment
during a flood.
A. The regulation contained herein shall apply in those areas identified as
floodplain in the Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance,167 as last
§ 136-518 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-519
1:527
amended. The Flood Boundary and Floodway Map shall be available
in the Towamencin Township Building for inspection. In regard to the
adopted Floodplain Conservation District, the regulations contained
herein shall apply to those areas defined and established as floodplain
and not in conflict with the information provided in the Flood Insurance
Study.
B. The regulations contained herein are intended to conform to the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. Furthermore, it
is the purpose of these regulations to:
(1) Regulate the subdivision and development of floodplain areas in
order to promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the
community;
(2) Require that each subdivision lot or development site in floodplain
areas be provided with a safe building site with adequate access;
and that public facilities which serve sites be designed and
installed to preclude flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
(3) Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use
because of flood hazards prohibiting the subdivision and
development of unprotected floodplain areas;
(4) Maintain the certification of Towamencin Township and the
eligibility of the property owners in the Township for the benefits of
the National Flood Insurance Program, P.L. 93.234.
C. Establishment of base flood elevations. For proposed subdivisions
greater than either 50 lots or five acres (20,235 square meters) within
the flood-prone areas in which the Township's Flood Insurance Study
has not established base flood elevations, the developer shall be
responsible for establishing such data through hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analysis, computation, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to
allow a thorough technical review by the Township. Prospective
developers shall consult with the Zoning Officer to make a
determination as to whether or not the proposed subdivision or land
development is located within an identified floodplain.
D. Where not prohibited by this or any other codes or ordinances, land
located in the floodplain may be subdivided or developed in accordance
with this and other codes or ordinances regulating such development.
E. The finished elevation of proposed streets within floodplain areas shall
be no more than two feet (0.6096 meters) below the base flood
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-519 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-519
1:528
§ 136-520. Varying design standards in mixed residential
developments.
elevation. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows
without unduly increasing flood heights.
F. Waivers. Guidelines for relaxation from the requirements set forth in
this section are as follows:
(1) A waiver shall not be issued within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increased flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
(2) A waiver shall only be issued if there is:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to relax the requirements would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
(c) A determination that the relaxing of a requirement will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(3) A waiver shall only be issued upon a determination that the waiver
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
(4) The Township shall:
(a) Maintain a record of all waivers including justification for their
issuance; and
(b) Report such decisions issued in its annual report submitted to
the Federal Insurance Administrator.
A. Upon the written request of the applicant and in accordance with
accompanying plans filed by the applicant, the Board of Supervisors
may waive or modify the street requirements of this chapter if the
modifications will result in furthering the objectives of the Mixed
Residential Cluster (MRC) District and the Comprehensive Plan of
Towamencin Township, as last amended.
B. Permitted modifications. The following modifications may be permitted:
(1) Fences shall not be permitted in the front yard, forward of the front
line of the building, except where, in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors, fences are required to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the community.
(2) All-weather sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all streets
in a MRC development. However, the Board of Supervisors may, in
§ 136-519 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-520
1:529
their discretion, permit sidewalks to be constructed on only one
side of a residential through street, and may completely waive
the requirements for sidewalks on a permanent cul-de-sac street
provided that the applicant can prove that sidewalks, as required,
will not be necessary for proper pedestrian circulation within the
proposed development.
(3) Curbs will be required along all residential streets of a MRC
development. However, the Board of Supervisors may, at its
discretion, upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer,
waive the requirement for curbs in areas containing single-family
detached dwellings and single-family detached lot-line dwellings.
§ 136-520 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-520
1:530
ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements
§ 136-600. Purpose.
§ 136-601. Applicability.
§ 136-602. Revision of construction plans.
When changes from the construction drawings and specifications become
necessary during construction, a revised plan shall be submitted to the
Township and written acceptance by the Township Engineer shall be
secured before the execution of such changes.
§ 136-603. Maintenance of streets.
Adequate provisions for the satisfactory maintenance of all streets shall
be made before dedication to and acceptance for maintenance by the
Township.
§ 136-604. Public improvements.
The applicant shall agree to construct and/or install improvements required
by the chapter as listed below:
A. The purpose of this article is to establish and define the public
improvements which will be required by the Board of Supervisors to be
constructed or created to be constructed by the applicant.
B. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications of the Township.
A. The improvements included in this article are minimum requirements.
However, the governing body reserves the right in any case to increase
the same if conditions so warrant.
B. If any mandatory provisions of this chapter are shown by the applicant
to be unreasonable and cause undue hardship as they apply to his
proposed subdivision or land development, the Board of Supervisors
may grant a waiver to such applicant from such mandatory provisions,
in accordance with the provisions of § 136-800 herein, so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest served, provided
that such variations shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of this chapter, and that the full enforcement of the provisions
is not necessary to maintain or protect the public interest.
A. Streets.
B. Street signs.
C. Lighting.
§ 136-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-604
1:531
§ 136-605. Sewer connection fees.
Relative to connection to the public sewer system, developer shall be
responsible for paying impact fees which have been adopted by the Board
of Supervisors in accordance with Act 203.
§ 136-606. On-site sewage disposal systems.
All on-site sewage disposal systems shall comply with Chapters 71 and
73 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537,168 County Health
Department regulations, and all Township ordinances.
§ 136-607. On-site sewer and water locations.
The dimensional location of the on-site sewage system, alternate system
location, and the well must be shown on the plan prior to the issuance
of a building permit. The locations shall comply with the Department of
Environmental Resources, County Health Department and Township
regulations.
§ 136-608. Special drainage problems in floodplain areas.
D. Monuments.
E. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths.
F. Curbs.
G. Storm drainage system.
H. Water supply system with fire-protection capability.
I. Public sanitary sewer system.
J. Electric, telephone, cable TV and communication facilities.
K. Grading.
L. Planting.
M. Community facilities.
N. Driveway.
O. All other improvements required as part of the plan approval.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, when it deems necessary for the health,
comfort, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the
area, and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage and sanitary
facilities, prohibit subdivision of any portion of the property which lies
within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course. Floodways are
168. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 136-604 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-608
1:532
subject to the restrictions of the Towamencin Township Zoning
Ordinance,169 as last amended.
B. The areas referred to above shall be preserved from any and all
destruction or damage by clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste
material, stumps, or other materials of any kind.
C. When there is any proposed alteration of a stream, the applicant shall
show evidence that all required approvals by state agencies have been
granted.
D. The developer shall place with the Township a maintenance bond of
sufficient sum to pay for the continuous maintenance of the facility. The
amount of the maintenance bond shall be determined by the Board of
Supervisors upon the recommendations of the Township Engineer.
169. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-608 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-608
1:533

ARTICLE VII
Plan Requirements
§ 136-700. Applicability.
The procedures set forth in this article shall be followed by all applicants
proposing to subdivide or develop land in the Township.
§ 136-701. Plans of subdivision or land development.
A. A tentative sketch plan is recommended for the initial submission of all
but the most simple subdivisions and/or land developments.
B. Applicants shall be required to submit the following plans:
(1) A preliminary plan is required for all subdivisions and land
developments proposed within the Township.
(2) Final plan.
(a) A final plan consisting of the following two parts is required for
all subdivisions and land developments proposed within the
Township:
[1] An improvements construction plan;
[2] A record plan.
(b) A plan showing all information required for a final plan, which
has been submitted as a preliminary plan and for which no
changes have been required by the Township, may be approved
as a final plan.
C. A land development plan shall be required whenever the application for
approval shall be construed to be a land development in accordance
with the definition in the latest amendment of the Municipalities
Planning Code.170 A development plan may be required in conjunction
with a subdivision plan or in lieu of a subdivision plan when review of a
plan on a lot-by-lot basis would not be applicable.
D. All plans of subdivision or land development shall be subject to the
following review process: [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
(1) Review by Township Civil Engineer, Traffic Engineer, Sanitary
Sewer Engineer, Township Landscape Architect (if applicable
within Towamencin Village), Township Fire Marshal, Township
Police Department, Fire Department, Sewer Authority,
Montgomery County Conservation District, and any other agency
having authority as required by local, state or federal laws.
(2) Preliminary plan review by the Township Planning Commission.
170. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 136-700 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-701
1:535
(3) Review by the Montgomery County Planning Commission.
(4) Preliminary plan review by Towamencin Board of Supervisor.
(5) Final plan review by Towamencin Board of Supervisors.
E. Minor plans of subdivision or land development shall apply to the
following: [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
(1) Lot line adjustment between two abutting, existing, legally
approved and recorded lots so long as the adjusted lines and lots
conform to all zoning requirements without the need for variances
or special exemptions.
(2) Minor residential subdivision that will divide a single lot into one
additional lot for the construction of a single-family dwelling unit,
in which the new lot will be of the same zoning classification as the
original, will comply with all zoning requirements without the need
for variances and or special exceptions, and will not require the
extension of public utilities or stormwater conveyance systems, and
has applicable road frontage to meet the requirements of the
Township Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances. The proposed
building and impervious coverages of the existing and proposed
lots must remain under the minimum standards of the Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance.171
(3) A new building or an addition onto a structure that will not exceed
the limits of building or impervious coverages of the Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance, or require additional parking,
curbing, or site work. The property shall only be eligible for two
minor plan approvals. Any requests after the second approval, or a
proposal that in addition to the previous minor plan approval will
cumulatively exceed the minimum requirements of the Stormwater
Management Ordinance, shall be reviewed as a standard land
development application. The proposal must conform with all
requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance without the need
for variances or special exceptions. The proposal must not require
the extension of public roads, utilities, or stormwater systems.
(4) The application shall be subject to the following review process:
(a) Township Civil Engineer, Traffic Engineer, Sanitary Sewer
Engineer, Police Department, Fire Marshal, and any other
agency having authority based on local, state or federal laws.
(b) Montgomery County Planning Commission.
(c) Final plan review before the Towamencin Board of
Supervisors.
171. Editor's Note: See Ch. 132, Stormwater Management.
§ 136-701 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-701
1:536
§ 136-702. Sketch plan.
A tentative sketch plan is recommended to be submitted in accordance
with this chapter as a basis for informal discussion with the Township
Planning Commission. There are no formal reviews of sketch plans and
submission does not start the time period for review as established by
the Municipalities Planning Code, as last amended. Data furnished in a
tentative sketch plan should include the following information.
(5) The plan submission must meet the plan requirements of § 136-705
for minor subdivision plans, and § 136-706 for record plans.
A. General information:
(1) Name of subdivision or land development;
(2) Tax parcel number (Montgomery County Tax Map);
(3) Name and address of the owner/applicant/developer;
(4) Name and address of engineer, surveyor, architect, planner or
landscape architect responsible for the plan;
(5) Total acreage of site;
(6) Tract boundaries;
(7) Date of plan;
(8) True North point;
(9) Location map;
(10) Zoning requirements, including:
(a) Applicable district;
(b) Maximum density permitted, if applicable;
(c) Lot size and yard requirements;
(d) Open space and impervious ground coverage ratios, if
applicable;
(e) Any variances or special exceptions granted;
(11) Number of proposed lots;
(12) Proposed use.
B. General site plan at a scale of one inch (2.540 centimeters) equals 100
feet (30.48 meters) showing:
(1) Soil types and wetlands;
(2) Vegetation, forest cover, and large trees;
§ 136-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-702
1:537
§ 136-703. Preliminary plan.
The preliminary plan shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
(3) Drainage ways, streams, swales and ponds;
(4) Streets on and adjacent to the tract;
(5) Significant topographical and physical features [five foot (1.524
meter) contours];
(6) Proposed general street layout;
(7) Proposed general lot layout;
(8) Proposed landscaping;
(9) Location of construction (for land developments);
(10) Types of building proposed;
(11) Number of units proposed;
(12) Location and number of parking spaces;
(13) Open space areas;
(14) Recreation areas;
(15) Floodplain and steep slope areas;
(16) Features within 500 feet (152.4 meters) of the site.
C. Written statement indicating a tentative method for administration and
maintenance of open space, when applicable.
A. Drafting standards:
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch (2.540 centimeters)
equals 100 feet (30.48 meters) or larger [one inch (2.540
centimeters) equals 50 feet (15.24 meters), etc.]. Plans shall be
accurate to within one part in 300. The plan shall include a graphic
scale.
(2) Dimensions shall be set in feet (meters) and decimal parts
(centimeters) thereof; and bearings in degrees, minutes, and
seconds.
(3) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the
total number of sheets.
(4) Where any revision is made, or when the plan is a revision of a
previously approved plan, a description of the revisions should be
noted in the plan with the appropriate date.
§ 136-702 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-703
1:538
(5) The plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to
indicate clearly which features are existing and which are
proposed. All lettering shall be at least 0.2 inch (0.508) centimeters
in height, or as specifically approved by the Township Engineer. A
two-inch (5.08 centimeter) wide margin shall be provided on all
sheets, or such margin as is specifically approved by the Township
Engineer.
(6) The boundary line of the subdivision shall be shown as a solid heavy
line.
(7) Sheet sizes shall be either 15 inches by 18 inches (38.1 by 45.72
centimeters), 18 inches by 30 inches (45.72 by 76.2 centimeters),
or 24 inches by 36 inches (60.96 by 91.44 centimeters), or such size
as is specifically approved by the Township Engineer. Sheet sizes
24 inches by 36 inches (60.96 by 91.44 centimeters) are
recommended. Sheets shall be all the same size and consecutively
numbered. Where more than one sheet is used, a key map and
index sheet(s) shall be provided.
B. General information to be shown:
(1) Name of subdivision or land development;
(2) Tax parcel number (Montgomery County Tax Map), Township block
and unit number, County Planning Commission File Number;
(3) Name and address of the owner/applicant/developer;
(4) Name and address of the registered engineer, surveyor, landscape
architect, architect, or planner responsible for the plan;
(5) Zoning requirements, including:
(a) Applicable district;
(b) Maximum density permitted, if applicable;
(c) Lot size and yard requirements;
(d) Open space, building coverage, and impervious ground
coverage ratios, if applicable;
(e) Any relief from the Zoning Ordinance requirements sought or
granted; indicate Zoning Hearing Board decision dates;
(f) List proposed statistics of the plans which indicate compliance
with the zoning requirements;
(6) Location map showing relation of site to adjoining properties and
streets;
(7) North point;
(8) Written and graphic scales (including scale of location map);
§ 136-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-703
1:539
(9) Total acreage of the site;
(10) A complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided or
developed, showing all courses, distances, tie-ins to all adjacent
intersections and areas;
(11) Location of all existing monuments;
(12) Abutting lot lines of all adjoining properties with names of
landowners;
(13) Existing streets on and adjacent to the site with ultimate right-ofway;
(14) Existing buildings (and their uses), driveways, sewer lines, storm
drains, culverts, bridges, utility easements, quarries, railroads, and
other significant man-made and/or off-site features as required by
the Township Engineer;
(15) Signature blocks;
(16) The date of plan preparation with revision dates and statement
indicating items revised;
(17) The plan shall list all waivers being requested by the applicant;
(18) The plan shall include all segments of on- and off-road trails
pursuant to the Towamencin-Wide Trail Master Plan, as last
amended.
C. Existing features.
(1) The location, names, and widths of streets, the location of property
lines and names of owners, the location of watercourses, sanitary
sewers, storm drains and similar features within 1,000 feet (304.8
meters) or such distance as is specifically approved by the
Township Engineer, of any part of the land to be subdivided or
developed. An aerial photograph, which clearly shows all features
required of this section to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer, may be submitted in lieu of the requirements of this
section; [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
(2) Location, size, and ownership of all underground utilities, and any
rights-of-way or easements within the property;
(3) Contours at vertical intervals of two feet (0.6096 meters) for land
with average natural slope of 4% or less; vertical intervals of five
feet (1.524 meters) for more steeply sloping land;
(4) Soil map showing:
(a) Soil types within the site, based on maps contained in the Soil
Survey of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, 1967. A
§ 136-703 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-703
1:540
table shall indicate each soil's limitations for community
development.
(b) Contour lines measured at vertical intervals of two feet (0.6096
meters). Such slopes shall be determined by on-site survey, not
interpretation of U.S.G.S. maps. Contours should extend 100
feet (30.48 meters) beyond the property lines of the proposed
development.
(c) The delineation of all floodplain areas where a subdivision or
land development lies partially, or completely, or borders on a
floodplain showing:
[1] Location and elevation of existing and proposed streets,
water supply and sanitary facilities, building sites,
structures, soil types, and proposed floodproofing
measures;
[2] Boundaries of the floodplain and the base flood elevation
as defined in the Floodplain Conservation District of the
Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance,172 as last
amended.
(d) All streams, swales, lakes, ponds and wetlands.
(5) Slope map showing:
(a) Slopes between 15% to 25%;
(b) Slopes greater than 25%;
(6) Vegetation map showing:
(a) The location and size by caliper of all existing trees larger than
six inches (15.24 centimeters) caliper as measured one foot
(0.3048 meters) above the ground level which either stand
alone or are within 50 feet (15.24 meters) of the center line of
any existing or proposed street; and
(b) The location, species mix, general size and condition of any
forested areas or masses of other significant plant material.
(7) Items of historical significance.
D. Proposed layout showing:
(1) Proposed standards, as applicable:
(a) Density;
(b) Open space;
(c) Dwelling unit mix;
172. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ 136-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-703
1:541
(d) Type and size of units (square footage/square meters of
footprints);
(e) Size of nonresidential buildings (include floor area and gross
leasable area);
(f) Total number of off-street parking spaces and method of
calculation;
(2) The layout and names of streets and driveways, including widths of
cartways and rights-of-way and recommended improvements (see
Township for recommended street list).
(3) The layout and approximate dimensions, areas, and uses of lots,
building setback lines, and rear and side yard lines. The error of
closure of all lot lines and easements shall not be greater than one
part in 2,500.
(4) The arrangement and use of buildings, pads, structures, and
parking areas in nonresidential developments with all necessary
dimensions and number of parking spaces. Elevations and
perspective sketches of proposed buildings are encouraged.
(5) All open space shall be so identified, and its proposed use and level
of maintenance specified. The method of administration and
maintenance of the open space shall be detailed.
(6) The layout of recreational or community facilities, sidewalks and
pedestrian paths.
(7) Where the preliminary plan is phased and covers only a part of the
applicant's entire holding, a sketch shall be submitted of the
prospective street layout for the remainder.
E. Sedimentation and erosion control plan pursuant to the Clean Streams
Law, P.L. 1987,173 as last amended, and in accordance with standards
and specifications found in the "Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook" available through the Montgomery County Conservation
District.
F. Sewer and water plan, showing:
(1) Public sanitary sewer facilities, if applicable;
(2) Stormwater facilities, if applicable; and
(3) Public water supply facilities and distribution system, if applicable;
(4) Storm drainage computations and a drainage area plan shall be
provided.
173. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 136-703 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-703
1:542
G. Tentative typical cross sections and center-line profiles for each
proposed street shown on the preliminary plan. These plans may be
submitted as separate sheets.
H. A landscaping plan including, but not necessarily limited to, the
locations for street trees and the landscape treatment of reverse
frontage lots and of any required buffer strips or yards.
I. Traffic impact study
(1) Purpose. A traffic impact study shall be required for all subdivisions
of more than 10 lots, all land developments and rezoning requests
to provide the Board of Supervisors with the opportunity to assess
the effect of a proposed subdivision, land development or rezoning
request on the transportation system in Towamencin Township. The
purpose of the study is to identify traffic and transportation
problems associated with the adequacy of the existing
transportation network to provide access to, from and through the
site in light of the character and volume of traffic expected to be
generated by the proposed subdivision, land development, and/or
rezoning. This study should also delineate solutions to such
problems or facilities including the prescription of improvements to
be provided by or at the expense of the applicant, consistent with
the Township's Capital Improvement Program.
(2) Preparation of traffic impact study.
(a) The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic
engineer and/or transportation planner with prior traffic study
experience.
(b) A traffic impact study shall be submitted for all residential
subdivisions or land developments of 10 or more lots or
dwelling units; all commercial, office, industrial, institutional
or other nonresidential uses requiring subdivision or land
development approval; all rezoning requests.
(c) The Township Planning Commission may, upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer, determine that the
requirement for a traffic impact study is not necessary.
(d) The requirements, procedures, and standards for the traffic
impact study are as set forth in § 136-703I(4).
(3) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
LEVEL OF SERVICE — As defined in the 1985 Highway Capacity
Manual, Special Report 209, as amended, defines operational
conditions within a traffic stream (or at an intersection approach).
"Level of service" also generally describes these conditions in
terms of such factors as speed, travel time, freedom to maneuver,
traffic interruptions, comfort and convenience and safety. Six levels
§ 136-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-703
1:543
of service are defined for each type of traffic facility, ranging from
A to F. Level of Service A indicates free flow; Level of Service
B indicates stable flow; Level of Service C indicates stable but
inhibited flow; Level of Service D indicates high-density, restricted
stable flow; Level of Service E indicates operation at or near
capacity; and Level of Service F is indicative of flow breakdown.
MAJOR INTERSECTION — Any intersection where traffic
generated by the proposal will have a significant effect on the
operation of traffic through the intersection. Where doubt exists,
the qualified traffic engineer and/or planner shall seek guidance
from the Township Planning Commission or the Township Engineer
prior to the submission of the traffic impact study.
QUEUE ANALYSIS — This procedure includes the average queue
and maximum queue of vehicles which will be observed in each
traffic stream and intersection approach, measured in both feet
and vehicles. Various statistical and/or computer models may be
applied.
STUDY AREA — This area will extend along all Township, county
and state roads serving the development and will extend to all
major intersections in the Township that may be affected. Where
doubt exists, the qualified traffic engineer and/or transportation
planner will seek guidance from the Township Planning
Commission or Township Engineer prior to the submission of the
study.
TRIP GENERATION — The total count of trips to and from a study
site per unit of land use (i.e., acres, dwelling unit, etc.) as
established by the most recent edition of the institute of
Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Report. For land uses
not listed in this report, or if information is determined through
a small sample size, the qualified traffic engineer and/or
transportation planner shall seek guidance from the Township
Planning Commission or Township Engineer prior to submission of
the study.
VOLUME/CAPACITY ANALYSIS — This procedure compares the
volume of a traffic facility to its capacity. The procedure described
in the 1985 Highway Capacity Manual, Transportation Research
Board Special Report 209, as amended, shall be followed.
WARRANTS FOR TRAFFIC SIGNAL INSTALLATION — A series
of warrants which detail the minimum traffic volume, pedestrian
volume or other criteria necessary for the installation of a traffic
signal. These criteria are contained in the most recent edition of
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways, United States Department of Transportation, FHWA.
(4) Requirements for traffic impact study.
§ 136-703 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-703
1:544
(a) A traffic study shall include, but not necessarily be limited to,
the following information:
[1] Site description;
[2] Existing conditions analysis;
[3] Future conditions analysis without proposed development;
[4] Trip generation characteristics of use(s);
[5] Future conditions analysis with the proposed
development;
[6] Proposed improvements;
[7] Conclusions.
(b) Specific information required within the report shall include,
but not necessarily be limited to, the following information:
[1] Site description. Identify the site, use and transportation
setting of the site and its surrounding area including:
[a] A brief description of the size, location, proposed land
uses, and completion date of the proposed land
development. If the development is residential, types
of dwelling units and number of bedrooms shall be
included. Also, the description shall include probable
socioeconomic characteristics of site users with
respect to transportation needs of the site (i.e.,
number of senior citizens).
[b] The existing and proposed uses of the site shall be
identified in terms of type and zoning classification
category.
[c] A complete description of access and circulation for
the site including, but not necessarily limited to,
location of access points and method of traffic control.
[d] Description of the adjacent external roadway system
within the study area. Major intersections in the study
area shall be identified and illustrated. All existing and
proposed public transportation services and facilities
within a one-half-mile radius of the site shall also be
documented. All future highway improvements within
Towamencin Township and the study area, including
proposed road construction and traffic signalization,
shall be noted. Improvements from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation's Twelve-Year Highway
and Bridge Program shall also be noted. Any proposed
§ 136-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-703
1:545
or in-place roadway improvements due to proposed
surrounding developments shall be noted.
[2] Existing conditions analysis. Existing traffic conditions
shall be measured and documented for the roadways and
intersections in the study area based on the following
efforts:
[a] Daily and peak hour volumes. Schematics diagrams
shall be presented depicting existing traffic volumes
for average daily traffic (ADT), the weekday peak
highway traffic hour(s) and peak developmentgenerated
hour(s) and the Saturday peak hour traffic.
All documentation must be contained in the report.
Turning movement and mainline volumes shall be
presented for all peak hour conditions (weekday a.m.
peak, weekday p.m. peak, weekday site-generated and
Saturday peak) while only mainline volumes are
required for ADT's. Source and method of
computation must be included.
[b] Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. A volume
capacity analysis based upon existing volumes shall be
performed during the weekday and Saturday peak
traffic hour(s) and the peak development-generated
hour(s) for all roadways and major intersections in the
study area.
[c] Levels of service at critical points. Based on the
results obtained in the previous section, levels of
service are to be computed and presented in
schematic form. Included in this section shall also be a
description of typical operating conditions at each
level of service.
[3] Future conditions analysis without the proposed
development. A description of the anticipated future traffic
volumes and the ability of the roadway network to
accommodate this traffic without the proposed
development shall be provided. The future year(s) for
which projections are made shall be the development
completion year, unless required otherwise by the
Township Planning Commission. Factors included within
this section include, but are not necessarily limited to,
background traffic growth and traffic generated by other
proposed developments within the study area. Include the
following:
[a] Daily and peak hour volumes. Clearly indicate the
method and assumption used to forecast future
volumes in order that Township personnel can
§ 136-703 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-703
1:546
duplicate these calculations. The schematic diagrams
depicting future volumes shall be similar to those
described previously in Subsection I(4)(b)[2][a] in
terms of location and times (daily and peak hours).
[b] Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. Describe
the ability of the roadway system to accommodate
future traffic (without the proposed development). If
roadway improvements or modifications are
committed for implementation, the volume/capacity
analysis should be presented for these conditions.
Periods of analysis shall be the same as those
previously performed in Subsection I(4)(b)[2][b].
[c] Levels of service at critical points. Based on the
results obtained in the previous section, levels of
service are to be determined and presented as in
Subsection I(4)(b)[2][c].
[4] Trip generation characteristics. Vehicular trips resulting
from the proposed development shall be estimated and
distributed for weekday and Saturday peak traffic
conditions during the weekday a.m. and p.m. peak traffic
hours, the weekday peak development-generated hour and
the Saturday peak traffic hour. Development traffic
characteristics shall be determined as follows:
[a] Estimation of the number of trips generated by the
proposed use(s) for each period shall be developed
utilizing ITE publication, Trip Generation, latest
edition. Other local sources of trip generation are
acceptable, subject to approval by the Township
Engineer.
[b] The direction of approach and departure for sitegenerated
traffic shall be identified. As with all
technical analysis steps, the basic method and
assumptions used in this work must be clearly stated.
[c] Site-generated traffic volumes and access points
combined with anticipated traffic volumes as
calculated under Subsection I(4)(b)[3] to determine
mainline and turning movement volumes for future
conditions with the site developed as proposed.
[5] Future conditions analysis with the proposed
development. A description of the adequacy of the
roadway system to accommodate future traffic with
development of the site shall be provided. An analysis shall
be completed for each time period as listed in Subsection
I(4)(b)[4] and as follows:
§ 136-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-703
1:547
[a] Daily and peak hour traffic volumes. Mainline and
turning movement volumes shall be presented, in
schematic form, for the highway network in the study
area as well as driveways and internal circulation
roadways for the appropriate time periods (identified
previously).
[b] Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. Similar to
Subsection I(4)(b)[2][b] and I(4)(b)[3][b], a volume/
capacity analysis shall be performed for the
appropriate peak hours of future conditions with the
site developed as proposed.
[c] Levels of service at critical points. Based upon the
results obtained in the previous section, levels of
service are to be determined and presented as in
Subsection I(4)(b)[2][c] and I(4)(b)[3][c].
[6] Proposed improvements. A description of proposed
improvements to remedy deficiencies shall be identified.
Improvements shall be identified which would increase
capacity to return to predevelopment levels of service
conditions. Alternative improvement schemes shall be
presented for postdevelopment traffic volumes to operate
at a minimum Level of Service D or, under no
circumstances, at a level of service worse than
predevelopment levels. These recommendations shall
separately identify committed projects of governmental
agencies which were described and independently
identified in Subsection I(4)(b)[1] and reflected in the
analysis contained in Subsection I(4)(b)[2] and I(4)(b)[3]
and as follows:
[a] Proposed recommended improvements. This section
should describe the location, nature and extent of
proposed improvements to assure sufficient capacity.
The listing of recommended improvements shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following elements: internal circulation design, speed
limit, stop and no parking sign locations, site access
location and design, external roadway and
intersection design and improvements and traffic
signal installation and operation, including phasing
and timing. All physical roadway improvement shall be
shown in sketches. This listing shall also include, for
each improvement, preliminary cost estimates,
funding source, timing and likelihood of the
improvement implementation and party responsible
for the improvement.
§ 136-703 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-703
1:548
[b] Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. Another
iteration of the volume/capacity analysis shall be
presented and described which demonstrates the
anticipated results of making recommended
improvements.
[c] Levels of service at critical points. Based on the
results obtained in the previous section, levels of
service for the study area with improvement shall be
presented.
[7] Conclusion. The overall results of the traffic impact study
shall be presented in a clear, concise description. It is
anticipated that this concluding section will serve as an
executive summary.
(5) Time of submission.
(a) A traffic management study shall be submitted to the Township
Planning Commission with the preliminary plan application or
the petition for rezoning, as the case may be. An application for
preliminary plan approval shall be deemed incomplete and
unacceptable for filing if the traffic study is not included in the
submission.
(b) The preliminary plan and accompanying improvement
construction plans shall not be submitted to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation until the plans and traffic study
have been reviewed by the Township Planning Commission,
and approved by the Township Board of Supervisors. The
submittal to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
shall be accompanied by the comments of Towamencin
Township.
(6) Implementation.
(a) The Township Planning Commission, the Township Engineer,
and Board of Supervisors shall review the traffic study to
analyze its adequacy in solving any traffic problems that may
occur due to the land development, subdivision, or request for
rezoning.
(b) The Board of Supervisors may decide, after receiving the
reports and recommendations of the Township Planning
Commission, Township Engineer, and Montgomery County
Planning Commission, that certain improvements are
necessary and may make these additional improvements to be
completed by and at the cost of the developer as conditions to
the subdivision, land development or request for rezoning
approval.
§ 136-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-703
1:549
§ 136-704. Final plan.
The final plan shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
J. The applicant shall submit a copy of the deed by which the property was
acquired. The applicant shall submit the names of the real (title) owners
of the property, the names of all equitable owners, and the names of all
option holders.
K. Planning Modules for Land Development as required by Chapter 71 of
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.174
L. The plan should be accompanied by color photographs and a color video
tape (VHS format) of the property showing significant features,
indicating proposed street locations, identifying existing structures and
streets, and showing all property boundaries and a continuous view of
the area within 500 feet (152.4 meters) of the site boundaries. The plan
and video should be indexed to facilitate identification of physical
features and proposed improvements.
A. Drafting standards per preliminary plan requirements.
B. General information per preliminary plan requirements and, in
addition, must include datum to which contour elevations refer. Where
reasonably practicable, data shall refer to known, established
elevations.
C. Existing features per preliminary plan requirements.
D. Proposed layout, showing:
(1) Proposed standards, as applicable:
(a) Density;
(b) Open space;
(c) Dwelling unit mix;
(d) Type and size of units (square footage/square meters of
footprints);
(e) Size of nonresidential buildings (include floor area and gross
leasable area);
(f) Total number of off-street parking spaces and method of
calculation.
(2) The layout and names of streets and driveways, including widths of
cartways and rights-of-way and recommended improvements (see
Township for recommended street list).
174. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 136-703 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-704
1:550
(3) The layout and approximate dimensions, areas, and uses of lots;
building setback lines, and rear and side yard lines. The error of
closure of all lot lines and easements shall not be greater than one
part in 2,500.
(4) The arrangement and use of buildings, pads, structures, and
parking areas in nonresidential developments with all necessary
dimensions and number of parking spaces. Elevations and
perspective sketches of proposed buildings are encouraged.
(5) All open space shall be so identified, and its proposed use and level
of maintenance specified. The method of administration and
maintenance of the open space shall be detailed.
(6) The layout of recreational or community facilities, sidewalks and
pedestrian paths.
(7) Where the preliminary plan is phased and covers only a part of the
applicant's entire holding, a sketch shall be submitted of the
prospective street layout for the remainder.
E. Cross sections and center-line profiles shall be provided for each
proposed street shown on the preliminary plan. These plans may be
submitted as separate sheets.
F. Sewer and water plan (per preliminary plan requirements).
G. Landscaping and grading plan, showing:
(1) Existing grades with proposed grades shown as required by the
Township Engineer;
(2) Areas for proposed topsoil stockpiling;
(3) Location of all proposed drainage and stormwater facilities;
(4) Existing vegetation to be removed;
(5) Existing vegetation to be preserved and vegetation protection
measures;
(6) The location of all proposed plant material;
(7) The identification, quantity, botanical name, common name, type of
container and any additional remarks of all proposed plant material
species list of alternate species when applicable;
(8) Detail of all planting, staking, guying, wrapping, pruning
specifications;
(9) Buffer areas.
H. Improvement construction plan (drainage and construction):
§ 136-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-704
1:551
(1) The improvement construction plan shall be at any of the following
scales:
Horizontal Vertical
20 feet/inch (4.57 meters/
centimeter)
2 feet/inch (0.6096 meters/
centimeter)
40 feet/inch (12.192 meters/
centimeter)
4 feet/inch (1.2192 meters/
centimeter)
50 feet/inch (15.24 meters/
centimeter)
5 feet/inch (1.524 meters/
centimeter)
(2) Horizontal plan (streets). The horizontal plan shall show details of
the horizontal layout including:
(a) Center line with bearings, distances, curve data and stations
corresponding to the profile;
(b) Right-of-way and curb lines with radii at intersections;
(c) Beginning and end (physical location) of proposed
construction;
(d) Tie-ins by courses and distances to intersection of all public
roads, with their names and widths;
(e) Location of all proposed monuments with reference to them;
(f) Property line and ownership of abutting properties;
(g) Location and size of all drainage structures, stormwater
detention `facilities, sidewalks, public utilities, lighting
standards, and street name signs;
(h) Location and size of line with stations corresponding to the
profile;
(i) Location of manholes or inlets with grade between and
elevation of flow line and top of each manhole or inlet;
(j) Property lines and ownership, with details of easements where
required;
(k) Beginning and end of proposed construction;
(l) Location of laterals;
(m) Location of all other drainage facilities and public utilities in
the vicinity of storm and/or sanitary sewer lines;
(n) Profile of existing ground surface along center line of street;
§ 136-704 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-704
1:552
(o) Proposed center-line grade with percent on tangents and
elevations at fifty-foot (15.24 meters) intervals, grade
intersection and either end of curb radii;
(p) Vertical curve data including length, elevations and minimum
sight distance as required by the Township Engineer;
(q) Right-of-way width and location and width paving;
(r) Type, thickness, and crown of paving;
(s) Type and size of curb;
(t) Grading of sidewalk area;
(u) Location, width, type and thickness of sidewalks;
(v) Typical location of sewers and utilities with sizes;
(w) Profile of existing ground surface with elevations at top of
manholes or inlets;
(x) Profile of storm drain or sewer showing type and size of pipe,
grade, cradles, manhole, and inlet locations;
(y) Stormwater management:
[1] Description of an ownership and maintenance program, in
a recordable form, that clearly sets forth the ownership
and maintenance responsibility for all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities, including
the following:
[a] Description of the method and extent of the
maintenance requirements.
[b] When maintained by a private entity, identification of a
responsible individual, corporation, association or
other entity for ownership and maintenance. Deed
covenants and restrictions must be submitted to
provide for maintenance by this entity.
[c] When maintained by a private entity, copy of the
legally binding document which provides that
Township shall have the right to:
[d] Inspect the facilities at any time;
[e] Require the private entity to take corrective measures
and assign the private entity reasonable time periods
for any necessary action;
[f] Authorize maintenance to be done and lien the cost of
the work against the properties of the private entity
responsible for maintenance.
§ 136-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-704
1:553
[g] Where the stormwater management plan proposes
that Township own or maintain the facilities, a
description of the methods, procedures, and the
extent to which any facilities shall be turned over to
the Township.
[2] Financial security for the completion of stormwater
management facilities as set forth in this chapter.
[3] Maintenance guarantee, as set forth in this chapter.
[4] When a stormwater management plan is submitted in
sections, a generalized stormwater management plan for
the entire project site shall be submitted in addition to the
detailed stormwater management plan for the proposed
section. This generalized plan shall demonstrate how the
stormwater of the proposed section will relate to the entire
development. If temporary facilities are required for
construction of a section, such facilities shall be included
in the submitted stormwater management plan.
I. Acknowledgments.
(1) All offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation
and maintenance of undedicated open space, bearing certificate of
approval of Township Solicitor.
(2) Such private deed restrictions, including building setback lines, as
may be imposed upon the property as a condition to sale, together
with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may
affect the title to the land being subdivided.
(3) A written improvements agreement, pursuant to this chapter.
(4) Surveyor's certification shall appear on the plan as follows:
"I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon, as well
as all other drawings which are a part of this plan set, are true
and correct to the accuracy required by the Towamencin Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and were prepared
by me or under my direction. The existing perimeter monuments
shown hereon have been located as part of the survey and all other
proposed perimeter monuments shall be set.
Date
"
Surveyor
(5) Wetlands certification shall appear on the plan as follows:
§ 136-704 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-704
1:554
§ 136-705. Minor subdivision final plan.
"I do hereby certify that the delineation of the wetlands shown
on this plan is in accordance with the findings of my field
investigation and that I have determined these limits based upon
the Corps of Engineer guidelines.
Date
"
Surveyor
(6) Note on plan for dedication of rights-of-way or easements:
(a) Typical note for right-of-way:
"Fifty-foot (15.24 meters) right-of-way for public thoroughfare
is hereby offered for dedication to Towamencin Township."
(b) Example plan note for easements:
"Stormwater easement for the benefit of Towamencin
Township is hereby offered for dedication to Towamencin
Township or its assigns."
(7) Permits. The developer shall obtain all necessary permits and
approvals from all governmental agencies which have jurisdiction
over this project. This would include such agencies as follows: the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, United States Corps of
Engineers, etc.
(8) The plan shall list all waivers granted by the Board of Supervisors.
(9) The plan shall indicate the Montgomery County Planning
Commission review number.
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet (2.540
centimeters equals 6.096 meters), one inch equals 30 feet (2.540
centimeters equals 9.144 meters), one inch equals 40 feet (2.540
centimeters equals 12.192 meters), one inch equals 50 feet (2.540
centimeters equals 15.24 meters), or one inch equals 100 feet
(2.540 centimeters equals 30.48 meters).
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet (meters) and decimal parts thereof, and
bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(3) The boundary line of the subdivision shall be shown as a solid heavy
line. The error of closure of all lot lines and easements shall not be
greater than one part in 2,500.
(4) Plans shall be on sheets either 15 inches by 18 inches (38.1
centimeters by 45.72 centimeters), 18 inches by 30 inches (45.72
§ 136-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-705
1:555
centimeters by 76.2 centimeters), or 24 inches by 36 inches (60.96
centimeters by 91.44 centimeters), or such size as is specifically
approved by the Township Engineer, and all lettering shall be so
drawn as to be legible if the plans should be reduced to half size.
B. General information to be shown:
(1) Name of subdivision or land development;
(2) Tax parcel number (Montgomery County Tax Map);
(3) Name and address of the owner/applicant/developer;
(4) Name and address of the registered engineer, surveyor, landscape
architect, or architect responsible for the plan;
(5) Type of water supply and sewage disposal facilities proposed;
(6) Zoning requirements, including:
(a) Applicable district;
(b) Lot size and yard requirements;
(c) Any variances or special exceptions granted;
(7) Location map showing relation of site to adjoining properties and
streets;
(8) North point;
(9) Written and graphic scales (including scale of location map);
(10) Total acreage of the site, area and dimensions for each lot;
(11) Site boundaries;
(12) Boundaries of all adjoining properties (with names of landowners
in the case of unplatted land);
(13) Existing streets on and adjacent to the site with future rights-ofway;
(14) Existing buildings (and their uses), driveways, sewer lines, storm
drains, culverts, bridges, utility easements, quarries, railroads, and
other significant man-made features within 500 feet (152.4 meters)
of and within the site (this includes properties across roadways);
(15) Proposed lot layout;
(16) Building setback lines.
C. Natural features to be shown:
§ 136-705 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-705
1:556
§ 136-706. Record plan. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
The record plan submission shall consist of three copies of a clear and
legible blue or black line print on white opaque linen or clear Mylar, and
five copies on paper print. The record plan shall be an exact copy of the
approved final plan on a sheet of the size required for final plans. An
electronic copy of the record plan shall also be submitted in a format
compatible to a GIS system, or as otherwise approved by the Township.
(1) Soil types within site, based on maps contained in the Soil Survey
of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, 1967.
(2) Contours based upon U.S. Geological Survey datum; provided, that
if on-site sewage disposal is proposed, contours shall be provided at
vertical intervals of two feet (0.6096 meters) for land with average
natural slope of 5% or less and vertical intervals of five feet (1.74
meters) for more steeply sloping land. Show datum to which
contour elevations refer. Where reasonably practicable, data shall
refer to known, established elevations.
(3) The location and area of all floodplains, floodplain soils, forests,
lakes, ponds, watercourses, and wetlands.
D. Acknowledgment (per final plan requirements).
A. Seals as follows:
(1) The impressed seal and signature of the licensed engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or surveyor who prepared the plan;
(2) The impressed corporation seal, if the subdivider is a corporation;
(3) The impressed seal of a notary public or other qualified officer
acknowledging owner's statement of intent.
B. Acknowledgments as follows:
(1) A statement to the effect that the applicant is the owner of the land
proposed to be subdivided and that the subdivision shown on the
final plan is made with his or their free consent and that it is
desired to record the same;
(2) An acknowledgment of said statement before an officer authorized
to take acknowledgments;
(3) All other applicable acknowledgments per final plan requirements.
C. The following signatures shall be placed directly on the plan in ink:
(1) The signatures of the owner of the land; if the owner of the land is a
corporation, the signatures of the president and secretary of the
corporation shall appear;
§ 136-705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-706
1:557
(2) The signature of the notary public or other qualified officer,
acknowledging the owner's statement of intent;
(3) The signature of the licensed engineer or surveyor who prepared
the plan;
(4) The signatures of the Chairman and the Secretary of the Board of
Supervisors.
D. The seal of the Montgomery County Planning Commission shall be
placed directly on the plan prior to recording of the plan with the
Montgomery County Recorder of Deeds. Provide a three-and-one-halfinch
(8.89 centimeters) wide by two-inch (5.08 centimeters) tall block
for county review stamp.
E. All plans shall require a certification as to the accuracy of the plats, and
shall be prepared in accordance with the Act of May 23, 1945, known as
the "Professional Engineers Registration Law."175
F. Said plats can propose, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors,
the phasing of said project of land development. In the event the Board
of Supervisors permits a phased development, the arrangement of the
surety and the phasing, in terms of number of units, shall be reviewed
by the Board of Supervisors and approved at its discretion.
175. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
§ 136-706 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-706
1:558
ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 136-800. Unnecessary hardship to applicant; modification of
requirements.
A. Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this
chapter and/or its accompanying regulations would result in
unnecessary hardship, the Board of Supervisors may make such
reasonable exception thereto. Proof of unnecessary hardship must be
presented in writing to the Township Planning Commission by the
applicant. The Township Planning Commission shall review the
applicant's request and submit a written report to the Board of
Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors may grant a waiver or deferral to
such applicant from such mandatory provisions, so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest served; provided that such
waiver or deferral will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of these regulations.
B. It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that greater profit would
result if the waiver or deferral were granted. Furthermore, hardship
complained of cannot be self-created; it cannot be claimed by one who
purchases with or without knowledge of restrictions; it must be from
the application of this chapter; it must be suffered directly by the
property in question; and evidence of waiver or deferral granted under
similar circumstances shall not be considered.
C. In granting waivers or deferrals and modifications, the Board of
Supervisors may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objective of the standards or requirements so waived,
deferred, or modified.
D. Procedure for modification.
(1) The governing body, after comment by the Township Planning
Commission, may grant a modification of the requirements of one
or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to
the land in question, provided that such modification will not be
contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of
this chapter is observed.
(2) All requests for such a modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be part of the application for development. The
request shall state in full the grounds and facts, relative to
reasonableness or hardship, on which the request is based, the
provision or provisions of the chapter involved, and the minimum
modification necessary.
§ 136-800 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-800
1:559
§ 136-801. Required improvements and contracts.
(3) The Board of Supervisors will keep a written record, via its
minutes, of all action on all requests for modification. All waivers or
deferrals granted shall be indicated on the final record plan.
A. Improvement. Before approving any subdivision or land development
plan for recording, the Board of Supervisors shall either require that
the necessary grading, paving and other improvements as herein
specified shall have been installed in strict accordance with the
standards and specifications of the Board of Supervisors, or that the
Board of Supervisors be assured by means of a proper contract and
completion guarantee, as set forth in § 136-802B hereof, that the
improvements will subsequently be installed by the developer. Where
the subdivision or land development plan has been approved and
recorded, either after the specified improvements have been completed
and approved by the Board of Supervisors, or if prior to completion
upon proper completion guarantee as aforesaid, purchasers and
mortgagees of lots in the subdivision or land development, with or
without buildings thereon or on any of them shall be relived of any and
all liability for any deficiency in lack of or failure to complete the
improvements above mentioned as set forth in said plan or required as
a condition precedent to the approval of the plan of subdivision or land
development and any failure to complete or properly complete said
improvements shall not encumber any or all of the lots in the
subdivision or land development.
B. Contracts. In all cases where the necessary grading, paving and other
improvements required herein shall not have been installed in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Township prior
to approval of the final plan, the developers shall agree, in writing, to
the following:
(1) Construct streets and other improvements required by this section
from the lot or lots to be sold or built upon to an existing improved
street, subject to the provisions of § 136-800 herein. The work shall
be performed in strict accordance with approved plans and the
Township Engineering Standards176 or the applicable provisions of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Publication 408
Specifications, as last amended, or any subsequent number or
section thereof. No plan shall be finally approved until the
developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements as required as a condition for final approval of a plan
or until such time as the applicant has provided a proper guarantee
in the form of a performance bond or bonds with surety satisfaction
to the Township or by the deposit of funds or securities in escrow or
by the presentation of an irrevocable letter of credit from a federal
or commonwealth chartered lending institution. Such financial
176. Editor's Note: The Towamencin Township Engineering Standards are included in Ch. 136A,
which immediately follows this chapter.
§ 136-800 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-801
1:560
security shall be posted with a bonding company or federal or
commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the
developer, builder or subdivider posting the financial security,
provided that said bonding company or lending institution is
authorized to conduct business within the commonwealth. When
requested by the applicant, to facilitate financing, the Township
shall furnish him with a signed copy of a resolution indicating
approval of the final plat contingent upon the applicant obtaining
satisfactory financial security. The final plat or record plan shall
not be signed nor recorded until the financial security agreement
is executed. The resolution of contingent approval shall expire and
be deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement is
not executed within 90 days unless written extension is granted
by the Board of Supervisors. Such extension shall be placed in
writing. The amount of financial security shall be equal to 110%
of the cost of the required improvements including construction
contingencies, Township inspection fees, Township engineering
and legal services fees, and as-built drawings for which the
financial security is to be posted, estimated as of 90 days following
the date schedule for completion by the applicant. The cost of
the improvements shall be based upon an estimate prepared by
a professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and shall not include financial security for the cost
of any improvement for which financial security is required by and
provided to the Department of Transportation in connection with
the issuance of a highway occupancy permit pursuant to Section
420 of the Act of June 1, 1945, P.L. 1242, No. 428 (known as
the "State Highway Law").177 Said estimate shall be certified by
said engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost.
The Township, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer,
may refuse to accept said estimate for good cause. Upon such
circumstances, the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified
by a third engineer and shall be presumed fair and reasonable
and shall be the final estimate. Fees for the services of said third
engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and applicant. The
applicant shall also guarantee that no lot will be sold or building
constructed in any flood-prone area prior to completion of all
floodproofing measures planned for such lot and necessary access
facilities. [Amended 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
(2) Such financial security shall provide for and secure to the public
the completion of all subdivision improvements for which such
security is being posted by the date fixed in the subdivision plan or
subdivision agreement for completion of such improvements.
Annually, the Township may adjust the amount of financial security
by comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have been
completed and the estimated cost for completion of the remaining
improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after either the
177. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 136-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-801
1:561
§ 136-802. Release from liability.
original date scheduled for completion, or a rescheduled date of
completion, to complete the required improvements. The Township
may require the applicant to post additional financial security to
assure that it equals the required 110% of the cost of completion
of the required improvements as reestablished by using the above
procedure.
(3) In the case where development is projected over a period of years,
the Board of Supervisors may authorize the submission of final
plans by sections or stages of development, subject to such
requirements or guarantees as to improvements in future sections
or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of
any finally approved section of the development.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not relieve the developer from
the penalties provided for in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,178 as last amended, for violations of this chapter.
A. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release, or authorize the release from time to time, of
such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
contractor(s) performing the work. Any such request shall be in writing,
addressed to the Board of Supervisors and subject to the provisions for
release as established in Section 509 of Act 247, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as last amended.
B. If a partial release is not authorized as stated in Subsection A above, the
financial security shall be released only upon the complete installation
of the required improvements in accordance with the approved
improvement construction plan. Strict compliance with the procedures
established by Section 510 of Act 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as last amended, shall be followed with respect to the
release of the performance bond or other security. If the Board of
Supervisors fails to comply with the time limitations of said Section
510, all improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the
developer shall be released from all liability pursuant to the
performance bond. If the required improvements are not completely
installed within the required time period, the Board of Supervisors shall
declare the performance bond in default and authorize the Township
Manager to collect the amount payable thereunder. Upon receipt of
such amount, the Township shall install such improvements as were
covered by the bond and are commensurate with the extent of the
building development which has taken place in the subdivision or land
development, not exceeding in cost, however, the amount collected
upon the bond.
178. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 136-801 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-803
1:562
§ 136-803. Township procedures.
§ 136-804. Construction sequence.
A. The Township will receive the final plan application including a cost
estimate for all improvements in accordance with this chapter.
B. Along with the final plan, the Township Engineer will be asked to review
the cost estimate for the improvements.
C. The Township Solicitor will prepare the necessary contracts and legal
documents necessary for the improvements.
D. The Township Solicitor will prepare the necessary documents to affect
the improvements guarantee.
E. The funds received to cover the costs of the improvements will be
placed in the appropriate account.
F. The Township, through its Engineer, will make inspection of the
construction of the improvements as it deems necessary.
(1) Notice.
(a) The Township Engineer shall be notified 48 hours in advance of
the commencement of any construction or installation
operation, in order that provision may be made for inspection
by the Township.
(b) Construction and installation operations shall also be subject
to inspection by Township officials during the progress of the
work, and the subdivider, developer or builder shall pay for all
inspections.
(2) Samples of materials shall be furnished to the Township in the
same manner as is required of contractors under the highway and
sanitary drainage specifications.
G. The Township Engineer will determine the date when all of the
improvements are complete. From this date the applicant will be
responsible for maintaining and repairing the improvements for a
period of 18 months.
A. Existing roads. The implementation and scheduling of the
improvements required by the Township in relation to existing roads
shall be addressed by the Township as part of the final plan approval.
B. Proposed roads. All improvements within the roadway right-of-way
shall be completed along all lots or units before any use and occupancy
permit shall be issued for the lot or unit which abuts the roadway
improvements. The only exception to this requirement shall be the
placement of the pavement wearing course which shall be placed upon
completion of the project. This required work shall also include those
§ 136-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-804
1:563
§ 136-805. Fees.
§ 136-806. Conditions of acceptance.
improvements which are required on the lot or unit for which the use
and occupancy permit is required.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall establish a schedule of fees and a
collection procedure for the review of all applications and other matters
pertaining to the administration of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit an additional fee to the Montgomery County
Planning Commission and the Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal
Authority to cover the review process.
B. The Board of Supervisors hereby established that, in accordance with
Resolution Nos. 87-3 and 88-4, as last amended, applicants shall pay for
review of all applications and other matters pertaining to the
administration of this chapter.
C. Applicants shall furnish an escrow fund sufficient to pay all fees and
costs required for the administration of this chapter. The escrow fund
shall be paid when preliminary plans (and/or final plans) are submitted
for review and approval. The escrow fund shall be sufficient to
guarantee the payment of:
(1) The services of the Township engineers, Township consultants, and
Township Solicitor related to review and consideration of the
application, and all other costs for planning, engineering, traffic
surveys, and professional certification as deemed necessary by the
Board of Supervisors in reviewing plans;
(2) The actual cost of all drainage, water, and materials tests;
(3) The cost of Township inspection services;
(4) Legal fees, advertising, and other costs involved in the dedication
of streets, easements, and public improvements to the Township;
(5) Actual costs of recording;
(6) A Township administrative charge, as established by resolution, of
the total costs described in Subsections C(1) through (5) above.
D. Impact fees. As required by state regulations, Towamencin Township
has completed the necessary studies to establish impact fees for: park;
recreation and open space; public sewer; and traffic. The applicant
shall be responsible for the payment of all applicable impact fees as
required under the various studies.
A. Conditions. The Township shall have no obligation to take over and
make public any street or other improvements unless:
§ 136-804 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-806
1:564
§ 136-807. Records.
The Board of Supervisors and Township Planning Commission shall keep
records of their findings, decisions, and recommendations relative to all
subdivision plans filed with them for review or approval.
§ 136-808. Approvals.
The Board of Supervisors may grant a conditional preliminary or final
approval subject to conditions acceptable to the Board of Supervisors and
the applicant. Said conditional approval can be subject to applicant's
acceptance of the conditions as set forth therein. The procedure for
acceptance shall be a mailing by regular first class mail to the address
given by the applicant on its original application with a requirement that the
applicant return to the Township office, within 14 days of approval from the
Board of Supervisors, a signed copy of the resolution of conditional approval
acknowledging applicant's acceptance. In the event that said resolution
is not returned to the Township office within 14 days from the Board of
Supervisors' approval, the applicant will have been deemed not to have
(1) The required improvements, utility mains and laterals and
monuments shown on an approved plan or plans have been
constructed to all requirements;
(2) It is established, to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors,
that there is a need for the improvements to be taken over and
made public;
(3) All applicable fees and services have been paid;
(4) All utility costs incurred have been paid by the applicant;
(5) As-built Mylars of the construction improvements have been
submitted and reviewed by the Township.
B. Acceptance. The Township shall have no responsibility with respect to
any street or other improvement, notwithstanding the use of the same
by the public, unless the street or other improvement is accepted by an
ordinance or resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
C. Guarantee. The applicant shall guarantee for a period of 18 months
from the date of the ordinance accepting dedication to maintain the
stability of all materials and work and to promptly make good and
replace all poor or inferior materials or workmanship and all shrinkage,
settlement or other faults of any kind whatsoever arising therefrom, at
his own expense and to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, when
notified in writing to do so by the Township Engineer; and, in order to
secure the guarantee as herein required, the Township shall be assured
by means of a proper guarantee in the form of a bond or surety
satisfactory to the Township or the deposit of funds or securities in
escrow in an amount equal to 15% of the completion guarantee posted
by the owner with the Township.
§ 136-806 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-808
1:565
accepted said conditions and, therefore, the resolution approving same
shall become a nullity.
§ 136-808 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-808
1:566
ARTICLE IX
Amendments and General Provisions
§ 136-900. Power of amendment.
The governing body may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this chapter. When doing so, the Board of Supervisors shall
proceed in the manner prescribed in this article.
§ 136-901. Interpretation and scope.
The words "amend," "amendment," "amendments" or "amended" in this
chapter shall be deemed to include any modification of the text or
phraseology of any provision or amendment thereof, or any repeal or
elimination of any such provision or part thereof, or any addition to the
chapter or to an amendment thereof.
§ 136-902. Initiation of amendments.
Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal may
be initiated by the Board of Supervisors on its own motion, or by the
Township Planning Commission.
§ 136-903. Hearings.
A. Proposals originated by the Board of Supervisors. The Board of
Supervisors shall refer every proposed amendment, supplement,
change, modification, or repeal originated by the Board of Supervisors
to the Township Planning Commission and Montgomery County
Planning Commission. Within 45 days of the submission of said
proposal, the Township Planning Commission shall submit to the Board
of Supervisors a report containing the Commission's recommendations,
including any additions or modifications to the original proposal.
B. Proposals originated by the Township Planning Commission. The
Township Planning Commission may, at any time, transmit to the Board
of Supervisors proposal for the amendment, supplement, change,
modification, or repeal of this chapter.
A. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon. No amendment shall
become effective until after such hearing at which parties in interest,
contiguous municipalities, and citizens shall have an opportunity to be
heard. [Amended 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
B. Notice shall be given once each week for two successive weeks, the first
notice being not more than 30 days, and not less than 14 days, in
advance of such hearing and shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall state the time
and place of the hearing and shall include either the full text of the
proposed amendment, or a brief summary setting forth the principal
§ 136-900 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-903
1:567
§ 136-904. Repealer.
All ordinances, code sections, or parts thereof in conflict herewith shall be
repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 136-905. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter
be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of the
chapter shall not be.
§ 136-906. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter shall be April 18, 1995.
provisions in reasonable detail, with reference to a place where copies
of the proposed amendment may be examined.
C. No hearing shall be held before or during the forty-five-day period in
which the Township Planning Commission has been directed to review
and report its recommendations to the Board of Supervisors.
§ 136-903 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 136-906
1:568
Appendix 136A
TOWAMENCIN TOWNSHIP ENGINEERING STANDARDS
§ A100. General.
The following standards and Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's
Publication 408 Specifications, as last amended, shall be followed for all
subdivision, land development and new construction in the Township.
Where the Township's standards and those of PADOT differ, the most
restrictive standard, as determined by the Township Engineer, shall govern.
§ A101. Street right-of-way widths.
§ A102. Street cartway width.
A. The minimum public or private street right-of-way shall be 50 feet
(15.24 meters) or as specified in the current Official Map of
Towamencin Township, as last amended or as set forth below,
whichever is greater:
Street Classification
Minimum Width Right-of-Way
(feet/meters)
Local access 50/15.24
Feeder 60/18.288
Collector 80/24.384
Controlled access 80/24.384
Arterial highway 100/30.48
Service or marginal
access
40/12.192
B. Slope rights-of-way shall be provided in addition to the right-of-way
whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide
adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of 3:1.
A. Local access streets (residential).
(1) For streets within the R-200 Districts: Provided that all lots served
are one acre (4,047 square meters) or larger in area, the cartway
width shall be a minimum of 20 feet (6.096 meters) with four-foot
(1.2192 meters) stabilized shoulders provided on each side of the
road. Where curbs are required by the Board of Supervisors for
stormwater management or road stabilization, the minimum
cartway width shall be 28 feet (8.5344 meters).
(2) For all other local access streets: The minimum cartway width shall
be 30 feet (9.144 meters) with curbs. Parking allowed on one side
only.
§ 136-906 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A102
1:569
§ A103. Street engineering criteria.
(3) The minimum cartway for streets where on-street parking is
permitted on both sides shall be 40 feet (12.192 meters) with curbs.
B. Feeder streets.
(1) Where on-street parking is prohibited there shall be a minimum
cartway width of 24 feet (7.3152 meters) with a four-foot (1.2192
meters) stabilized shoulder provided on each side of the road.
Where curbs are required by the Board of Supervisors for
stormwater management or road stabilization, the minimum
cartway width shall be 30 feet (9.144 meters). No parking allowed.
(2) Where on-street parking is permitted on one side only, there shall
be a minimum cartway width of 36 feet (10.9728 meters) with
curbs.
(3) Where parking is permitted on both sides, there shall be a
minimum cartway width of 44 feet (13.4112 meters) with curbs.
C. Collector streets: A minimum cartway width of 40 feet (12.192 meters)
shall be required. On-street parking shall be prohibited.
D. Controlled access and arterial highways: Shall be determined by the
agency having jurisdiction (Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
Montgomery County) regarding minimum cartway width, shoulders,
and curbs. On-street parking shall be prohibited.
E. Service or marginal access streets: Shall have a minimum cartway
width of 30 feet (9.144 meters) with curbs.
A. Maximum (and minimum) grade.
Street Classification Grade
Local access, maximum grade 10%
Feeder, maximum grade 7%
Collector, maximum grade 7%
Controlled access and arterial *
Minimum grade, all streets 1.0%
Minimum grade for grass swales 1.0%
Marginal access roads and alleys,
maximum grade
8%
*NOTE: Set by the agency with jurisdiction.
B. Normal street crown requirements: Five-sixteenths inch (0.09525
centimeters) per foot extending in cross-section from edge of pavement
to center line.
§ A102 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A103
1:570
C. Depth of grass swale: One foot (0.3048 meters) deep with maximum
side slopes of 4:1 on each side of the street.
D. Horizontal curves: Horizontal curves shall be used at all changes in
direction in excess of 1°, and shall consider distance, change in grade,
and alignment. The following standards shall be used:
Street Classification
Minimum Radius
(feet/meters)
Local access 150/45.72
Feeder 200/60.96
Collector 300/91.44
Controlled access and
arterial
To be set by the agency having
jurisdiction
E. Vertical curves: Vertical curves shall be used at changes in grade of 1%
or more. The minimum length of vertical curves for each 1% of change
in grade shall be as follows:
Street Classification
Length/Percent Grade Change
(feet/meters)
Local access 25/7.62
Feeder 50/15.24
Collector 100/30.48
Controlled access and
arterial
To be set by the agency having
jurisdiction
F. Tangents between reverse curves.
Street Classification
Minimum Length of Tangents
Between Reverse Curves
(feet/meters)
Local access 100/30.48
Feeder 240/73.152
Collector 300/91.44
Controlled access and arterial As required by agency with
jurisdiction
G. Minimum turnarounds for culs-de-sac.
Right-of-way diameter 120 feet (36.576 meters)
Pavement diameter (w/o on-street
parking)
100 feet (30.48 meters)
§ A103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A103
1:571
§ A104. Pavement design.
The pavement thickness design shall, as a minimum, conform to the
following schedule. However, additional standards may be required by the
Township Engineer to compensate for high water table soils, frost heave
potential, etc.
Pavement Thickness Design
Option 1
One two-inch (3.81 centimeters) ID-2A
Wearing Course on
Two-inch (5.08 centimeters) ID-2A Binder
Course on
Ten-inch (25.4 centimeters) CABC PennDOT
#4 and #1 Stone on
Two-inch (5.08 centimeters) #1 Screenings
on Established Subgrade
Pavement Thickness Design
Option 2
One-and-one-half-inch (3.81 centimeters) ID-2A
Wearing Course on
Two-inch (5.08 centimeters) ID-2A Binder
Course on
Six-inch (15.24 centimeters) B.C.B.C. on
Six-inch (15.24 centimeters) Sub-base
§ A105. Street intersections.
Pavement diameter (w/ on-street
parking)
110 feet (33.528 meters)
Center island diameter (if approved by
the Township)
78 feet (23.7744 meters)
H. Design speed.
Street Classifications
Design Speed
[miles/(kilometers) per hour]
Local access 30/(48.279)
Feeder 35/(56.3255)
Collector, controlled access 50/(80.465)
arterial 55/(88.5115)
§ A103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A105
1:572
A. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less
than 75° shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved
approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right
angles for at least 50 feet (15.24 meters) therefrom.
B. No more than two streets shall intersect at the same point. Four-way
intersections are to be avoided in the layout of residential areas when T
intersections can be utilized.
C. Intersection spacing.
(1) Streets entering opposite of another street along an arterial,
controlled access, or collector street shall be laid out directly
opposite one another or with the minimum offset of 350 feet
(106.68 meters) between their center lines except local access and
feeder streets intersecting another local access or feeder street
shall either intersect directly opposite each other, or shall be
separated by at least 150 feet (45.72 meters) between center lines,
measured along the center line of the street being intersected.
(2) Feeder and local access streets shall not intersect on the same side
of an equal or more major thoroughfare at intervals of less than 500
feet (152.4 meters).
D. The design at channelized intersections shall conform to established
federal and PennDOT safety standards.
E. Intersection shall be approached on all sides by a straight leveling area
in according with the following standards:
Street Classification
Maximum Grade
(percent)
Length of Leveling
Area from
Intersection
(feet/meters)
Local access 4% 100/30/48
Feeder Collector 4% 100/30/48
Controlled access or
arterial
4% 100/30/48
F. Maximum grade within any intersection shall not exceed 3%.
G. Approaches to an intersection shall follow a straight horizontal course
for 100 feet (30.48 meters).
H. Street curbline intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum radius of: 25 feet (7.62 meters) for intersections involving
local access streets; 30 feet (9.144 meters) for all intersections
involving a local access street and a feeder, collector, controlled access,
or arterial street.
§ A105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A105
1:573
§ A106. Sight distance at intersections.
§ A107. Driveways.
I. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall
have the corners cut off in accordance with good engineering practice
to permit safe vehicular movement. Entrances shall be rounded at a
minimum radius of 10 feet (3.048 meters).
J. Street right-of-way lines at intersections shall be parallel to (concentric
with) curb arcs.
K. Deceleration lanes of not less than 12 feet (3.6576 meters) in width,
shall be provided on thru-collector and arterial streets at intersections
between collector streets or between collector and controlled access
streets. The length and geometry of the lanes shall be subject to
approval by the Township Engineer.
L. Collector streets shall be directly intersected only by other collector
streets or by feeder streets.
M. Where any local access or feeder street intersects a collector or
controlled access street, the right-of-way requirements shall be
adequate to accommodate deceleration lanes as approved by the
Township Engineer. A deceleration lane not less than 12 feet (3.6576
meters) in width shall be provided on collector streets at intersections
with local access and feeder streets.
A. Minimum sight distance. When a proposed street or driveway is
planned to intersect an existing street, the intersection shall be so
designed as to satisfy the minimum sight distance requirements as set
forth in the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Code, Title 67,
Transportation.
B. The Township shall have the right of entry to remove any obstruction to
vision within the clear sight triangle not conforming to the standards
controlling the area upon proper and sufficient notice to the property
owner.
C. No earth bank, fence, wall, plantings, or other visual obstruction higher
than 30 inches (76.2 centimeters) above the existing or proposed curb
level will be permitted within the clear sight triangle. There shall be a
sight triangle easement placed on adjacent lots at each intersection. In
addition, the deeds of all such lots shall include a description of such an
easement including all restrictions as described herein.
D. The Township may notify a landowner by certified mail to clear the
clearway sight triangle in accordance with this chapter. Upon failure of
the landowner to comply with such notification within 30 days, the
Township may enter upon said land and clear the sight triangle at the
landowner's expense in accordance with this chapter.
§ A105 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A107
1:574
A. Access driveways to and from off-street parking areas shall be located
so as to minimize interference with street traffic.
B. In order to provide a safe and convenient means of access from the
street, grades on private driveways should not exceed 10%. A grade of
12% for a single-family residential unit if approved by the Township.
C. In order to provide safe and convenient ingress and egress, private
driveway entrances shall be rounded at a minimum radius of five feet
(1.524 meters), or shall have a flare constructed that is equivalent to
this radius, at a point of intersection with the cartway edge.
D. For the purpose of servicing any property held under single and
separate ownership, entrance and exit drives crossing the street lot line
shall be limited to two along the frontage of any single street, and their
center lines shall be spaced at least 200 feet (60.96 meters) apart.
E. For all nonresidential uses, landowners are encouraged to grant or
obtain driveway access easements from adjacent property owners in
order to minimize the number of access driveways on any given right-ofway.
F. Driveways must be located as far away as possible from the intersection
but there shall be a minimum spacing of 100 feet (30.48 meters) for all
nonresidential uses and 40 feet (12.192 meters) for residential uses,
measured at the ultimate right-of-way, between the center line of any
access driveway and the ultimate right-of-way line of the parallel street.
G. The width of access driveways, except for multiresidential use, shall be:
(1) A minimum of 16 feet (4.8768 meters) for one-way use only;
(2) A minimum of 30 feet (9.144 meters) for two-way use;
(3) Additional width will be required if parking is allowed on access
driveway.
H. The width of access driveways for multiresidential use shall be:
(1) A minimum of 16 feet (4.8768 meters) for one-way use only;
(2) A minimum of 24 feet (7.3152 meters) for two-way use;
(3) Additional width will be required if parking is allowed on access
driveway.
I. Driveways for residential use, except for multiresidential uses, shall
have a minimum width of 10 feet (3.048 meters) and a maximum width
of 18 feet (5.4864 meters) excluding any parking bay or turnaround.
J. Entrance to the street shall be at a horizontal angle ranging between
75° to 105° with the intersecting street.
§ A107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A107
1:575
§ A108. Cul-de-sac streets.
K. The driveway between the right-of-way of the street and the cartway
shall be paved.
L. All curb depressions shall be properly constructed to the satisfaction of
the Township Engineer when curbing is provided. If curbing is not
provided, then an adequate drainpipe or swale shall be installed.
M. The Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to approve driveways
intended for the use of two or more families, apartment developments
and commercial and industrial projects where usage by the occupants
constitutes essentially a private street. Driveways constituting private
streets are those access ways used by two or more families daily or 10
or more workers daily for vehicular circulation. Driveways serving as
private streets shall not be dedicated to the Township, nor does the
Township assume any responsibility for their maintenance.
N. The location and placement of driveways serving as private streets shall
comply with the street section of this article. Additionally, provisions for
drainage and stormwater runoff shall be approved by the Township
Engineer.
O. The Board of Supervisors shall evaluate the location, placement and
alignment of driveways serving as private streets based upon the ease
of accessibility to and efficient maneuverability through the
development for the protective service of fire and police.
P. Construction of driveways to be used as private streets shall conform to
the pavement structure of the applicable use as required for public
streets: residential, commercial or industrial. Curbing shall be used
when required by the Township.
Q. The owner and all successors of any property which is to abut any
driveway serving as a private street shall be fully responsible for the
permanent improvement of the driveway(s) and for the maintenance
thereof in a good and safe condition.
A. The minimum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 250 feet (76.2 meters).
(1) For culs-de-sac exceeding 500 feet (152.4 meters) in length, there
shall be provided a stabilized emergency vehicular access in
accordance with approval of the Township Fire Chief at least 10
feet (3.048 meters) wide at the head of the cul-de-sac giving direct
access to an adjacent street.
(2) The easement provided for the emergency vehicular access shall
have a minimum width of 15 feet (4.572 meters). This easement
shall become a restriction upon the deed(s) of future lot owners.
(3) If direct access to an adjacent street cannot be obtained for the
emergency vehicular access from the head of the cul-de-sac, the
§ A107 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A108
1:576
emergency access shall be located at an appropriate point along
the length of the cul-de-sac.
(4) The emergency vehicular access shall be identified by the
placement of blue reflectorized flexible high-impact plastic markers
48 inches (121.92 centimeters) in height placed every 20 feet
(6.096 meters) along the access way. These markers shall be placed
on both sides of the emergency lane starting at the street right-ofway
where it intersects and shall be placed on each lot line.
However, in no case shall the distance between markers exceed 20
feet (6.096 meters). In locations where the roadside is curbed, the
curb shall be depressed for a width equal to the emergency
vehicular access plus four feet (1.2192 meters). The lip of the
depressed curb shall be three inches (7.62 centimeters) in height.
The depression shall be painted yellow to be easily identifiable to
emergency vehicles.
(5) In cases where emergency vehicular access cannot be obtained to
any adjacent streets, the cartway of the proposed cul-de-sac shall
be constructed to an extra width of 10 feet (3.048 meters); said
extra width to begin at the intersection of the proposed cul-de-sac
with the higher order street and extending for a distance equal to
the difference between the ultimate length of the road and the 500
foot (152.4 meters) length requirement of this section. The distance
shall not include transition areas. Street rights-of-way, bracketing
the extra width, shall also be increased in kind.
(6) In areas of the Township where public water is not provided, the
maximum length of a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 500 feet
(152.4 meters).
(7) P-loops (loop streets from a single access point) shall have an
entrance leg not exceeding 500 feet (152.4 meters). The loop of a Ploop
shall have a street length not exceeding 3,000 feet (914.4
meters).
(8) Where the sum of the length of the entrance leg and ½ the street
length of the loop exceeds 500 feet (152.4 meters) in length, there
shall be provided a stabilized emergency vehicular access in
accordance with approval of the Township Fire Chief at least 10
feet (3.048 meters) in width. The emergency access shall lead from
the most remote point in the loop and give direct access to an
adjacent street. If direct access to an adjacent street is
unobtainable from the most remote point in the loop, the
emergency access shall be located at an appropriate point along
the length of the loop. The width of the easement shall be 15 feet
(4.572 meters). Identification of the easement shall be the same as
is provided for in this article.
B. Minimum turnarounds shall be in accordance with the Towamencin
Township Engineering Standards, as last amended.
§ A108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A108
1:577
§ A109. Sidewalk design requirements.
§ A110. Parking area location.
C. Provisions for snow removal shall be provided in all culs-de-sac. A snow
removal easement shall be shown on the plans. No driveways or inlets
are permitted within 20 feet (6.096 meters) of the easement area.
Driveways around the cul-de-sac bulb shall be arranged in pairs to
provide for the maximum area possible for snow removal. Inlets within
culs-de-sac shall be marked with a reflectorized flexible high-impact
plastic marker 48 inches (121.92 centimeters) in height.
D. The bulb orientation will be left-handed unless otherwise approved by
the Township Engineer and the Public Works Director.
A. Sidewalks within residential districts shall be a minimum of four feet
(1.2192 meters) wide and between four to six feet (1.2192 to 1.8288
meters) wide within nonresidential districts at the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors. [Amended 7-10-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
B. Sidewalks shall be all-weather and be constructed as specified in the
Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks Ordinance, Chapter 133 of the Code of
the Township of Towamencin. A median strip of landscaped areas of
grass shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs or edge of the
cartway. [Amended 7-10-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
C. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths constructed along streets shall not
exceed the maximum grade specified in § A103A of this chapter for the
corresponding street classification. The maximum grade of sidewalks or
pedestrian paths, outside of the right-of-way of public or private streets,
shall not exceed 8%. [Amended 7-10-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
D. Curb depressions shall be provided at street and other crossings and be
designed to accommodate bicycles and wheel chairs.
E. Sidewalks, pedestrian and bicycle paths shall be laterally pitched at a
slope of not less than ¼ inch per foot (0.635 centimeters per meter) to
provide for adequate surface drainage.
F. Sidewalks adjacent to angle parking areas shall be increased by two
feet (0.6096 meters) in width to prevent vehicular overhang from
restricting pedestrian movement along the sidewalk unless stops are
provided to prevent any portion of the vehicle from overhanging the
sidewalk.
A. For all nonresidential uses, all parking areas shall be located to the rear
or side of any building. As a minimum, all parking areas shall be set
back 15 feet (4.572 meters) from the ultimate right-of-way line and all
property lines pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance,179 as
179. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ A108 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A110
1:578
§ A111. Parking area circulation.
last amended. The edge of any parking area shall not be closer than 20
feet (6.096 meters) from the outside wall of the nearest building.
B. Facilities with major parking requirements shall arrange buildings and
open space in order to provide for groups of small parking areas as
opposed to one large parking facility.
A. All parking aisles shall be designed to discourage through motor
vehicular circulation.
(1) No individual parking aisle shall include greater than 18 parking
stalls on one side or 36 parking stalls on both sides.
(2) Collector drives without any parking shall be required to connect
all parking aisles.
(3) Dead-ended parking areas shall be discouraged for lots of 50 or
more parking spaces. All dead-ended parking areas shall be
provided with a turnaround either circular, "T" or "Y" shaped.
B. Access areas are those areas adjacent to a structure, facility or use area
which are primarily intended to provide for such functions as pickup
and delivery, servicing and emergency vehicle access. Access areas
shall not include parking areas.
(1) Access areas shall be clearly delineated by signs noting use
restrictions.
(2) All service and delivery areas shall be laid out so that their periodic
use will not obstruct the normal flow of vehicular traffic and
pedestrian circulation.
(3) Areas primarily intended for picking up and/or discharging
passengers or goods shall be clearly designated by pavement
parking and signs.
(4) Parking shall not be permitted along driveways or accessways
which serve as the main entrance(s) or exit(s) to parking areas with
a capacity of 150 cars or more.
C. Pedestrian paths shall be provided from the parking areas to the
entrances of buildings and adjacent street sidewalks.
(1) Pedestrian walks crossing the parking area shall be delineated by
use of a paving material different from that which is used for the
parking area.
(2) Pedestrian walks in parking areas shall not be subject to the
concentration of surface runoff.
§ A110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A112
1:579
§ A112. Table of parking dimensional requirements.
The parking dimensional requirements shall be no less than those listed in
the following table:
Driveway Width
Parking
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Stall Width
(feet/
meters)
Stall Depth
(feet/
meters)
One-Way
(feet/
meters)
Two-Way
(feet/
meters)
90° 9/2.74321 8/5.48642 5/7.62 25/7.62
60° 9/2.7432* 19/5.79121 18/5.4864
45° 9/2.7432* 18/5.4864 16/4.8768
Parallel 9/2.7432 22/6.7056
*NOTE: Width is measured perpendicular to the side lines.
§ A113. Parking area construction details. [Amended 4-25-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-01]
A. All parking areas shall be physically defined by one or more of the
following methods: concrete curbing, wood or concrete bollards,
railroad ties, or concrete tire stops.
B. All construction requirements shall be in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation's Form 408 Specifications, as last
amended, and/or as required by the Township Engineer, but in no case
shall be less than the following minimum standards:
(1) For standard asphalt pavement, the specification shall, in no case,
provide less than one-and-one-half-inch (3.81 centimeters) depth
superpave volumetric asphalt mixture design, 9.5MM, PG 64-22,
HMA wearing course, 0.3 to 3.0 ESALS and three inches (7.62
centimeters) depth superpave volumetric asphalt mixture design,
19 MM, PG 64-22, HMA binder course, 0.3 to 3.0 ESALS, on sixinch
(15.24 centimeters) depth crushed aggregate base course.
(2) Porous pavement is permitted, in parking spaces only, with the
following conditions:
(a) The design of the porous pavement and infiltration testing
must be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, December 2006, as last
amended (PA BMP Manual).
(b) The porous pavement may be porous asphalt, pervious
concrete or permeable interlocking paver units with the
following requirements:
§ A112 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A113
1:580
§ A114. Off-street loading facilities.
Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to conform to the following
specifications:
§ A115. Curbs. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09; 7-10-2013
by Ord. No. 13-06]
Concrete curbs shall be installed along each side of all roads. Curbing shall
be constructed as specified in the Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks Ordinance,
Chapter 133 of the Code of the Township of Towamencin. A combination
curb and gutter may be used at the option of the developer when approved
by the Township Engineer.
[1] For porous asphalt pavement, the specification shall
provide a minimum thickness of compacted porous asphalt
of 2 1/2 inches (6.35 centimeters) with a minimum of one
inch choker (stabilizer) course of clean, washed AASHTO
No. 57 crushed stone.
[2] For porous concrete, the specification shall provide a
minimum thickness of porous concrete of four inches
(10.16 centimeters) with a minimum of one inch choker
(stabilizer) course of clean, washed AASHTO No. 57
crushed stone.
[3] For permeable interlocking paver units, the specification
shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations.
(c) The design of infiltration systems beneath the porous
pavement must meet the requirements for infiltration BMPs as
contained in the Towamencin Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance.180
(d) All porous pavement must include an overflow system to
prevent stormwater from rising to the level of the pavement
surface.
C. All end parking stalls shall be separated from parking isles and internal
circulation bays by a raised planting island of not less than three feet
(0.9144 meter) in width.
A. Each required space shall be no less than 14 feet (4.2672 meters) wide,
50 feet (15.24 meters) long, and 17 feet (5.1816 meters) high, exclusive
of drives and maneuvering space, and located entirely on the lot being
served;
B. There shall be appropriate means of access to a street as well as
adequate maneuvering space.
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 132, Stormwater Management.
§ A113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A116
1:581
§ A116. Street trees and plantings.
A. All plans for sites of 10 acres (40,470 square meters) or more shall
include landscaping plans prepared by a landscape architect.
B. Street trees, buffer yards, and other required planting shall be in
accordance with this chapter.
C. Street trees and other required plant material shall not be planted until
the finished grading of the subdivision or land development has been
completed.
D. Plans for proposed street tree planting or buffer zone plantings shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township.
E. Street trees and other required planting shall be guaranteed for a
period of 18 months from the date of planting and shall be certified to
be alive and healthy, as determined by a landscape architect, arborist,
or nurseryman at the end of the guarantee period. All such plant
materials shall be inspected for approval by the Township at the end of
the guaranteed period. Should a disagreement arise as to whether the
planting is alive and healthy, a consultant shall be retained by the
Township, at the expense of the developer, to make a final
determination.
F. Street trees shall not be planted opposite each other, but shall
alternate.
G. At intersections, trees shall be located no closer than 50 feet (15.24
meters) from the intersection of the curb.
H. Street trees shall be planted five feet (15.24 meters) outside the rightof-
way, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Supervisors.
I. Street trees shall not be closer than:
(1) Eight feet (2.4384 meters) from the edge of any sidewalk or curb;
(2) Twelve feet (3.6576 meters) from the edge of any uncurbed
cartway or one story building; or
(3) Twenty-five feet (7.62 meters) from any overhead utility line or two
or more story building.
J. Plant material.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Plant material shall not, at maturity, obstruct the necessary
visibility of traffic control signs or signals, nor obstruct
visibility at street intersections or driveway entrances.
§ A116 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A116
1:582
(b) Plant material shall be selected to minimize future
maintenance costs, including, but not limited to,
considerations of pruning, tree removal, and sidewalk repair.
(c) Plant material shall not interfere with underground utilities or
stormwater management facilities.
(d) Plant material shall be adaptable to the specific planting site
and able to achieve the specified design objectives of the plan.
(e) Plant material shall be spaced to permit the healthy growth of
each plant.
(2) Street trees and associated planting shall be required for any
subdivision or land development as part of the design and
construction of:
(a) New streets;
(b) New sidewalks or pedestrian ways;
(c) Existing streets, sidewalks, pedestrianways, highways, bicycle
or other trails or pathways when they abut or lie within the
subdivision or land development;
(d) Access driveways to residential developments serving greater
than four dwelling units.
(3) Number and placement of trees shall be:
(a) Forty feet (12.192 meters) on center in street rights-of-way as
part of any subdivision or land development;
(b) Each 40 feet (12.192 meters) of medial divider or cul-de-sac
landscaped island.
(4) Tree caliper at time of planting, as measured from four feet (1.2192
meters) above ground level, shall be no less than 2 1/2 inches (6.35
centimeters).
(5) The applicant shall indicate the tree species proposed to be
installed. The following plant material is approved for use within
the Township provided that the specific site is suitable:
(a) Shade or canopy trees suitable for street trees or parking lots
as well as for buffers and screens [minimum two-and-a-halfinch
caliper (6.35 centimeters)].
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer rubrum Red Maple (native)
Celtis sp. Hackberry (native)
Cladastris lutea Yellow Wood (native)
§ A116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A116
1:583
Botanical Name Common Name
Corylus colurna Turkish Filbert
Fraxinus pennsylvania
landceolata
"Marshall's Seedless"
cv. Marshall's seedless Ash (native)
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (male only)
Gleditsia triacanthos, inermis Thornless Honeylocust
Koelreuteria paniculata Golden Rain Tree
Liquidamber styraciflua Sweet Gum (native)
Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak (native)
Quercus borealis Scarlet Oak (native)
Quercus imbricaria Shingle Oak (native)
Quercus phellos Willow Oak (native)
Quercus prinus Chestnut Oak
Quercus rubra Red Oak (native)
Robinia pseudoacacia Black Locust (native)
Sophora japonica Japanese Pagoda tree
Tilia americana American Linden (native)
Tilia cordata Little Leaf Linden
Tilia tomentosa Silver Linden
Ulmus parvifolia Chinese Lacebark Elm
Zelkova serrata Japanese Zelkova
(b) Shade or canopy trees suitable for property line buffers and
nonvehicular use areas only [minimum of two-and-one-halfinch
caliper (6.35 centimeters)].
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer saccharinum Silver Maple (native)
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple (native)
Betula lenta Sweet Birch (native)
Betula nigra River Birch (native)
Carya ovata Shagbark Hickory (native)
Carya sp. Hickory (native)
Fagus grandifola American Beech (native)
Fagus sylvatica European Beech
Fraxinus americana White Ash (native)
Juglans nigra Black Walnut (native)
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip tree (native)
§ A116 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A116
1:584
Botanical Name Common Name
Metasequoia glypostroboides Dawn Redwood
Ostrya virginiana Hop Hornbeam (native)
Phellodendron amurense Amur Cork Tree
Plantanus acerifolia London Plane
Prunus virginiana Chokecherry (native)
Quercus alba White Oak (native)
Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak (native)
Quercus palustris Pin Oak (native)
Quercus vellutina Black oak (native)
Sassafras albindum Sassafras (native)
(c) Ornamental trees suitable for property line buffers or site
element screens 10 to 30 feet (3.048 to 9.144 meters) at
maturity [minimum of two-inch caliper (5.08 centimeters)].
Botanical Name Common Name
Amelanchier canadensis Serviceberry (native)
Carpinus carolinia Ironwood (native)
Cercis candensis Red Bud (native)
Chionanthus virginicus Fringetree (native)
Cornus florida Flowering Dogwood (native)
Cornus kousa Japanese Dogwood
Cornus mas Cornelian Cherry
Crataegus cv. Toba Toba Hawthorn
Crataegus mollis Downy Hawthorn
Crataegus oxycantha English Hawthorn
Crataegus phaenopyrum Washington Hawthorn
Eleagnus augustofolia Russion Olive
Halesia carolinia) Silverbells (native)
Hammamelis virginiana Witch Hazel (native)
Koelreuteria paniculata Golden Raintree
Laburnum vossi Goldenchain
Magnolia soulangeana Saucer Magnolia
Magnolia virginiana Sweetbay Magnolia (native)
Malus sp. Crab Apple Species (native)
Oxydendrum arboreum Sourwood (native)
Prunus sargentii Sargent Cherry
§ A116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A116
1:585
Botanical Name Common Name
Prunus serrulata cv.Kwanzan Kwanzan Cherry
Pyrus calleryana cv.Bradford Bradford Pear
Pyrus calleryana cv.Redspire Redspire Pear
Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac (native)
Rhus typhina Staghorn Sumac (native)
Sorbus aucuparia European Mountain Ash
Styrax japonica Japanese Snowbell
Syringa amurensis japonica Japanese Tree Lilac
(d) Large deciduous shrubs suitable for use in property line
buffers or site element screen (not clipped hedges) [mature
height between five and 15 feet (1.524 meters and 4.572
meters)].
Botanical Name Common Name
Aronia arbutifolia Black Chokeberry (native)
Calycanthus floridus Sweet Shrub (native)
Cephalanthus occidentalis Buttonbush (native)
Clethra acuminata Summersweet (native)
Cornus serica Red Osier Dogwood (native)
Enkianthus campanulatus Redvien Enkianthus
Euonynonous alatus Burning Bush
Forsythia sp. Forsythis
Fothergilla major Large Fothergilla (native)
Ilex verticilata Winterberry (native)
Lindera benzoin Spicebrush (native)
Myrica pennsylvanica Bayberry (native)
Philadelphus spp. Mock Orange
Physocarpus opulifolius Common Ninebark
Sambucus canadensis Elderberry (native)
Spirea nipponica Snow Mound Spirea
Vaccinium corymbosum Blueberry (native)
Viburnum dentatum Arrow Wood (native)
Viburnum lentago Nannyberry (native)
Viburnum prunifolium Black Haw (native)
Viburnum spp. Other Large Viburnums
Viburnum trilobum American Cranberry (native)
§ A116 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A116
1:586
(e) Deciduous or evergreen shrubs suitable for clipped hedges in
property line buffers or site element screens [six to 20 feet
(1.8288 meters to 6.096 meters) at maturity].
Botanical Name Common Name
Acanthopanax pentaphyllus Five Leaf Aralia
Aronia arbutifolia Chokeberry (native)
Berberis sp. Barberry Sp.
Cornus mas Cornelian Cherry
Cotoneaster salicifolia Willowleaf Cotoneaster
Euonymous alatus Burning Bush
Euonymous alatus campactus Dwarf Burning Bush
Euonymous fortuneii vegetus Big Leaf Wintercreeper
sarcoxie
Ilex crenata 'compacta' Compact Japanese Holly
Ilex glabra Inkberry (native)
Ilex crenata 'hetzi' Hetz Holly
Juniperus chinensis 'glauca
hetzi'
Hetz Blue Juniper
Juniperus chinensis
'pfitzeriana' compacta
Compact Pfitzer Juniper
Ligustrum ibolium Ibolium Privet
Lonicera fragrantissima Winter Honeysuckle
Philadelphus lemionei Mock Orange
Ribes alpinum Currant
Taxus baccata English Yew
Taxus brownii Brown's Yew
Taxus canadensis Canada Yew
Taxus densiformis Dense Yew
Taxus media Hatfieldi Hatfield Yew
Viburnum dentatum Arrow Wood (native)
Viburnum lentago Nannyberry (native)
Viburnum opulus European Cranberry Bush
Viburnum prunifolium Black Haw (native)
Thuja sp. Arborvita
(f) Evergreen shrubs suitable for site element screens.
§ A116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A116
1:587
Botanical Name Common Name
Azalea - evergreen species -
must reach three-foot height
(0.9144 meters)
Azalea
Chamaecyparis obtusa Chamaecyparis
Chamaecyparis pisifera Chamaecyparis
Ilex crenata "hetzi" Japanese Holly
Ilex glabra Inkberry (native)
Ilex mesevvea Blue Holly Series
Juniperus chinensis "Hetzi
Glauca"
Hetz Blue Jumiper
Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar (native)
Kalmia latifolia and cvs Mountain Laurel (native)
Leucothoe fontanessiana Leucothoe
Pieris floribunda Mountain Andromeda (native)
Pieris japonica Japanese Andromeda
Rhododendron sp. Various Large Rhododendrums
Taxus sp. Yew
Thuja sp. Arborvitae
Viburnum rhytidophillum Leatherleaf Viburum
(g) Evergreen trees suitable for property line buffers or site
element screens [minimum height five feet (1.524 meters)].
Botanical Name Common Name
Abies concolor White Fir
Ilex opaca American Holly (native)
Picea abies Norway Spruce
Picea omorika Siberian Spruce
Picea pungens Colorado Spruce
Pinus strobus White Pine (native)
Pinus thunbergii Japanese Black Pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas Fir
Tsuga canadensis Canadian Hemlock (native)
Tsuga caroliniana Carolina Hemlock (native)
(6) Plant material specifications.
(a) Plant names shall agree with the nomenclature of Standard
Plant Names as adopted by the American Joint Committee on
Horticulture Nomenclature, 1942 edition, as last amended.
§ A116 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A116
1:588
§ A117. Landscaping of off-street parking areas.
Size and grading standards shall conform to those specified by
the American Association of Nurserymen in the latest edition
of the U.S.D.A. Standards for Nursery Stock. No substitutions
shall be permitted except by written permission from the
Township.
(b) All plants shall be typical of their species or variety. They shall
have normal, well-developed branches and virorous fibrous
root systems. All plants shall be nursery-grown, unless
otherwise stated; they shall have been growing under the same
climate conditions as the Township for at least four years prior
to date of planting. All plants which are found unsuitable in
growth or condition, or which are not true to name, shall be
removed and replaced with acceptable plants.
(c) Plants shall be measured as they stand in their natural
position. Stock furnished shall be a fair average of the
minimum sizes specified or of the range given in the U.S.D.A
Standards for Nursery Stock. Larger plants cut back to sizes
specified shall not be accepted.
(d) All precautions customary in good trade practice shall be taken
in preparing plants for moving. All balled and burlapped plants
shall be dug to meet or exceed the U.S.D.A. Standards for
Nursery Stock.
(e) Plants shall be packed, transported and handled with utmost
care to insure adequate protection against injury. Each
shipment shall be certified by state and federal authorities to
be free from disease and infestation.
(f) In order to achieve the effect established in the planting plan,
uniformity of plant material is desired. The plant material shall
be of the same size, age, and cultivar, and shall have been
obtained from the same nursery.
A. Within the parking facility there shall be planted at least one tree of
four-inch (10.16 centimeters) caliper minimum for every five parking
spaces in single bays and one tree of four-inch (10.16 centimeters)
caliper minimum for every 10 parking spaces in double bays. Trees
shall be planted in such a manner so as to afford maximum protection
from the sun for parked vehicles.
B. A minimum of 10% of any parking lot facility over 2,000 square feet
(185.8 square meters) in gross area shall be devoted to landscaping,
inclusive of all required trees. For the purpose of this calculation, the
parking lot area square footage shall be defined as consisting of all
parking stalls, access ways, and driveways which are immediately
adjacent to such stalls. The required landscaping shall be provided
§ A116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A117
1:589
§ A118-1. Riparian corridor buffers.
All watercourses shall be protected by the establishment of a riparian
corridor buffer on each side of the watercourse and containing one shade
tree, minimum four-foot height, staggered at twenty-foot centers, and one
shrub, at minimum height of 18 inches, staggered at three-foot centers.
within this denoted area. No individual landscape area within a parking
lot shall be less than 200 square feet (18.58 square meters).
C. The perimeter of all parking facilities shall be landscaped to meet the
following buffer requirements in order to visually screen the motor
vehicles: [Amended 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02]
(1) The parking lot perimeter shall be landscaped to provide a visual
buffer. The plant materials shall include a mix of evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubs in a naturalistic arrangement. The
buffer shall consist of a minimum of one evergreen tree for each 35
linear feet; one ornamental or shade tree for each 50 linear feet;
and one shrub for each four linear feet of the parking lot perimeter.
Informal groupings of more closely spaced plants which reflect the
natural character of the site are encouraged.
(2) The minimum width of the parking lot buffer area shall be 10 feet
except when required otherwise by Appendix 136A, § 119, Buffer
yard requirements, Subsection A(2)(b).
(3) In addition to the requirements outlined in Paragraph C(1) above,
any parking area closer than 50 feet to a public street, right-of-way
or residential district shall include a continuous row of shrubs at a
rate of one shrub per four linear feet of parking edge, fence, wall,
berm or combination of these to a minimum height of three feet
between the street or residential district and parking area.
(4) Existing vegetation of appropriate species and quantities on the
property can be considered in the fulfillment of these requirements
if permitted by the Board of Supervisors.
(5) The trees and shrubs acceptable for use in the parking lot
perimeter planting shall be in accordance with Appendix 136A,
§ A116J. The minimum size of the plant material at the time of
planting shall be as follows:
(a) Shrubs used for parking area buffering must be a minimum of
24 inches (60.96 centimeters) in height at the time of planting.
(b) Tree caliper, as measured from four feet (1.2192 meters) above
ground level, shall be no less than 2 1/2 inches (6.35
centimeters).
(c) Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of five feet
(1.524 meters).
§ A117 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A118-1
1:590
All materials shall conform to existing approved species list and shall be
approved by the Township Horticulturist.
§ A118 . Detention basin landscaping.
A. Disturbed areas within the basin shall be planted with covered
vegetation such as grass, crown vetch, native grasses, and/or
appropriate shrubs. All trees proposed to be planted within the basin or
within 50 feet from the basin fringe must be reviewed and approved by
the Township Horticulturist and/or landscape architect. The choice of
such vegetation will be based upon the intended use of the basin,
maintenance requirements, structural integrity of the berm area, and
conformity with surrounding landscaping.
B. Specialized plantings suitable for wet conditions should be planted in
portions of the basin that retain water or that contain soils under
saturated conditions.
C. Landscaping design should reduce overall maintenance requirements
for the basin. The use of native grass and shrubs is encouraged for this
reason.
D. Plants that attract wildlife are encouraged. However, landscape designs
should not encourage burrowing animals.
E. To reduce erosions, the flow from the inlet to outlet pipe will be directed
in a sodded swale eight feet (2.4384 meters) wide by six inches (15.24
centimeters) deep.
F. Trees should not be planted on the basin berm or dam. Shrubs can be
planted in this area.
G. In order to reduce runoff and erosion, existing topsoil, trees, and shrubs
should be preserved within and surrounding the stormwater basin
excluding the earth berm.
H. Within any detention basin one of the following seed mixtures shall be
used:
(1) Crown vetch establishment (legume).
(a) Crown vetch, plus 20 pounds (9,072 grams)/acre.
(b) Tall fescue, plus nurse grass (use one) 25 pounds (11,340
grams)/acre.
(c) Annual ryegrass, or 30 pounds (13,608 grams)/acre.
(d) Perennial ryegrass 30 pounds (13,608 grams)/acre.
(2) Birdsfoot trefoil establishment (legume).
(a) Birdsfoot trefoil, plus eight pounds (3,628.8 grams)/acre.
§ A118-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A118
1:591
(b) Tall fescue, plus 25 pounds (11,340 grams)/acre Nurse grass
(use one).
(c) Annual ryegrass, or 30 pounds (13,608 grams)/acre.
(d) Perennial ryegrass 30 pounds (13,608 grams)/acre.
(3) Deertongue grass establishment (legume). (NOTE: Deertongue
grass establishment may be maintained as a turf-grass and used for
recreational purposes.)
(a) Deertongue grass, plus 10 pounds (4,536 grams)/acre
Companion, (use one).
(b) Tall fescue, or 25 pounds (11,340 grams)/acre.
(c) Birdsfoot trefoil, plus six pounds (2,721.6 grams)/acre Nurse
grass (use one).
(d) Annual ryegrass or 30 pounds (13,608 grams)/acre.
(e) Perennial ryegrass 30 pounds (13,608 grams)/acre.
(4) Preferred varieties.
(a) Preferred varieties are:
[1] Deertongue grass - Tioga.
[2] Tall fescue - Ky. 31.
[3] Perennial ryegrass - Pennfine or Manhattan.
[4] Crownvetch - Penngift.
[5] Birdsfoot Trefoil - 50/50 mixture of Empire and either
Maitland or Viking.
(b) Since other seed varieties may be equally suited to perform the
purpose and, the mixture stated in this chapter or the
preferred seeds may not always be readily available, other
seed varieties of equal quality shall be acceptable upon
approval from the Township Engineer.
I. Within any detention basin the following plant material is suitable for
occasionally flooded and permanently wet areas:
(1) Canopy trees suitable for stormwater dentention basins.
Botanical Name Common Name
+ Acer rubrum Red Maple
* Acer saccariunum Silver Maple
* Betula nigra River Birch
* Fraxinus americana White Ash
§ A118 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A118
1:592
Botanical Name Common Name
* Ilex opaca American Holly
+ Liquidamber Styraciflua Sweet Gum
* Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum
* Quercus phellos Willow Oak
+ Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak
* Quercus pallustris Pin Oak
+ Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress
NOTES:
* = Usually well-drained, but subject to occasional flooding.
+ = Permanently wet areas.
(2) Deciduous/evergreen ornamental trees suitable for stormwater
detention basins.
Botanical Name Common Name
* Amelanchiar canadensis Shadbush
* Carpinus carolinia Ironwood
* Chloanthus virginiana Fringetree
* Magnolia virginiana Sweetbay
+ Salix Caprea Willow
+ Salix discolor Willow
* Thuja occidentalis cv. nigra Arborvitae
NOTES:
* = Usually well-drained, but subject to occasional flooding.
+ = Permanently wet areas.
(3) Deciduous or evergreen shrubs suitable for stormwater detention
basins.
Botanical Name Common Name
+ Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry
* Caly canthus florida Sweetshrub
+ Cephalanthus occidentalis Button Bush
+ Clethra alnifolia Summersweet
+ Cornus amonum Silky Dogwood
+ Cornus serica Red-Stem Dogwood
* Hammamelis virginiana Witch Hazel
+ Ilex glabra Inkberry
§ A118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A118
1:593
Botanical Name Common Name
+ Ilex verticilata Winterberry
* Lindera benzoin Spice Bush
+ Myrica cerifera Southern Bayberry
+ Myrica pennsylvanica Northern Bayberry
+ Rhodedendron nudiflorum Pinxterbloom Azalea
+ Rhodedendron viscosim Swamp Azalea
* Sambucus canadensis Elderberry
* Viburnum cassanoides Witherod
* Viburnum dentatum Arrow Wood
* Viburnum lentago Nannyberry
* Viburnum tribolum American Cranberry
NOTES:
* = Usually well-drained, but subject to occasional flooding.
+ = Permanently wet areas.
(4) Herbaceous perennials suitable for detention basins.
Botanical Name Common Name
* Aster novae angliae New England Aster
* Chrysanthemum lencanthemum Ox-Eye Daisy
* Echinacea purpurea Purple Cornflower
+*Eupatorium fistulosum Hollow Joe Pye Weed
* Hemerocallis sp. Day Lily
* Hesperis matronalis Dames Rocket
+ Hibiscus moshentos Rose Mallow
+*Iris pseudocaris Yellow Iris
+ Iris vericolor Blue Flag
+* Lobelia cardinalis Cardinal Flower
+*Lobelia siphilitica Blue Lobelia
* Monarda didyma Bee Balm
+* Panicum virgatumSwitchgrass
* Phalaris arundinacae Canary Reed Grass
* Rudbeckia sp. Black-Eyed Susan
+ Scirpus acustus Hard Stem Bullrush
+ Spartina alternifolia Cordgrass
+ Typha angustifolia Narrowleaf Cattail
+ Typha latifolia Common Cattail
§ A118 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A118
1:594
§ A119. Buffer yard requirements.
Botanical Name Common Name
+* Vernonia noveboracensis New York Iron Weed
NOTES:
* = Usually well-drained, but subject to occasional flooding.
+ = Permanently wet areas.
A. To determine the required buffer yard and planting schedule, the
following three-step procedure shall apply:
(1) Step 1: Site analysis and determination of buffer yard class.
(a) For each property boundary, the applicant shall determine the
adjacent land use or street classification. Land use information
shall be determined by an on-site survey, and the
Comprehensive Plan shall be utilized to determine street
classifications.
(b) Table 1181 specifies the buffer yard class for each boundary. The
applicant shall match his proposed land use with the
corresponding adjacent land use or street classification for
each property boundary. The letter indicates the buffer yard
class.
(2) Step 2: Selection of the planting option for the buffer class.
(a) After determining the buffer class, the applicant shall select a
planting option from Table 2. For each buffer class several
planting options are available, one of which the applicant shall
select to meet the buffer yard requirement for each boundary.
However, the Board of Supervisors may permit an alternative
planting option which shall have a screening capability equal
to, or greater than, any of the available options.
(b) The options set forth in Table 1182 indicate the minimum
amount of plant material that is required per linear foot of
property line. However, the Board of Supervisors shall, at its
discretion, have the power to increase the amount of planting
required (per Table 2) when it is believed that required buffer
materials are not capable of providing a desirable transition
between the existing and proposed land uses. Unless stated
below, plantings are required to be aligned adjacent to
property lines or right-of-way boundaries, but may be sighted
on any portion of the property if permitted by the Board of
Supervisors. Plant materials shall be so arranged to allow for
181. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this Appendix.
182. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this Appendix.
§ A118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A119
1:595
proper growth and to provide the buffer intended herein. All
Class A buffers shall have a minimum width of at least 15
feet (4.572 meters); all Class B buffers shall have a minimum
width of at least 25 feet (7.62 meters) and all Class C buffers
shall have a minimum width of at least 25 feet (6.096 meters).
[Amended 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02; 2-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-02]
(c) Where a buffer requires the installation of canopy trees, such
trees shall be installed in addition to all street tree
requirements where applicable.
(d) Buffer yard plantings shall be designed so that the first floor of
the proposed use will be adequately buffered and/or screened
from the view of the existing adjacent uses at the first floor
level. A scaled rendering which provides an elevation view
illustrating the screening effect of the proposed buffer
landscaping when viewed from abutting properties that are
impacted by the proposed land use must be provided to
demonstrate that this requirement has been met. [Added
2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02]
(e) Berms with side slopes no steeper than four feet horizontal to
one foot vertical (4:1) may be used to supplement landscape
planting. [Added 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02]
Table 2
Planting Options
[Amended 1-17-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1; 2-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-02]
Class Option
A One 1 canopy tree per 40 feet (12.192 meters)
+1 flowering tree per 60 feet (18.288
meters)
+1 evergreen tree per 60 feet (18.288
meters)
+1 shrub every 20 feet (6.096 meters),
informally arranged
Two 1 canopy tree per 40 feet (12.192 meters)
+1 evergreen tree per 30 feet (9.144
meters)
+1 shrub per 20 feet (6.096), informally
arranged
B One 1 evergreen tree per 8 feet (2.4384
meters), informally arranged
§ A119 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A119
1:596
Table 2
Planting Options
[Amended 1-17-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1; 2-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-02]
Class Option
Three 1 evergreen tree per 15 feet (4.572
meters)
+1 evergreen shrub per 8 feet (2.4384
meters),
Four 1 evergreen tree per 10 feet (3.048
meters)
+1 shrub per 4 feet (1.2192 meters),
informally arranged
Five Hedgerow on property line of 3-foot
(0.9144 meters) centers
C One 3 canopy trees per 100 feet (30.480
meters)
+ 10 evergreen trees per 100 feet (30.480
meters) with no white pine (Pinus
strobus)
+ 25 shrubs per 100 feet (30.480 meters)
(3) Step 3: Selection of plant materials from the plant materials list.
Each planting option may utilize any of the plant materials outlined
in the Towamencin Township Engineering Standards, as last
amended. The Board of Supervisors may permit other planting
types if they are hardy to the area, are not subject to blight and
disease, and are of the same general character and growth habitat
as those listed in the Towamencin Township Engineering
Standards. All plant material shall meet the standards of the
American Association of Nurserymen.
B. The applicant shall not be required to provide a buffer yard should
existing planting, topography, or man-made structures be acceptable
for screening purposes by the Board of Supervisors.
C. When the buffer plantings are near overhead utility lines, the following
requirements apply. [Added 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-08]
(1) Within 20 feet of the overhead utility lines, small trees with a
mature height of 25 feet or less shall be provided.
(2) Within the area between 20 feet and 50 feet of the overhead utility
lines, trees with a mature height of 40 feet or less shall be provided.
(3) Within the area 50 feet or more from overhead utility lines, trees
with a mature height greater than 40 feet may be provided.
§ A119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A119
1:597
(4) Recommended183 species for the smaller trees near overhead utility
lines are as follows:
Deciduous Trees
Acer buergerianum (Trident maple)
Acer campestre (Hedge maple)
Acer ginnala (Amur maple)
Acer tataricum (Tatarian maple)
Acer griseum (Paperbark maple)
Amelanchier spp. (Serviceberry species)
Carpinus caroliniana (American hornbeam)
Cercis canadensis (Red bud)
Cornus florida (Flowering dogwood)
Cornus kousa (Kousa dogwood)
Cornus mas (Cornelian dogwood)
Crataegus crusgalli var. inermis (Thornless cockspur hawthorn)
Crataegus laevigata "Superba" (English hawthorn)
Crataegus x lavallei (Lavalle hawthorn)
Crataegus phaenopyrum (Washington hawthorn)
Crataegus viridis "Winter King" (Winter king hawthorn)
Malus "Adirondack" (Adirondack crab apple)
Malus "Prairifire" (Prairifire crab apple)
Malus "Profressor Sprenger" (Professor Sprenger crab apple)
Prunus serrulata "Shirotae" (Mt. Fuji cherry)
Prunus subhirtella "Autumnalis" (Autumn flowering cherry)
Prunus virginiana (Chokecherry)
Prunus virginiana "Schubert" (Canada red chokecherry)
Syringa reticulata "Ivory Silk" (Japanese tree lilac)
Syringa reticulata "Summer Snow" (Japanese tree lilac)
Evergreen Trees
Juniperus chinensis "Spartan" (Spartan Chinese juniper)
Juniperus chinensis "Green Column" (Green column Chinese
juniper)
Juniperus scopulorum "Gray Gleam" (Grey gleam rocky mountain
juniper)
Juniperus scopulorum "Moonglow" (Moonglow rocky mountain
juniper)
183. Recommended tree list from PECO website for placement near overhead wires.
§ A119 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A119
1:598
§ A120. Minimum easement widths.
§ A121. Grading, soil erosion and sediment controls.
Juniperus virginiana "Emerald Sentinel" (Emerald sentinel
eastern red cedar)
Juniperus virginiana "Manhattan Blue" (Manhattan blue eastern
red cedar)
Thuja occidentalis "Emerald" (Emerald American arborvitae)
Thuja occidentalis "Techny" (Techny American arborvitae)
A. Drainage easements shall be required along natural watercourses with
a minimum width of 20 feet (6.096 meters). Such easements may be
used for storm drainage systems, sanitary sewer lines, and open space.
Where conditions warrant, such as in floodplains, additional widths may
be required.
B. A minimum easement width of 25 feet (7.62 meters) shall be required
for all storm drainage systems and sanitary sewer systems which are
located outside of the public right-of-way and wherever storm drainage
is collected in swales and ditches. An additional five feet (1.524 meters)
of easement width shall be required for each additional utility which is
placed within the easement area.
A. General requirements.
(1) All land development shall protect streams, lakes and ponds from
sedimentation damage, and control erosion in accordance with the
Clean Streams Law, P.L. 1987, and regulations adopted by DER,
Chapter 102, except that all developments, regardless of size, shall
submit an erosion and sediment control plan as part of the
preliminary land development plan for review by the Montgomery
County Conservation District or Township Engineer.
(2) In accordance with the Clean Streams Law, P.L. 1987, no changes
shall be made in the contour of the land and no grading, excavation,
removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees or other vegetative
cover of the land shall be commenced, until such time that a plan
for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been approved by
the Montgomery County Conservation District.
(3) Where an erosion and soil erosion control plan is required, no earth
moving shall be permitted until the Township is in receipt of a
satisfactory review by Montgomery County Conservation District
or Township Engineer.
(4) Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall,
as a minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the
Montgomery County Conservation District. In cases where the
Montgomery County Conservation District does not have standards
§ A119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A121
1:599
and specifications for erosion and sedimentation control, other
known and commonly accepted standards and specifications may
be used as approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Compliance with regulations and procedure.
(1) Final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation, as approved,
will be incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements as
required by the Township (see § 136-802).
(2) All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper
drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without ponding,
and all land within a development shall be graded to drain and
dispose of surface water without ponding except where approved
by the Township or where such ponding is part of the overall
stormwater control plan for the site.
(3) The subdivider or developer shall construct and/or install such
drainage structures and/or pipes as are necessary to prevent
erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off, or detain, release
surface waters.
(4) Where drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away
from buildings, they shall be sodded, planted or otherwise suitably
protected as required and shall be of such slope, shape and size as
to conform with the requirements of the Township Engineer.
Concentration of surface water runoff shall be permitted only in
swales, watercourses, retention or detention basins.
(5) Excavations and fills.
(a) Except for roadway embankment slopes, the excavation will
conform to the following conditions:
[1] The slope shall be no greater than 4:1.
[2] The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of
4:1 and passing through any portion of the cut face will be
entirely inside the property lines of the property on which
the excavation was made, otherwise evidence of
easements for slope shall be shown.
[3] The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope of steeper than that required, but
to a maximum of two horizontal to one vertical. For slopes
steeper than 2:1, a written statement to that effect from a
civil engineer, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion control, shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer and approved by him.
The statement shall affirm that the site has been inspected
and that the deviation from the slope will be stable.
§ A121 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A121
1:600
[4] A concrete or mortared stone masonry wall constructed in
accordance with approved standards is provided to
support the face of the excavation.
[5] All slopes shall be properly stabilized.
(b) No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface
steeper in slope than four horizontal to one vertical, except
under the following conditions:
[1] The fill is located so that settlement, sliding, or erosion will
not result in property damage or be a hazard to adjoining
property, streets, alleys or buildings.
[2] For slopes steeper than 2:1, a written statement from a
civil engineer, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion control,
certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the maximum slope will not
endanger any property or result in property damage, is
submitted to and approved by the Township Engineer.
(c) The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of five
feet (1.524 meters) from property or right-of-way lines of
streets or alleys in order to permit the normal rounding of the
edge without encroaching on the abutting property.
(d) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water
from damaging the cut face of excavations and the sloping
surfaces of fills. Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to
minimize sliding or erosion of the soil.
(e) Fills shall not encroach into floodplains or constructed
channels unless permitted as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board and/or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environment Resources.
(f) Fills placed within floodplain or constructed channels shall
have suitable protection against erosion during periods of
flooding.
(g) Grading shall not be done in such a way so as to divert water
onto the property of another landowner.
(h) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control must be exercised.
(i) Grading equipment or construction equipment shall not be
permitted to cross streams. Provisions shall be made for the
installation of temporary culverts or bridges.
(j) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent equipment from
carrying mud or debris from the site onto adjoining streets. An
§ A121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A121
1:601
§ A122. Sanitary sewers.
area 50 feet (15.24 meters) in width and 50 feet (15.24 meters)
in length of stone ballast is required at all entrances and
exits. In addition, mechanical tire cleaners may be required as
deemed necessary by the Township during construction.
(6) Storm drains shall be required to be constructed by the owner to
take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, to lead water
away from springs, and to avoid excessive use of cross gutters at
street intersections and elsewhere.
(7) Unless otherwise directed by the Township and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, watercourses shall
remain open and shall not be piped or incorporated into a storm
sewer system.184
A. Sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed and connected to the public
sanitary sewer system following review of plans and approval by the
UGTMA.
B. Sanitary sewers, with connection to each building in a subdivision or
land development, shall be installed at the expense of the applicant or
subdivider, and connected to the public sanitary sewer system. The
sanitary sewer shall be extended through the project to the property
lines of the site so that adjacent land has access to the public sewers.
C. Sanitary sewers shall be constructed according to UGTMA Standards
and the Pennsylvania Sewage Manual of the DER.
D. Wherever practical, sanitary sewers shall be installed and connected to
the Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Sewer Authority.
E. If sewers are not available in the vicinity, but are considered reasonably
necessary in the near future by the Township or the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources or other appropriate state
agency for the area in question, a system of sewers, together with all
necessary laterals extending from mains to the street right-of-way line
shall be installed at the expense of the developer. The sewer lines shall
be suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision or land development
and the laterals shall be capped at the right-of-way. The sewer
installations shall include the construction within rights-of-way or
easement to bring the sewer to the future connection with the Township
sanitary sewer system.
F. All public sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the Sewerage Manual issued by the Pennsylvania
184. Editor's Note: Original Section A122, Stormwater management, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 1-17-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1. This ordinance also
provided for the renumbering of original Sections A123 through A131 as Sections A122
through A130.
§ A121 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A122
1:602
§ A123. Bridges and culverts.
§ A124. Survey monuments.
Department of Environmental Resources and the Upper Gwynedd-
Towamencin Municipal Sewer Authority specifications.
A. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to meet current Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standards to support expected loads and
to carry expected flows. They shall be constructed to the full width of
the right-of-way.
B. It is unlawful to construct any dam or other water obstruction, or to
make any change in or addition to, any existing water obstruction, or in
any manner change or diminish the course, current, or cross section of
any stream or body of water, without first having made written
application to and obtained consent or permit, in writing, from the
Pennsylvania DER.
C. The following information is required: drawing to include location plan;
cross section of present bridge, if one exists; profile of stream for a
reasonable distance above and below bridge site, showing slopes of
bed, normal water surface and floodwater surface (if the bridge is on a
skew, give the angle of the center line of the bridge with the direction of
the line of flow); the total drainage area above the bridge site;
description of watershed; length of stream from source to bridge site
and to the mouth; character of stream bed and banks; extent and depth
of overflow during floods; effect of previous floods upon bridges, their
span and clearance; whether bridge will be within backwater influence
of parent stream.
D. When submitting a plan involving construction of bridge or culverts, a
complete set of structural computations shall be submitted.
A. Monuments shall be iron or magnetic pins encased in stone or concrete
and located on the right-of-way lines at corners, angle points, beginning
and end of curves, at all corners and angle points of the boundaries of
the original tract to be subdivided and as otherwise required.
Monuments shall be indicated on the record plan. They shall be placed
after a new street has been completed. The center line of all new streets
shall be marked with spikes and referenced to permanent monuments
or structures. A certified copy of this referenced information shall be
given to the Township Engineer. Permanent reference monuments shall
be of case concrete or durable stone 20 inches (50.8 centimeters), by
four inches (10.16 centimeters), by four inches (10.16 centimeters),
with forty-five-degree beveled edges with an indented cross or dimple.
The monument shall be set by a registered professional surveyor so that
the scored point shall coincide exactly with the point of intersection of
the line being monumented. The monument shall be set at final grade
elevation.
§ A122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A124
1:603
§ A125. Emergency accessways.
§ A126. Street signs.
§ A127. Lighting.
B. Staking requirements. All lots shall be staked by the registered
engineer or surveyor for the subdivider, builder, or developer, when
final grading has been completed. This stake out shall be visible and
completed before an owner or occupant moves into the property. All lot
corner markers shall be permanently located and shall be at least a fiveeighths-
inch (1.5875 centimeters) metal pin with the minimum length
of 24 inches (60.96 centimeters) located in the ground to existing
grade.
C. Bench marks. The Township elevations are based on the U.S.G.S.
Datum. All contours and elevations shown on the plans must be based
on this system.
A. Minimum cartway width shall be 10 feet (3.048 meters).
B. When paved, pavement shall conform to Pavement Design, herein.185
C. When not paved the cartway shall be constructed of six inches (15.24
centimeters) of crushed stone of appropriate size, depth, and
compaction to support the largest Township fire trucks under all
weather conditions. Placed on top of the six inches (15.24 centimeters)
of crushed stone shall be an interlocked porous block pavement
constructed of fiber reinforced polyethylene. All voids are to be filled
with topsoil and seeded with a grass seed mix. The Township Engineer
shall determine compliance with this standard.
D. The emergency accessway shall be marked in accordance with § A108,
Subsection A(4), of these standards.
A. The developer shall erect at every street intersection a street sign or
street signs meeting Township approval, having thereon the names of
the intersecting streets. At intersections where streets cross, there
shall be at least two such street signs and at the intersections where
one street ends or joins with another street, there shall be at least one
such street sign.
B. Street signs are to be erected when the first dwelling on the street is
occupied. Temporary street signs may be erected on the approval of the
Township but shall be made permanent before final offer for the
dedication of roads is made.
C. The Board of Supervisors shall require warning and regulatory signs to
be erected upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer and/or
Police Department.
185. Editor's Note: See § A104, Pavement design.
§ A124 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A127
1:604
A. General requirements.
(1) Lighting shall be installed as required by the Township. A lighting
plan shall be submitted with the preliminary plan and reviewed by
the Township Engineer.
(2) Outdoor illumination in all districts shall be diffused or shielded in
such a manner as not to create any hazardous situations for passing
vehicular traffic or a nuisance to persons in the area. Lighting plans
shall provide for nonglare lights focused downward.
(3) Lighting fixtures should not look institutional, yet should be vandal
proof. Lights should be of unbreakable plastic, recessed or
otherwise designed to reduce possible damage.
B. On-lot lighting.
(1) Each residential unit shall have one post light or lantern, activated
by a photo cell, and located within the front yard.
(2) For all nonresidential and multifamily development, globe or
hooded light fixtures shall be grouped together or installed at
frequent intervals to provide sufficient light for security. Minimum
lighting levels shall be as recommended by the Illuminating
Engineering Society in the IES Lighting Handbook, as last
amended. Fixtures for this lighting purpose should be mounted
between 10 and 15 feet (3.048 and 4.572 meters) above finished
grade and shielded to screen windows of dwellings from the light.
(3) For all on-lot lighting, the owner of record or his lessee shall be
responsible for all costs involved in lighting and maintenance.
C. Pedestrian path/walkway lighting.
(1) Shall be lighted with globe or hooded fixtures. The fixtures shall be
located at frequent intervals so as to illuminate the path/walkway
and to avoid dark spots. The fixtures shall produce the correct
intensity of light to match the circumstance. Higher intensity
lighting shall be used at street intersections and large open areas,
and lower intensity lighting shall be used along backyards of
dwelling units. Minimum lighting levels shall be as recommended
by the Illuminating Engineering Society in the IES Lighting
Handbook, as last amended.
(2) The height of these fixtures shall be set between 10 and 15 feet
(3.048 and 4.572 meters) above the finished grade.
D. Parking lot, loading/storage area lighting.
(1) Shall produce enough light intensity to provide security and
discourage vandalism. The minimum maintained horizontal
footcandle shall be 1.0.
§ A127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A127
1:605
§ A128. Public water supply.
(2) Shall be illuminated with hooded lights mounted on poles a
maximum of 30 feet (9.144 meters) above finished grades.
(3) Shall be installed and shielded so as not to direct light on adjacent
dwellings.
E. Lighting within right-of-way. Where appropriate, the developer shall
install or cause to be installed, at the developer's expense, metal or
concrete pole streetlights serviced by underground conduit in
accordance with a plan to be prepared by the developer's engineer and
approved by the Township Engineer. The installation of metal poles may
be waived in such instances as approved by the Township due to the
existence of wooden poles already in place. Provision shall be made for
energizing said lighting after 50% or more of the dwellings in a given
subdivision or land development or section of a subdivision or land
development have been occupied. The developer shall be responsible
for all costs involved in lighting the streets until such time that the
streets are accepted or condemned as public streets by the Township.
F. Streetlights. All streetlights must comply with the technical
specifications set forth in Appendix 136B following this Appendix.
A. All developments of more than three lots must be provided with public
water supply if public water is available within 1,000 feet (304.8
meters) of the site property lines.
B. The developer shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make
adequate water service available to each lot or dwelling unit within the
subdivision or land development. A minimum pressure of 40 pounds per
square inch (28,124 kilograms per square meter) shall be provided at
each house or other building to be connected to the water supply main.
The water supply must comply with the regulations and standards of
the State Department of Environmental Resources and the
specifications and review/approval policies of the North Penn Water
Authority. For areas where the water pressure exceeds 75 pounds per
square inch (52,732.5 kilograms per square meter), the developer shall
install a pressure reducing valve for each residential or nonresidential
occupancy.
C. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and
appropriately spaced fire hydrants for fire-fighting purposes pursuant
to the Standard Schedule for Grading Cities and Towns of the United
States with reference to their Fire Defense and Physical Conditions,
National Board of Fire Underwriters, 1956 and the specifications and
review/approval policies of the North Penn Water Authority. Review and
approval by the Township Engineer and the Township Fire Chief shall
be required in order to insure that adequate fire protection is provided.
§ A127 TOWAMENCIN CODE § A128
1:606
§ A129. Private water supply.
Where no public water is accessible, water shall be furnished by the
developer on an individual lot basis in accordance with the requirements
established by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
If wells are installed on each lot and the lot also contains its own sewage
disposal facilities, the well shall be of the drilled type, cased and grout
sealed into the bedrock. The well will be required to have a production
of not less than six gallons (22,710 cubic centimeters) per minute as
established by the bailer tests, and certified by the well driller. Before
being placed in consumer use, it shall be disinfected by the use of sodium
hypochlorite or other acceptable solutions, and a sample bacteriological
examination collected by a licensed water analyst.
§ A130. Trash and refuse areas.
D. Requirement for public water. The applicant shall present evidence to
the governing body and the Township Planning Commission that the
subdivision or land development is to be supplied, if not by a private
water supply, a certificated public utility, a bona fide cooperative
association of landowners or by a Township corporation, authority, or
utility. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to
serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
considered acceptable evidence.
E. Fire hydrants shall be located at accessible points throughout the
subdivision and shall be located according to the Fire Marshal,
Township Engineer, North Penn Water Authority, and/or DER. The type
and methods of construction to be employed in the installation of fire
hydrants shall be in accordance with current state regulations.
F. Fire hydrants are to be placed no more than 500 feet (152.4 meters)
apart. A fire hydrant should be placed at the bulb of all culs-de-sac and
at all street intersections.
A. The site design must include either a provision for the storage of trash,
refuse and garbage inside the building(s) or within a walled area
outside the building(s). The walls of such a trash and refuse area must
shield the trash and refuse from direct view of any adjacent property
and must be at least six feet (1.8288 meters) in height. The trash and
refuse area must be located a minimum of 50 feet (15.24 meters) from
the property boundaries. The trash and refuse shall be stored in
covered containers.
B. Trash and refuse areas shall be located so as to be separate adequately
from habitable buildings to avoid being offensive, but at the same time
be convenient for both collectors and residents.
§ A128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A130
1:607
Appendix 136B
STREETLIGHT SPECIFICATIONS
§ B100. Luminaries.
§ B101. Optical assembly.
C. The trash and refuse areas shall be screened and landscaped.
Evergreen landscape plantings shall be used to screen the area. All
evergreen vegetation to be installed shall not be less than five feet
(1.524 meters) in height at the time of planting. The plantings shall
form a continuous screen.
D. The provision of this chapter regarding trash and refuse areas shall be
applied to all projects unless provisions are otherwise specified in the
Township Zoning Ordinance,186 as last amended.
A. Luminaries shall consist of a die cast aluminum upper housing,
refractor door and power pad module.
B. The housing shall have a baked on acrylic enamel finish.
C. The slipfitter shall be a four bolt type adjustable for 1¼ inch through
two inch mast arm without removal or rearrangement of fitter
components.
D. The lamp socket shall be mogul type porcelain socket, one piece screw
shell design to prevent separation of shell and disengagement of lamp
under vibration.
E. The photocontrol receptacle shall be designed of polycarbonate to
eliminate breakage and shall have a die cast rain lip to minimize the
entry of moisture. It shall be capable of rotation no more than 350° to
prevent possible damage to photocontrol receptacle wires. It shall be
connected for 12V.
F. All hardware shall be of a noncorrosive material. All screws and bolts
shall be coated with an organic material to eliminate hydrogen
embrittlement and provide superior corrosion protection. The luminaire
shall be the Power Pad Horizontal Type as manufactured by American
Electric or equal.
A. The reflector shall be hydroformed aluminum and have a durable
anodized finish.
B. The reflector design shall be such that by the proper positioning the
lamp socket, it shall provide a Type II/III light distribution. The
luminaire shall be delivered set for IES Type III light distribution.
186. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Zoning.
§ A130 TOWAMENCIN CODE § B101
1:608
§ B102. Ballast.
§ B103. Photocell.
C. The refractor shall be prismatic acrylic for luminaires through 250 watt.
The refractor shall be secured in the refractor door with a positive
retainer that will allow easy removal for cleaning. Removal of refractor
shall not require tools.
D. The refractor door shall be hinged and have a "one hand" operable,
internally latched, trigger latch consisting of a die cast pivoting
member with a stainless steel spring.
E. The gasket between the refractor and reflector shall be of polyester
fiber material with a density of 3.5# per square yard and air
permeability of 450 CIM/square foot at 0.5 inch H2O at 1/16 inch
thickness to effectively seal out contaminants and allow for proper
breathing of the assembly.
A. The ballast and components shall be mounted on a separate die cast
door. The upper housing shall incorporate a die cast retention bar to
deter spreading of the upper housing and accidental disengagement of
the ballast door assembly. The ballast shall be factory prewired and
shall be suitable for operation in temperatures down to minus 20° F. It
shall have an electrical quick disconnect.
B. The ballast shall be capable of starting and operating the specified
mercury vapor lamp from a nominal 12/240 volt power source, 60 HZ.
C. For 175 watt and 250 watt luminaires, the ballast shall be
Autotransformer type; 120/240 volt regulated type. The ballast shall be
manufactured and supplied by the luminaire manufacturer.
D. The A-weighted decibel noise measurement of the luminaire after lamp
warmup of approximately five minutes shall be 40 db or less. Each
manufacturer shall submit a certified test report in accordance with
this criteria at time of bid.
E. The starting aid shall be two lead circuit design for more reliable pulse
positioning. It shall be of universal replacement design for both two- or
three-lead starting aids and meet ANSI standards. The starting air shall
be manufactured and supplied by the luminaire manufacturer.
F. The terminal board shall be of thermo plastic and shall be dead back
design to prevent arcing. Connections shall be a fast on male blade type
for internal wiring connections. Line side connections shall be pressure
type, capable of accepting up to a No. 6 AWG stranded wire.
A. The photocell control shall be of the plug-in, locking type conforming to
ANSI Standard C136.1. It shall be rated at 1,800 volt amperes and
§ B101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § B103
1:609
§ B104. Permits; N.E.C. requirements.
The contractor shall provide all necessary permits and shall install the new
luminaires in accordance with N.E.C. requirements and as approved by
PECO Energy Company.
§ B105. Lamps.
All new luminaires shall be equipped with mercury vapor lamps containing
noncorrosive nickel plated and porcelain insulated screw base and shall
maintain stable arc tube voltage throughout life of the lamp. Lamps shall be
Sylvania Electric, Phillips Electric or General Electric.
§ B106. Electrical inspection.
Electrical inspection as required by PECO Energy Company for final
connection.
§ B107. Service.
All service to be provided and connected by PECO Energy Company
according to their standards. Special care should be taken when mounting
brackets and luminaires on existing PECO Energy Company poles.
Applications for service are responsibility of Township.
Appendix 136C
UTILITY INSTALLATION AND RELOCATION
§ C100. General.
operate over a range of 105 to 285 volts. The circuit shall be solid state
with exception of the load relay which is a bimetallic snap action switch.
B. The manufacturer's name and trademark, rating in volts, lamperes,
frequency and style number shall be permanently attached to the P.E.C.
The control shall operate at 120 or 277 volts, 50/60 HZ A.C. and shall be
capable of making and breaking an 1,800 VA HID lamp load together
with its associated ballast and transformer equipment without
excessive arcing.
C. A surge protector with a range from 450V to 500V shall be provided to
protect device against damage by a fault on the line.
D. The photoelectric control shall be Area Lighting Research Model
Number SST-PV or approved equal.
A. All utility companies and owners, including but not limited to pipeline
companies, cable TV companies, electric companies, telephone
companies, water companies and water and sewer authorities, shall
comply with the provisions of the Underground Utility Line Protection
§ B103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § C100
1:610
§ C101. Right-of-way.
Law, Act 287 of 1974, as amended by Act 38 of 1991 and Act 187 of
1996, which relates to excavation and demolition work in the vicinity of
underground facilities.
B. The utility owner is responsible for complying with applicable industry
codes and federal and state regulations that pertain to the particular
type of utility facility.
C. All utilities are to be installed or relocated underground in the public
rights-of-way or within the street cartways. Perpendicular crossings of
the streets shall be minimized through the use of common facilities.
D. All utilities shall be installed in accordance with PennDOT's Publication
408 Specifications, and PennDOT's Design Manual Part 5, as amended,
all applicable Township standards, and the requirements contained in
the Towamencin Village: Land Use and Design Manual (Ordinance No.
96-6).
E. All aboveground facilities (junction boxes, transformer boxes, splice
boxes) shall be screened from view from both the public rights-of-way
and adjacent properties by using walls, fencing, or landscaping. Such
screening devices shall comply with the Towamencin Village: Land Use
and Design Manual (Ordinance No. 96-6) or be compatible with
building materials and/or adjacent landscape treatments and are
subject to the review and approval by the Board of Supervisors.
F. Upon completion of utility construction, record plans of all utilities,
including services, are to be prepared by the utility owners. Two paper
copies and one reproducible copy of the plans are to be provided to the
Township for record retention. They are to be provided on acid-free
paper.
G. Utilities must be located to minimize the need for later adjustment, to
accommodate known future highway improvements, and in a manner
that the maintenance, servicing, and replacement of such facilities will
not impair the roadway nor impede traffic flow.
H. All utilities must be designed to provide for the future ultimate build-out
condition of the Towamencin Village Overlay District.
A. All utilities shall be located within the public rights-of-way of the
Township. If the utility facility must be outside the street right-of-way,
sufficient easements and/or right-of-way must be provided.
B. No trash or debris shall be placed in any excavation or left within the
public rights-of-way of the Township.
C. The horizontal and vertical location of facilities within the public rightsof-
way of the Township must conform with occupancy policies
§ C100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § C101
1:611
§ C102. Longitudinal lines and crossings.
§ C103. Clearance and cover requirements.
§ C104. Trenching and excavation.
applicable for the system, type of highway, and specific conditions for
the particular roadway section involved.
D. All utilities designed and installed within the public rights-of-way of the
Township must be of durable materials designed for long service life
expectancy, must be relatively free from routine servicing or
maintenance, must provide the highest degree of safety to the traveling
public, and must assure the integrity of the roadway and protection for
the facility.
E. All utility facilities installed within the public rights-of-way of the
Township shall be designed to support the dead loads imposed by earth,
subbase, pavement, etc. and vehicular loads thereon when the facility is
operated under all ranges of pressure.
F. The design and construction methods used for manholes, vaults, and
similar underground appurtenances to be installed within the public
rights-of-way of the Township are to comply with PennDOT's Publication
408 Specifications and are subject to the prior approval of the
Township.
A. Longitudinal installations must be on an alignment parallel to the
pavement and, where possible, located between the drainage ditch, if
present, and the public right-of-way lines. Longitudinal installations
shall not interfere with the roadway drainage, the structural integrity of
the pavement, shoulders or embankment, highway maintenance, and
the safety of the traveling public.
B. All utility facilities which intersect shall cross each other at an angle as
near to 90° as practical.
A. All utility facilities shall be installed with a minimum cover of 36 inches,
measured from the top of the facility to the adjacent ground.
B. The minimum clearance between utility facilities shall be 18 inches. All
crossings not meeting the minimum clearance shall be encased in
concrete.
A. Relocated or newly installed utility facility lines that are parallel to each
other shall be constructed in separate trenches.
B. Excavations for trenching shall not extend more than 300 feet ahead of
the utility facility placement, nor shall trenching be left open overnight
unless permission is received from the Township Engineer. If
permission is granted, appropriate roadside protection must be placed
§ C101 TOWAMENCIN CODE § C104
1:612
§ C105. Backfill and bedding.
§ C106. Blasting. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
All blasting shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 46 of the Code of
Towamencin Township.
§ C107. Specific utility requirements.
in accordance with PennDOT Publication 203, Work Zone Traffic
Control, April 1994, or most current.
C. The utility facility owner shall protect the utility facility trench to
provide for the safety of the traveling public, including motorists,
bicyclists and pedestrians.
A. The backfill must be a suitable material as approved by the Township
Engineer. Backfilling should not be done in freezing weather or with
frozen material.
B. Upon completion of utility facility placement, testing, and inspection,
the utility facility trench is to be backfilled immediately with suitable
materials as approved by the Township Engineer.
C. Any settlement which occurs in backfilled trenches must be
immediately corrected prior to placement of paving. Settlement which
occurs in asphalt pavement areas shall be repaired by resurfacing the
entire width of the street with asphaltic concrete at the expense of the
contractor. If the adjacent pavement section is rigid pavement
(concrete), it is required that the contract replace the pavement with
high early strength (HES) or accelerated concrete pavement in order to
facilitate traffic movements.
D. Any bedding soil that is unstable, in the opinion of the Township
Engineer, shall be removed from under utility facilities and utility
facility structures, as directed, and replaced as specified with suitable
material.
E. All excavations within the public rights-of-way of the Township shall be
backfilled with a maximum of six inch lifts using mechanical compaction
equipment. Compaction equal to the existing undisturbed soil must be
achieved.
A. Steel carrier pipes. Steel carrier pipes shall be protectively coated,
wrapped, and provided with a cathodic protection system in
conformance with all current applicable codes and regulations.
B. Fiber optic cables. All fiber optic cables shall be encased in six-inchthick
concrete which has been color coded with an orange dye. Metallic
identification tape must be buried a minimum of 18 inches below top of
ground and shall be positioned above the fiber optic cable.
§ C104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § C107
1:613
§ C108. Maintenance and protection of traffic.
Maintenance and protection of traffic during utility facility(ies) relocation(s)
and/or construction must be in accordance with PennDOT Publication 203,
Work Zone Traffic Control, April 1994, and its addenda. Maintenance and
Protection of Traffic Figures must be included with the utility application for
the Township to review prior to the issuance of a permit for the relocation
and/or installation.
§ C109. Miscellaneous.
C. Sanitary sewers.
(1) Sanitary sewers are to be placed at least 10 feet horizontally from
any existing or proposed water main. If local conditions prevent a
lateral separation of 10 feet, a sewer may be laid closer than 10 feet
to the water line if the following items are satisfied:
(a) It is laid in a separate trench.
(b) It is laid in the same trench with the water main located at one
side on a bench of undisturbed earth.
(c) In either case, the elevation of the crown of the sewer is at
least 18 inches below the invert of the water main.
(d) Should the sewer cross under the water main, the sewer shall
be laid at such an elevation that the top of the sewer is at least
18 inches below the bottom of the water main.
(2) All sanitary sewers shall be installed and connected to the public
sanitary sewer system following a plan review and approval from
the Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Sewer Authority
(UGTMA).
(3) Whenever possible, sanitary sewers shall be installed and
connected to the Upper Gwynedd-Towamencin Municipal Sewer
Authority.
(4) All public sanitary sewers must be designed and constructed in
accordance with the Sewerage Manual issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Upper Gwynedd-
Towamencin Municipal Sewer Authority Specifications.
D. Stormwater. All stormwater drainage inlets shall have structural steel
bicycle safe grates as set forth in PennDOT Publication 72.
A. Caps and plugs for any dead-end branches of utility facilities or service
connections shall be made watertight and be anchored to hold against
internal pressure or external force.
B. Erosion control measures must be in place prior to any utility facility
excavation and the measures must be maintained during all phases of
§ C107 TOWAMENCIN CODE § C109
1:614
Appendix 136D
TRAFFIC SIGNAL CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
§ D100. General requirements.
the utility facilities relocation/installation. The erosion control
measures must be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual, January 1996, and its addenda.
A. The purpose of this specification is to provide design engineers and
qualified traffic signal contractors with the general requirements and
administrative details governing the furnishing and installation of
traffic signals by private entities within Towamencin Township.
B. The Owner or Township is hereby defined as Towamencin Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
C. The Township Traffic Engineer is hereby defined as Pennoni Associates,
Inc.
D. The contractor is hereby defined as any qualified contractor or
subcontractor performing traffic-signal-related work for a private entity
in accordance with a PennDOT-approved traffic signal permit.
E. The requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Specifications (year 2007 or latest revision/edition), also known as
"PennDOT Publication 408," shall apply to all aspects of this
installation.
F. The requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Traffic Signal Design Handbook, also known as "PennDOT Publication
149, March 16, 2009," shall apply to all aspects of this installation.
G. Special provisions for vendor-specific equipment and nonstandard
PennDOT items have been included as part of this document. It is the
responsibility of the contractor to contact the Township Traffic
Engineer to determine which special provisions apply for a particular
installation.
H. Whenever a reference is made to any standard, specification, or code,
the reference shall mean the standard, specification, or code that is in
effect on the date that the contractor notifies the Township Traffic
Engineer that work is ready to proceed.
I. All traffic signal contractors working in the Township must be PennDOT
prequalified to perform traffic signal work (Work Class Code "P"). All
contractor personnel setting up work zone controls and performing flag
duties must be IMSA Work-Zone Safety certified. All personnel
performing electrical work must be IMSA Traffic Signal Technician
Level I certified. A supervisor must be on site during the installation of
§ C109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D100
1:615
§ D101. Contractor's work.
any electrical work and said supervisor must be IMSA Traffic Signal
Technician Level II certified.
J. It is the responsibility of the private entity installing the traffic signal to
secure all necessary PennDOT highway occupancy permit and
PennDOT traffic signal permit approvals before work begins.
A. General. Contractor shall furnish all materials, implements, machinery,
equipment, tools, supplies, transportation, labor, and supervision
required to construct the facilities as shown on the Township-approved
drawings and as specified herein. It shall be the responsibility of the
contractor to proceed with the work in the manner and within such
limitations as may be prescribed by the Township Traffic Engineer. It is
the responsibility of the contractor to obtain a construction drawing
from the design engineer, which has been approved by the Township
Traffic Engineer.
B. Construction limits. Contractor shall confine his operations strictly
within the limits of the right-of-ways indicated by the plans, and/or as
directed by the Township Traffic Engineer, unless written permission is
obtained to occupy additional ground. Upon completion of work, the
contractor shall clean up and restore the area of operations to a
condition at least equal to original conditions. Unless specified
elsewhere herein, all restoration shall be included in the contractor's
scope of work. Damage to property outside of specified construction
limits shall be the responsibility of the contractor and restoration of
same shall be made at the contractor's expense.
C. Scope of work. The extent of work is as shown on the construction
drawings and as contained within these specifications, includes but is
not limited to: installation of traffic signals; installation of pavement
markings and traffic signs; maintenance and protection of traffic; and
all necessary appurtenant work; and materials required to complete the
work indicated. Any equipment to be removed/replaced shall be
delivered to the Township Public Works Department by the contractor,
if requested by the Township Traffic Engineer, otherwise the contractor
is responsible for the disposal of all existing equipment being removed/
replaced.
D. Utility notification. The contractor is responsible for notifying the
Pennsylvania One-Call System in accordance with Pa Act 187 of 1996. It
is also the contractor's responsibility to protect all utilities from
damage during work that have been marked through the PA One-Call
System. When a utility is damaged, the contractor must stop all work
and notify the appropriate utility and the Township Traffic Engineer.
The contractor shall be responsible for any damage caused to marked
utilities and for any damage caused to unmarked utilities after the
initial damage occurs.
§ D100 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D101
1:616
E. Maintenance and protection of traffic. Maintenance and protection of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall be strictly observed by the
contractor in completing the project work program, as follows:
(1) All workers must wear a reflective vest or other appropriate safety
apparel during working hours.
(2) The contractor must provide vehicles outfitted with safety beacons,
appropriate traffic control signing, barricades, flags and cones.
(3) All work must be done in compliance with the contract drawings
and the appropriate figures contained within Publication 213, Work
Zone Traffic Control Guidelines, dated January 2006 or latest
edition, published by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(4) Open trenches across travel lanes are not permitted during
nonworking hours unless, on the approval of the Township Traffic
Engineer, such trenches are safely decked with steel plates of
sufficient size and strength to support the traffic load. The
contractor's name and emergency telephone number shall be
painted and legible on each plate to assist the Township in the
event of an emergency.
(5) All travel lanes must be open for traffic during the morning (6:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m.) and evening peak hours (3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.).
Two-way traffic must be maintained at all times. Lane closures are
permitted for short periods if flagging is provided in accordance
with PennDOT Publication 213.
(6) The contractor shall provide the Director of Public Works, the
Township Traffic Engineer, and the Towamencin Township Police
Department with information 24 hours in advance pertaining to
potential traffic restrictions.
(7) When the contractor is providing flag control of an intersection due
to traffic signal power interruption and at such time immediately
prior to signal turn on, contractor shall notify the Towamencin
Township Police Department.
F. Documentation. Three copies of the following documentation must be
provided for each installation before final acceptance of the installation
occurs:
(1) As-built documentation of the work in a format satisfactory to the
Township Traffic Engineer.
(2) Operator manuals containing detailed operating instructions for
each different type or model of equipment.
(3) Cabinet wiring diagrams including terminal number and conductor
color codes.
§ D101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D101
1:617
(4) Signed traffic signal permit plan and traffic signal system permit
plan issued by PennDOT and copies of the interconnect plan.
G. Guarantees. All materials and workmanship, including defects and
damages resulting from such, shall be fully guaranteed by the
contractor for a period of one year from the date of acceptance by the
owner. The contractor shall promptly remedy any defects in work and
pay for any damage to work resulting therefrom which shall appear
within the one-year period. This guarantee may be superseded by
specific equipment warrantees which shall be the responsibility of the
equipment supplier after the one-year period.
H. Inspection of traffic signal work.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to arrange a
preconstruction meeting on site with the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation (PennDOT) Traffic Unit and the Township Traffic
Engineer to spot signal poles and vehicle detector locations in the
field. No work may begin until this meeting has been held and the
intended scope of the signal installation is satisfactory to all
parties.
(2) Once work has begun, the contractor shall be responsible for
notifying the Township Traffic Engineer 24 hours prior to the
following, so that a representative of the Township Traffic Engineer
may be on site to inspect the following work:
(a) Installation of signal pole foundations before concrete is
placed;
(b) Trenching and conduit installation before backfilling occurs;
(c) Sawcutting for loop detector installation before sealing;
(d) Installation of loop detector wire, prior to sealing;
(e) Completion of loop detector series, inductance, and resistance
testing in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408 before
splices are sealed within the junction box.
(3) Work not inspected and/or completed to the satisfaction of the
engineers shall be redone by the contractor at the direction of the
Township Traffic Engineer.
I. Acceptance of traffic signal installation by Township.
(1) Thirty-day testing period. Upon substantial completion of the scope
of work, a thirty-day testing period shall begin. The contractor shall
hold a meeting with the PennDOT Traffic Unit, the Township Traffic
Engineer, and the Director of Public Works to begin the thirty-day
testing period. During this time period, the contractor must
commence repairs for signal flash or blackout within two hours of
notification by the Township. Also, the contractor must correct all
§ D101 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D101
1:618
failures by repairing or replacing malfunctioning parts or
equipment or faulty workmanship, regardless of the cause, within
24 hours after having been notified by the Township. In addition,
during this time period the contractor must guarantee the
satisfactory in-service operation of mechanical and electrical
equipment, related components, signing, pavement markings, and
the controller assembly, regardless of the cause for unsatisfactory
operation. After correcting failures for any reason, the thirty-day
testing period shall be restarted.
(2) Final dedication.
(a) Final dedication of the work outlined within this scope of work
shall be signified by the following:
[1] Satisfactory completion of the thirty-day testing period;
[2] Satisfactory completion of all outstanding construction
items as outlined by the engineer;
[3] Submission of all required documentation to the
satisfaction of the Township Traffic Engineer.
(b) Until final dedication is granted to the contractor, the
contractor is responsible for commencing repairs by repairing
or replacing malfunctioning parts or equipment or faulty
workmanship, regardless of the cause, within two hours after
having been notified by the Township. If the contractor does
not report on site within two hours, the Township shall have
the option to commence repairs through the Township traffic
signal maintenance contractor. The developer's escrow of the
project shall then be billed accordingly for work performed by
the Township traffic signal maintenance contractor. In
addition, during this time period the contractor must
guarantee the satisfactory in-service operation of mechanical
and electrical equipment, related components, signing (if
applicable), pavement markings (if applicable), and the
controller assembly, regardless of the cause for unsatisfactory
operation.
J. Closed-loop system upgrade. As part of this installation, the contractor
is responsible for upgrading the closed-loop system software on the
Township central monitoring station. This upgrade will include
ensuring communication between the local controller and the central
monitor, downloading/uploading local controller information to the
central monitor, and installation of intersection graphics in a format
similar to the existing intersection graphics used at the central
monitoring station. The contractor will be responsible for ensuring that
the new installation functions as part of the existing closed-loop system
to the satisfaction of the Township. The closed-loop system upgrade
must be completed by a technician from the approved supplier's office.
§ D101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D102
1:619
§ D102. Traffic control equipment items.
§ D103. Specific equipment items.
A. Description. This work consists of furnishing and installing the traffic
control equipment indicated on the drawings including: controller
cabinets; NEMA traffic signal controllers, electrical distribution system;
vehicular signal heads; traffic signal supports; loop detectors; junction
boxes; signs; sign posts; pavement markings; and all necessary
appurtenant work and materials necessary to complete the work
indicated.
B. Materials.
(1) All materials shall be in accordance with the most recent edition/
version of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) Publication 408, PennDOT Bulletin 15, and NEMA TS-2
Standards. All materials shall be supplied by PennDOT-approved
manufacturers.
(2) Catalog cuts for all materials must be provided to the Township
Traffic Engineer before construction begins. Include the type of
material, manufacturer's name, model number and PennDOT
certificate of approval number for each item to be supplied.
(3) The attention of all contractors is called upon regarding the
mandatory use of metallic conduit under the following conditions:
(a) Installation on the exterior surface of traffic signal poles;
(b) Underground, when the conduit also extends aboveground.
(4) If pavement markings are required as part of this installation, all
long line markings and twenty-four-inch transverse hatch markings
are to be an epoxy resin material, while all stop bars, crosswalks,
legends, and arrows are to be thermoplastic, as specified herein.
C. Construction methods. Construction methods shall be in accordance
with the applicable sections of the following documents: PennDOT
Publication 408, PennDOT Publication 148, PennDOT Publication 111,
PennDOT Publication 213, PennDOT Publication 72, and PennDOT
TC-7800 standards and PennDOT RC-67M standards. The applicable
document to be used is the most recent version or supplement of the
date upon which construction begins.
A. Item Number 0952-2052: controller assembly, solid-state flasher, Type
II mounting.
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installing of a solidstate
school flasher assembly capable of communications with the
Township's central computer via alphanumeric pager-activated
operation.
§ D102 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D103
1:620
(2) Materials: Sections 950.2, 952.2, 1104.01, 1104.03, 1104.04,
1104.05, and as follows:
(a) Provide an RTC manufacturing central pager, pager-activated
school flasher system, CPR2100 controller, door lock, antenna
for receiving pager signal and all necessary cables and
connectors to establish communications between the flasher
assembly and the Township's central computer.
(3) Construction: Sections 950.3, 952.3, as shown on the Standard
Drawings.
(a) In the presence of the Township Traffic Engineer, verify
communications between the flasher assembly and the central
computer. Program the flasher remotely from the central
computer.
B. Item Number 9936-0200: school speed limit sign, Type II.
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installing of a school
speed limit sign mounted on a mast arm, as shown on the contract
drawings or as directed by the Engineer.
(2) Materials: Sections 936.2, 950.2, 954.2, 955.2, 1103, 1104, as
shown on the Standard Drawings, and as follows:
(a) Provide a Type II school speed limit sign with a PennDOT
certification of approval. The sign shall have overall
dimensions of 30 inches by 54 inches. The sign shall consist of
the word "SCHOOL" in black legend on yellow background; the
words "SPEED LIMIT" in black legend on white background;
two eight-inch diameter LED amber lenses with visors,
mounted internally; a twelve-inch Dialight center LED speed
message of "15" section, portland orange when illuminated,
with visor; and the words "WHEN FLASHING" in black legend
on white background. The sign shall be made of material
consistent with Section 1103.
(b) Mount a white LED indicator light protected by a vandalism
cage to the back of the sign assembly, which shall illuminate
when the signal indications are in operation.
(3) Construction: Sections 930.3(h), 936.3, 950.3, 954.3, 955.3, and as
shown on the Standard Drawings.
C. Item Number 9951-XXXX: ornamental traffic signal supports, as
specified.
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installing of ornament
traffic signal supports including pedestals and mast arms of the
size indicated on the traffic signal plans as manufactured by
Valmont Industries, Inc. All mounting hardware must match the
pole color.
§ D103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D103
1:621
(2) Materials: Decorative traffic supports shall be designed in
accordance with 1994 AASHTO (American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials) criteria for a wind zone of 80
mph with a 30% gust factor. Signal loading for design purposes will
be per PennDOT standard loadings as shown in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania's TC-7800 Series Traffic Standards as well as the
Department's "Criteria for the Design and Construction of Traffic
Related Structures" and with the actual plan loadings. Materials
and workmanship will be in accordance with Publication 408.
Design calculations and drawings bearing the stamp of a
professional engineer registered in the state of Pennsylvania
certifying that these designs meet these requirements shall be
provided by the manufacturer.
(3) The pole and arm shaft shall be fabricated from commercial quality
hot-rolled steel. The shaft shall have only one longitudinal,
automatically, electrically welded joint, and shall have no
intermediate horizontal joints or welds. Only one length of steel
sheet shall be used, which shall be formed into a continuously
tapered shaft, having a taper of approximately 0.14 inch per foot.
(4) After forming and welding, the tapered shaft shall be longitudinally
cold-rolled over a hardened steel mandrel under sufficient
hydraulic pressure to flatten the weld and increase the physical
characteristics of the shaft. The shaft shall meet the chemical and
physical properties of ASTM A595 Grade A, having a minimum
yield strength of 55,000 psi. The cold-rolling process shall form a
sixteen-flute cross section for the pole upright shaft. The arms shall
be octaflute in cross section for arm lengths through 45 feet and
sixteen-flute in cross section for the arm lengths 46 feet and
greater. The sixteen-fluted shaft shall have 16 equally spaced doric
flutes, sharp and clear cut throughout the entire length of the shaft.
The octaflute shaft shall have eight equally spaced doric flutes,
sharp and clear cut throughout the entire length of the shaft. The
radius of the flute crests shall not exceed the thickness of the metal
of the shaft. Individually rolled flutes or round poles with fluted
sheathing will not be acceptable.
(5) The base plate shall conform to ASTM-A36. It shall telescope the
shaft and be attached by means of two continuous welds, one on
the inside of the base at the end of the shaft, the other one on the
outside at the top of the base. The base plate shall be arranged to
accept four one-and-one-half-inch diameter anchor rods on a
twenty-two-inch bolt circle.
(6) Included with each pole shall be four steel anchor bolts, one-andone-
half-inch diameter complete with double-hex nuts and washers.
Nuts, washers and threaded areas of anchor bolts shall be hot
dipped galvanized to ASTM A-153. Anchor bolts shall meet the
requirements of ASTM A449 and shall have four-inch-by-four-inch-
§ D103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D103
1:622
by-one-fourth-inch-thick steel embedment plates welded to bolt
bottom.
(7) The pole shaft shall be furnished with a four-inch-by-eight-inch
reinforcing handhole frame and a 1/2 inch -13UNC grounding
provision.
(8) Each pole shall be provided with an ornamental ball-type pole top
of appropriate scale. The pole top shall be mechanically attached to
the top of the shaft to provide access for wiring signals secured by
a j-hook wire support; also provided. Pole cap material shall
conform to the requirements of AA-319 aluminum.
(9) Black band-it shall be used for mounting equipment on the signal
supports including signs, preemption equipment, and signal heads,
stainless steel banding will not be accepted. All mounting hardware
installed on the signal support shall be the same color and finish as
the support.
(10) Couplings one-inch diameter NPT for the mounting of banners shall
be welded into the pole at angles of 90°, 180°, and 270°. Couplings
shall be installed with minimum projection above pole surface as to
minimize aesthetic impact when not in use. Height and spacing
shall be as required to support the banner type selected. A slotted
pipe plug painted to match the poles shall be supplied for each
coupling provided.
(11) The pole manufacturer will supply one-inch diameter banner arms
of the lengths and quantities specified by the engineer with a
removable screw-type ball fitting also painted to match the poles.
One-inch diameter NPT threading shall be used for these
components.
(12) Mast arms shall be monocurve flange-plate mounted with an
upsweep rise and shall include a steel arm plate with four
connecting bolts. Plates shall conform to the requirements of
ASTM-A36 steel. All arm connection plates shall be standardized
mating surfaces to provide complete interchangeability using a
twenty-one-inch horizontal and fifteen-inch vertical hole spacing
for mast arm lengths of 15 feet through 55 feet. The arm
connection bolts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A325
and shall be 1 1/2 inches in diameter.
(13) Arms shall be filled drilled by the installer. Rubber grommets shall
be furnished for each signal location. Rigid-mount-type signal
hanger brackets shall be supplied sized to fit the arm diameters at
the locations shown on the contract documents. These brackets
shall be finish painted after galvanizing to match structure finish.
No stainless steel banding shall be used.
(14) All welding to be performed in accordance with the requirements
of AWS D1.1 in a shop certified to the American Institute of Steel
§ D103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D103
1:623
Construction (A.I.S.C.) Category I. The shop shall all be certified
ISO 9001.
(15) Poles, arms, and other structural steel items shall be hot dipped
galvanized to the requirements of ASTM A123. The galvanized
surface will then be solvent wiped to an SSPC-SP-1. After wiping
the galvanized exterior surfaces will be brush blasted to an SSPCSP-
7. Apply one coat Sherwin Williams polyamide epoxy primer to a
DFT of 4-6 mils to all exterior surfaces. Finish paint with one coat of
Sherwin Williams polyurethane enamel corothane, polane 2.8 plus
or hi-solids polyurethane to a DFT of 2-3 mils. After finish, each
pole shall be wrapped in ripple kraft paper and packaged in
corrugated cardboard prior to shipment.
(16) The ornamental base shall conform to the requirements of
AA-319-O.F, aluminum. It shall be two-piece split (clam shell)
design with two removable doors at 180°. The base halves shall be
split equally and fitted to provide a hairline seam when assembled.
The base halves shall be factory assembled before shipment by
means of internal lugs cast into the base bottom and stainless steel
connecting pins at the top. The base casting shall fit securely
around the pole and the base opening shall match the contour of
the fluted pole. Finish paint base to match pole.
(17) Construction: Sections 951.3 and as follows. The concrete
foundation for the signal support shall be increased in size as
required to ensure the ornamental pole base is properly supported.
The concrete foundation shall extend a minimum of three inches
beyond the width of the ornamental pole base on all sides.
D. Item Number 9952-2035: controller assembly, solid state, as specified.
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installation of a basemounted
controller cabinet and a traffic signal controller assembly
of the type indicated.
(2) Materials: Sections 950.2, 1104.01, 1104.03, 1104.04, 1104.05,
and as follows:
(a) Cabinet. The controller and all associated equipment to be
provided in a weatherproof cabinet of clean-cut design and
appearance in accordance with PennDOT Form 408
Specifications and as follows:
[1] Size. Tri-county enclosures (77 inches by 44 inches by 26
inches) cabinet or approved equal shall be provided. The
cabinet size shall be increased or decreased by the
supplier only if approved in writing by the Township Traffic
Engineer based on the specific location of the cabinet and
equipment.
§ D103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D103
1:624
[2] Finish. Cabinet to be constructed of sheet or cast
aluminum. Finish to be natural with external welds ground
flush.
[3] Door. A hinged door to be provided permitting complete
access to the controller assembly. Door to be hinged on the
right side with stops provided at 90° and 180°, plus 10°. A
neoprene gasket to be attached to the cabinet making it
weather and dust resistant. Door to be provided with a
brass tumbler type lock. Two keys to the main door to be
provided for each cabinet.
[4] Auxiliary door.
[a] A small, hinged, and gasket-sealed auxiliary door to be
included on the outside of the main cabinet door. The
auxiliary door shall not allow access to the controller,
its associated equipment, or exposed electrical
terminals but shall allow access to a police panel. The
police panel shall be provided with the following
switches:
[i] Auto/flash.
[ii] Controller (on-off).
[iii] Automatic/manual.
[b] A flexible cord with push button to be provided for
manual control of the intersection (minimum ten-foot
length). Auxiliary door to be provided with a standard
police lock. Two keys for the auxiliary door shall be
provided with each cabinet.
[5] Emergency generator connector. A generator connector
shall be provided for the attachment of an alternative
power source (emergency generator) on the exterior of the
cabinet with a waterproof protective flip-top cover.
Appropriate overload and short circuit protection shall be
provided within the controller assembly. The neutral wire
of the alternative power source circuit shall be connected
with the neutral bus of the controller unit. The receptacle
shall be mounted either in the disconnect cabinet or on the
controller cabinet itself at a location determined by the
Township Public Works Director.
[6] Electrical connections. Electrical connections from the
controller (and auxiliary devices) to outgoing and
incoming circuits shall be made in such a manner that the
controller can be replaced with a similar NEMAcompatible
unit, without the necessity of disconnecting
and reconnecting the individual wires leading therefrom.
§ D103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D103
1:625
[7] Wiring panels. Cabinet to be furnished with suitable, easily
accessible wiring panels. All panel wiring to be neatly
arranged and firm. All wiring terminals to be labeled by
means of silk screening.
[8] Interior lamp. Cabinet to be equipped with an
incandescent lamp for night lighting. A toggle switch to
control the lamp to be mounted on the interior of the main
door.
[9] GFI receptacle. Cabinet to be equipped with a NEC-type,
ground-fault interrupter duplex receptacle.
[10] Circuit breakers. The fifteen-ampere circuit breaker
shown on the PennDOT Standard Drawings for the flasher
and GFI receptacle shall also control the fan and the
interior lamp.
[11] Expandability. Cabinet to be furnished to accommodate
the maximum controller expandability. This to include
cabinet space, connecting cables, wiring terminals and
load switch bases to facilitate the operation of the
maximum controller expansion.
[12] Test panel. Cabinet to be provided with a detector test
panel enabling authorized personnel to place simulated
calls to the controller from all pedestrian and vehicular
detectors.
[13] Surge protection. Cabinet to be provided with a surge
protection package for the power line, loop detectors,
pedestrian circuits, voice line, communications, and
controller as follows:
[a] Power line: Edco Model SHA-1210 IRS or approved
equal. Provide terminals for AC line, AC neutral, AC
equipment in, AC equipment out, neutral equipment
out and ground.
[b] Loop detector: Edco Model SRA 6LCA-916 or
approved equal to be provided for each detector loop
input and installed directly on the loop field terminal.
[c] Pedestrian circuit: Edco Model PC42A030N or
approved equal connected to the pedestrian push
buttons and the pedestrian detector inputs of the
controllers.
[d] Voice line: Edco Model PC2-TEC or approved equal
connected directly to the dial-up modem.
§ D103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D103
1:626
[e] Communications: Edco Model PC642C-008 or
approved equal connected to the interconnect cable
terminal block.
[f] Controller: Edco Model SPA-60BS controller surge
protector connected to the power feed for the
controller.
[14] Sliding storage shelf. A sliding aluminum laptop shelf with
hinged lid shall be installed in the cabinet. The slide shelf
shall be capable of holding the cabinet manuals,
intersection condition diagrams and wiring diagram.
(b) Base-mounted controller assembly, 2-8 phase, solid state,
actuated, NEMA TS2. Provide an Econolite ASC/3 series timer
unit (NEMA TS2 – Type II timer unit) with a NEMA TS2 – Type I
back panel assembly, which complies with the most recent
NEMA TS2 standards for a Type II timer unit and a Type I
assembly. This includes an ethernet port and a programmed
data key. A spare ASC/3 timer unit shall be provided to the
Township with each new controller or modified controller
assembly.
[1] Required features. The controller supplied shall be
capable of closed-loop system coordination and emergency
preemption operation for all phases.
[2] TS-2 ports. Provide a standard RS-485 Port 1, a standard
RS-232C Port 2, and a telemetry interface Port 3 for
systems communications as defined by NEMA TS-2
standards.
[3] Communications requirements. A voice-grade modem and/
or a fiber optic modem/ethernet switch, if required, shall
be tabulated separate from this item.
[4] Interval, sequence, and timing requirements. Controller
assembly to provide the proper intervals and interval
sequence as shown on the contract drawings. Controller to
provide for the setting of each interval, portion of interval,
or function by means of a keyboard and liquid crystal
display (LCD). Interval and function controls to be located
on the front of the controller and shall be properly
designated as to the function each control performs.
[5] Relays/load switches. Controller assembly to be provided
with solid-state load switches in accordance with NEMA
TS-2 standards. Communication between the timer unit
and the load switches is to be via the bus interface units
(BIUs). Controller assembly to be equipped with
appropriate relays, breakers, receptacles and wire as
outlined in PennDOT Form 408. Controller assembly to be
§ D103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D103
1:627
equipped with a radio frequency interference filter (RFI) in
accordance with NEMA standard testing procedures and
PennDOT Form 408. A spare BIU shall be provided to the
Township with each new controller or modified controller
assembly.
[6] Malfunction management unit (MMU). Econolite
MMU-16LE smart monitor to provide for 16 channels with
four inputs per channel meeting NEMA TS-2 2003
standards. Provide the Township with a letter of
certification from the malfunction management unit
manufacturer or an accredited NEMA test laboratory,
attesting to the supplied unit operation and compliance
with NEMA TS-2 standards. A spare MMU shall be
provided to the Township with each new controller or
modified controller assembly.
[7] Environmental requirements. The operating ambient
temperature range for the controller shall be 30°F. to
165°F. A 100 cfm (minimum) cooling fan shall be provided.
The fan thermostat shall be the line-voltage type,
adjustable from 90°F. to 150°F., with 10°F. turn-off below
on position. Weatherproof vents of sufficient area shall be
provided in the lower part of the door or cabinet. The vents
shall be covered with a disposable filter, held in place with
bottom and side brackets.
[8] Expansibility. Controller supplied to be expandable to a
maximum of eight vehicle phases and four pedestrian
phases without replacement of the chassis.
[9] Controller assembly acceptance. Prior to submission of
catalog cuts verify that certificates of approval, sale or
provisional, have been issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation for traffic signal equipment,
as provided in 67 Pa. Code Chapter 211. Furnish three
copies of warranties, guarantees, and parts lists with the
controller catalog cuts.
[10] Testing.
[a] Upon completion of a controller assembly, conduct a
physical and functional shop test of the assembly's
continuous, satisfactory operation, for not less than
five days.
[b] Provide 300W loads for signal circuit and simulated
inputs for detectors. Certify that the equipment
operates as designed. Prior to the commencement of
the bench test, notify the Township Traffic Engineer at
least three working days in advance so that a
representative may inspect the test site.
§ D103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D103
1:628
[c] After the traffic signal installation becomes
operational, conduct a continuous twenty-four-hour
operating test for not less than 30 consecutive days.
Prior to the initiation of stop-and-go operation, the
signal operation must be placed in a "flash" mode for a
minimum of five consecutive calendar days. Make the
initial turn-on in the presence of the PennDOT Traffic
Unit, the Township Traffic Engineer, and service
technician from the supplier of the signal controller,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., Tuesday
through Thursday, except holidays. Correct failures
during this test period by repairing or replacing
malfunctioning parts or equipment, or faulty
workmanship, regardless of cause, within 24 hours
after having been notified by the Township. After
correcting failures caused by defective equipment,
material or faulty workmanship, restart the thirty-day
test.
[11] Controller assembly warranty guaranty. The entire
controller cabinet and all materials within the cabinet shall
be warrantied to be free from defects in workmanship and
materials for a period of five years from the date of the end
of the thirty-day test period. This warranty shall also state
that the installation of the emergency generator
connection does not void the manufacture warranty. Any
parts found to be defective by the Township shall be
replaced free of charge.
[12] A uninterruptible power supply (battery backup) system
shall be supplied and installed in the controller assembly
as manufactured by Tech-Power (Econolite Model
DBL-700). When the battery backup becomes active in the
case of a PECO outage, a priority alarm shall be sent to the
Township through the closed-loop system, including a
page sent to the Township's Traffic Signal Foreman. A
minimum of three batteries shall be installed. Additional
batteries shall be installed, as necessary, to provide for a
minimum ten-hour run time.
(3) Construction: Sections 950.3, 952.3, and as shown on the Standard
Drawings.
E. Item Number 9953-0011: master controller assembly, solid state, as
specified.
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installing of a master
controller assembly of the type indicated.
(2) Materials: Sections 950.2, 952.2, 1104.01, 1104.03, 1104.04,
1104.05, and as follows:
§ D103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D103
1:629
(a) Provide an Econolite ASC/2M-1000 series master controller
assembly compatible with the local controller assembly being
interconnected. Provide for communication with local
controllers via a fiber optic communications telemetry module.
Provide an RS-232 port and ethernet port for programming via
laptop computer. Provide a communication port to
communicate to the central monitor station using a standard
RS-232 connection. A spare ASC/2M master controller shall be
provided to the Township with each new controller or modified
controller assembly. A voice-grade modem, if required, shall be
specified separately.
(3) Construction: Sections 950.3, 952.3, as shown on the Standard
Drawings. The master controller shall be installed in the Township
Control Center unless otherwise specified.
F. Item Number 9953-0012: ethernet switch.
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installation of a fiber to
ethernet switch as manufactured by Ruggedcom. A spare switch
shall be provided to the Township.
(2) Material: As follows:
(a) The local-shelf-mounted Ruggedcom switch shall be Model
Number RS900D-HI-P-2SC10, which includes a minimum of six
ethernet ports and two fiber points.
(b) The front panel shall contain two sets of fiber optic
receptacles, designed to accept SC-type connectors.
(3) Construction: As follows:
(a) Follow manufacturer's instructions for installation.
G. Item Number 9955-1721: pedestrian signal head, countdown hand/
man.
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installation of a
pedestrian signal head using universal hand/man LED indications
with a countdown timer.
(2) Material: Sections 950.2, 955.2, 1104.01, and 1104.06 and as
follows:
(a) Pedestrian signal head to be a single unit with the international
symbols for walk (man) and don't walk (hand) overlay with
nine-inch high two-row countdown digits as manufactured by
Dialight. Minimum height of symbols to be 11 inches. The
white man and portland orange hand indication must be a
solid; outline indications are not permitted.
§ D103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D103
1:630
(b) The LED traffic signal lamp must be warranted against failure
due to workmanship, material defects, or light degradation
within the first 60 months of field operation by the
manufacturer.
(c) The luminance uniformity and color uniformity shall exceed
ITE PTCSI-2 LED Pedestrian Signal Specification
requirements.
(d) A certificate of compliance from an independent testing lab
certifying that the LEDs have been tested and are in
compliance with ITE specifications must be provided.
(3) Construction: Sections 950.3, 955.3, and as shown on the Standard
Drawings.
H. Item Number 9955-xxxx: vehicular signal head eight-inch and twelveinch
sections.
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installation of
vehicular signal head assemblies for the control and illumination of
vehicular traffic signals with ITE-compliant LED indications as
manufactured by Dialight.
(2) Material: Sections 950.2, 955.2, 1104.01, and 1104.06 and as
follows:
(a) Dialight Model 433 green, amber, and red circular LED
indications satisfying the ITE VTCSH-LED Circular Signal
Supplement and Model 432 LED arrow indications satisfying
the ITE VTCSH-Part 3 Arrow Specifications for the full
temperature range of -40°C. to +74°C.
(b) The LED traffic signal lamp must be warranted against failure
due to workmanship, material defects, or light degradation
within the first 60 months of field operation by the
manufacturer.
(c) The luminance uniformity and color uniformity, including the
arrows, shall exceed ITE PTCSI-2 LED Pedestrian Signal
Specification requirements.
(d) A certificate of compliance from an independent testing lab
certifying that the LEDs have been tested and are in
compliance with ITE specifications must be provided.
(3) Construction: Sections 950.3, 955.3, and as shown on the Standard
Drawings.
I. Item 9956-0001: emergency preemption system.
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installation of
emergency preemption detectors, emergency preemption
§ D103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D103
1:631
verification beacons, a preemption card rack, preemption cards,
and wiring as necessary to provide the required operation as shown
on the approved traffic signal permit.
(2) Material: Section 956.2 and as follows:
(a) Preemption equipment to be manufactured by GTT and to be
compatible with both TOMAR and GTT brands of preemption
emitters.
(b) Preemption equipment shall be capable of operating on a highpriority
frequency of 14.035 Hz +/- 0.005 Hz.
(c) This item includes all of the following:
[1] One-directional detector heads.
[2] Manufacturer-supplied cable connecting the detectors to
the interface card.
[3] Dialight LED confirmation lights.
[4] Three-conductor, 14 AWG cable to power confirmation
beacons.
[5] Interface card and card cage to be installed in the
controller cabinet.
(d) The material provided under this item shall carry a ten-year
warranty against defects.
(3) Construction: Section 956.3 and as follows:
(a) Contractor shall field test the detectors by utilizing an emitter
(approved by the engineer and PennDOT) positioned at the
appropriate distance on the roadway. The detector head shall
then be relocated and/or adjusted as directed by the Township
Traffic Engineer to achieve the desired operation.
J. Item Number 9956-0141: dual output loop amplifier (two-channel).
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installation of a rackmounted
dual-output loop amplifier as manufactured by Reno, 1203
Series.
(2) Material: Sections 950.2, 956.2, 1104.01, and 1104.07 and as
follows:
(a) The loop amplifiers supplied will be two-channel rack-mounted
units, with delay and extension timing, as indicated. The loop
amplifiers will provide dual output for each channel, capable of
sending pulse and presence detection simultaneously to the
controller.
§ D103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D103
1:632
(b) The amplifier will provide internal diagnostics, identifying and
differentiating between an open, a short or a sudden twentyfive-
percent change (drift) in inductance.
(c) The amplifier will provide a minimum of eight selectable
frequencies per channel and eight sensitivities per channel.
(d) The amplifier will provide solid-state output, 1.2V at 50mA.
50VDC Max.
(e) Supply a menu-driven loop amplifier with a back-lit liquid
crystal display.
(3) Construction: Sections 950.3, 956.3, and as shown on the Standard
Drawings.
(a) Clearly label the detector phase and lane assignment on the
loop amplifiers for each channel.
K. Item 9956-0600: video detection system.
(1) Description: Furnish and install a complete operational video
detection system to operate as shown on the traffic signal
construction plans as manufactured by Econolite. Video vehicle
detection shall be supplied for all vehicle detection zones, in place
of standard in-pavement inductance loop detectors, unless
otherwise approved by the Township Traffic Engineer in writing.
(2) Material: The video detection system to be the Solo-Terra system as
manufactured by Econolite. Include a video camera for each
approach specified, process modules, video/power cable, mounting
hardware, rack-mounted video detection system, and all necessary
items to provide a fully functional video detection system. This item
includes a permanent LCD video monitor and a mouse located
within the controller cabinet for viewing and modifying the
programmed detectors.
(3) Construction: Install and calibrate the Econolite video detection
system in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
Mount the video detection camera a minimum of 20 feet above the
roadway. PennDOT and the Township Traffic Engineer must
approve the detector layout and operation. Adjust the cameras as
directed by the Engineer. Provide a service technician from the
supplier of the video detector equipment to attend the final
inspection field meeting.
(4) The video feeds from the cameras shall be transmitted to the
Township's Traffic Control Center via fiber optic cable.
L. Item 9956-0601: advance dilemma zone protection system.
(1) Description: Furnish and install a complete radar detection system
to provide dilemma zone protection as noted on the contract signal
§ D103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D103
1:633
plans. The radar detectors monitor vehicles on the roadway by
transmitting electromagnetic radar signals through the air. The
signals are bounced off vehicles in their paths and part of the signal
is returned to the radar detection device. The returned signals are
then processed to determine traffic parameters.
(2) Material: The dilemma zone protection system is to be the
SmartSensor HD as manufactured by Wavetronix. Include a radar
sensor for each approach specified, "Click!" modules, software,
cables, mounting hardware, and all necessary items to provide a
fully functional dilemma zone system. Provide lighting surge
protection that meets or exceeds the EN 61000-4-5 Class 4
specifications shall be installed no farther than 60 feet along the
radar detector cable from the radar detector unit. To ensure the
continued operation of the radar detector in the presence of
electrical surges, all connections to the radar detector shall be
protected, including power, RS-232, RS-485 communication lines
and ground.
(3) Mount the F aluminum NEMA 4X junction box within 60 feet of the
radar sensor five feet to six feet above the ground. A standard
police key shall access the Type F cabinet. Mount the cabinet on a
side of the pole so that it does not interfere with pedestrian traffic
along a sidewalk and/or curb ramp.
(4) Construction: Install and program the Wavetronix radar system in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. Determine the
exact location of the radar detectors with a representative of the
supplier in the field before installation. In the presence of the
Township Traffic Engineer and PennDOT, review the programmed
zones for each radar unit including the programmed speeds and
distances for each zone. PennDOT and the Township Traffic
Engineer must approve the detection zones and dilemma zones.
Modify and/or add additional zones as directed by the Engineer.
(5) Provide a manufacturer's technical representative to attend the
final inspection field meeting. A manufacturer's technical
representative shall be available to assist with the physical
installation, alignment and autocalibration of each supplied radar
detector. Technical support and training shall be provided to the
Township thereafter to assist with troubleshooting, maintenance,
or replacement of devices should such services be required for a
period of 180 days after successfully completing the thirty-day
operational test. The radar detector shall be warrantied to be free
from material and workmanship defects for a period of five years
from date of installation.
M. Item 9956-0602: pedestrian push button.
§ D103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D103
1:634
(1) Description: Furnish and install lighted pedestrian push buttons as
manufactured by Polara Engineering, Bull Dog with latching LED
Model BDLL2-X or latest model.
(2) Material: The push buttons should be equipped with a LED
indication that is illuminated upon pedestrian actuation along with
a two-tone beep sound. Include a rigid steel extension arm banded
to the signal support pole, when required to satisfy the maximum
ten-inch lateral reach requirement in PennDOT's RC-67M
standards.
(3) Construction: The push button shall be installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's recommendations. The latching push button
control unit and all other required equipment shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
N. Item Number 9957-0001: voice-grade modem (with phone drop if
specified on plans).
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installation of a localshelf-
mounted, stand-alone voice-grade modem, and if specified on
the plans, a phone drop for communication with a central
monitoring station.
(2) Material: Provide a shelf-mounted, stand-alone voice-grade modem
capable of operating at a minimum baud rate of 56,000 bps as
manufactured by Econolite. If a master controller is required for
communication between the voice-grade modem and the controller
assembly, it shall be incidental to this item. If a phone drop is
specified on the construction plan, then the contractor shall
coordinate with the Township to establish service at the controller
assembly.
(3) Construction: Follow manufacturer's directions for installation. If a
phone drop is required, the contractor is responsible for scheduling
the installation of the phone line for the Township.
O. Item 9957-0313: communications cable, fiber optic, single mode 12
fibers.
(1) Description: Sections 950.1, 957.1, and as follows:
(a) This work is the furnishing and installation of cable and
hardware to provide communications between the central
computer system and at the local controllers, as shown on the
interconnect plan. This work also includes all equipment
needed to determine splice losses, attenuation losses, cable
integrity and fiber distance data.
(2) Material: Section 957.2 and as follows:
(a) Furnish a lightning proof, single-mode, twelve-fiber, fiber optic
cable which conforms to the applicable requirements of the
§ D103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D103
1:635
latest publications of Electronic Industries, Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association (EIA/TIA) and Rural
Electrification Agency (REA) PE-90 and as follows:
(b) Fiber specifications:
[1] Core diameter: eight microns to 10 microns.
[2] Cladding diameter: 125 microns.
[3] Attenuation: 0.40 dB/km maximum at 1,300 nm, 0.5 dB per
connector.
[4] Bandwidth: At least 10 GHz-km at 1,300 nm optical
wavelength.
[5] Preterminated or field-terminated on one end with a fiber
optic cable breakout box specified in this section.
[6] Operating temperature: -34.5°C. to 74°C.
[7] Relative humidity: not exceeding 95%, noncondensing.
(c) Cable specifications:
[1] Number of fibers: 12.
[2] Color coded with 12 different colors.
[3] Cable type: heavy-duty, loose buffer tube.
[4] Capable of withstanding a tensile load of at least 2,700
newtons during installation.
[5] Capable of withstanding a load of at least 800 newtons for
long-term application.
[6] Minimum bending radius: 152 mm (six inches).
[7] Central member: dielectric.
(d) Connectors: SC connectors.
(e) Label clearly the following information on each reel:
[1] Customer name and address.
[2] Order number.
[3] Reel number.
[4] Destination.
[5] Ship date.
[6] Manufacturer's name, address and telephone number.
§ D103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D103
1:636
[7] Manufactured date.
[8] Cable code.
[9] Length of cable (one-foot segments).
[10] Listing of color codes for fibers.
(f) Clearly tag the fiber optic cable upon installation every utility
pole as follows:
Fiber Optic Communications Cable
Property of Towamencin Township
Phone Number (215) 368-7602
(g) Outside plant cables conform to the requirements of Rural
Electrification Administration Specification – "REA
Specification for Totally Filled Fiber Optic Cable, PE-90."
(h) Provide cable characteristics suitable for underground and
aerial installations. Cable installed to be installed in a
continuous run from patch panel to patch panel, with no
splices.
(i) Furnish and install a traceable conductor located in the
interconnect conduit that contains fiber optic cable to assist
the Township in locating the underground conduit in the
future. Do not install the conductor to form a continuous
circuit.
(3) Construction: Section 957.3 and as follows:
(a) Conduct tests on the fiber optic cable at the project site in the
presence of the Township Traffic Engineer as follows:
[1] Test the cable with a calibrated power meter/light source
unit pair that is portable, battery operated, and allows
quick field changes of adapters for "SC" and "ST" type
connectors.
[2] Unit utilized to meet or exceed the parameters outlined
above for single-mode fiber.
[3] Test the cable with a field unit optical time domain
reflectometer (OTDR) for operation on single-mode fiber
(8-10/125 micron meter) at 1,300 nm wavelength, to meet
or exceed the parameters outlined above.
P. Item Number 9957-0315: fiber optic fan-out kit.
(1) Description: This work is the furnishing and installation of the fiber
optic hardware to provide communications at the controller
location.
§ D103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D103
1:637
(2) Materials: As follows:
(a) Fiber optic fan-out kit.
[1] Furnish a factory- or field-installed mountable fiber optic
cable fan-out kit with a capacity for full splice storage and
connect functions for the number of fibers in the fiber
optic cable that are being terminated and meeting the
following requirements:
[2] Provide transition from the fiber optic cables to individual
fibers using fusion splices as specified in this section.
[3] Provide, on the outside surface of breakout box, the same
number of SC-type female optical connectors as that of
number of fibers in the fiber optic cable that are being
terminated, in order to plug in jumper cables that connect
to the equipment.
[a] Connector insertion loss: plus or minus 0.25 dB.
[b] Provide a removable top panel to protect the splices
and pigtails in the breakout box.
[c] Maximum height of the breakout box: plus or minus
1.75 inches.
[d] Provide rack-mounted breakout boxes in all the
cabinets in which fiber optic cable is terminated.
(b) Fiber optic jumper cable.
[1] Furnish simplex or duplex fiber optic jumper cables, as
required, meeting the following requirements:
[2] Terminated with SC-type connectors.
(3) Construction: As follows:
(a) Follow manufacturer's directions for installation.
Q. Item Number 996x-xxxx: thermoplastic pavement markings.
(1) Description: This work is the application of thermoplastic
pavement markings and/or legends of the type indicated on the
approved traffic signal construction plan.
(2) Materials: As follows:
(a) White and yellow reflective thermoplastic striping material – as
provided by an approved manufacturer listed in PennDOT
Bulletin 15 and conforming to AASHTO M 249 (most recent
revision).
(b) Glass beads – AASHTO M 247, Type I (most recent revision).
§ D103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § D103
1:638
(3) Construction: Sections 961.3(d), 962.3 and as follows:
(a) Thermoplastic is to be used for all stop bars, crosswalks,
legends, and arrows shown on the approved traffic signal
permit plan.
(b) The material shall be applied on dry pavement when the air
temperature is between 40°F. and 90°F., and when the wind
speed is less than 20 mph. The road surface shall be
satisfactorily cleaned and pretreated as required for material
adhesion prior to placement of any material. A tolerance of
one-half inch plus or minus from the specified width shall be
allowed provided the variation is gradual and does not detract
from the general appearance.
(c) After the application of thermoplastic material, protect the
markings from traffic for a minimum period of 10 minutes or
until the thermoplastic has dried sufficiently to prevent dirt
pick-up or tracking.
R. Item Number 996x-xxxx: epoxy resin pavement markings.
(1) Description: This work is the application of a reflectorized, twocomponent
epoxy resin pavement markings and/or legends of the
type indicated on the approved traffic signal construction plan.
(2) Material: As follows:
(a) Epoxy resin material – use only epoxy resins and pigments
from an approved manufacturer listed in Bulletin 15.
Composition Percentage by Weight
White
Titanium dioxide 20% ± 2 (ASTM D476 Type II)
Epoxy resins 80% ± 2
Yellow
Chrome yellow 25% ± 2 (ASTM D211 Type III)
Epoxy resins 75% ± 2
(b) Dry (cure) to a no-track condition in 15 minutes or less when
installed at temperatures above 50°F. at a thickness of fifteenmil
and reflectorized with glass beads.
(c) Furnish the Township Traffic Engineer with a copy of the
manufacturer specifications for the proper mix ratios of the
epoxy component, proper temperatures, proper mixing
techniques, and any other necessary data to insure that the
epoxy material is being properly installed.
(d) Glass beads – AASHTO M 247, Type I (most recent revision).
§ D103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D103
1:639
Chapter 139
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
(3) Construction: Sections 961.3(d), 962.3 and as follows:
(a) Epoxy resin pavement markings to be used for all long lines
and twenty-four-inch transverse hatch markings shown on the
approved traffic signal permit plan.
(b) The road surface shall be satisfactorily cleaned and pretreated
as required for material adhesion prior to placement of any
material. Uniformly apply the epoxy resin markings with a
minimum cross section of 15 mils. A tolerance of one-half inch
plus or minus from the specified width shall be allowed
provided the variation is gradual and does not detract from the
general appearance. Conduct epoxy installations only when the
road surface temperature is 50°F. or higher. Apply glass beads
immediately after application of the epoxy resin at a minimum
of 25 pounds per gallon of epoxy. Uniformly distribute glass
beads on surface.
(c) After the application of epoxy material and glass beads, protect
the markings from traffic for a minimum period of 30 minutes
or until the epoxy has dried sufficiently to prevent dirt pick-up
or tracking.
S. Item Number 9931-0001: post-mounted signs.
(1) Description: Section 931.1 and as follows. All post-mounted signs
shall be steel square posts. Lap splice channel bar posts are not
accepted.
(2) Materials: Section 931.2.
(3) Construction: Section 931.3 and as follows:
(a) Post-mounted signs shall be installed in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 111, Traffic Control Signing Standards –
TC-7000 series, latest edition.
(b) For signs installed in concrete, they shall be installed in a PVC
sleeve in the concrete to allow for easy replacement.
§ D103 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 139-1
1:640
§ 139-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation, whether profit or nonprofit.
SWIMMING POOL — Any artificial excavation created by grading earth or
enclosure intended or utilized for storage of water for bathing or swimming
purposes in which the depth of water stored therein above or below ground
level exceeds two feet in depth.
§ 139-2. Permit required for construction.
It shall be unlawful for any person desiring to construct or erect a swimming
pool to commence construction thereof until a permit shall have first been
obtained from the Zoning Officer of Towamencin Township.
§ 139-3. Registration of existing pools.
Within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter, all persons who
presently maintain a swimming pool within the Township of Towamencin
shall register such fact with the Township Zoning Officer on a form to be
supplied for this purpose.
§ 139-4. Enclosure of pools; certificates of approval.
No person presently maintaining a swimming pool within the Township
of Towamencin and within 300 feet of any property line of the property
on which it is located shall continue to maintain such pool unless access
to the same shall be restricted by protective fencing, protective plantings
or such other impediments as shall be approved by the Zoning Officer
upon recommendation of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Towamencin, after registration. Approval, if granted, shall be evidenced
by a certificate of approval issued by the Township Zoning Officer. Such
certificate of approval shall be revocable in the event the enclosure no
longer provides reasonable protection.
§ 139-5. Time for enclosure.
The enclosure of existing facilities as provided for in § 139-4 hereof shall
be accomplished within 60 days of the date of notification issued by the
Township Zoning Officer that facilities existing as of the date of registration
are inadequate. Said notification shall further set forth the minimum
facilities acceptable to the Township.
§ 139-6. Fencing requirements. [Amended 6-7-1965 by Ord. No. 30;
10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 14-12]
A. No person shall henceforth construct a swimming pool or maintain a
swimming pool constructed hereafter within the Township of
§ 139-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-6
1:641
Towamencin and within 300 feet of any property line of the property on
which it is located unless the same shall be entirely surrounded by a
substantial wire mesh or solid fence not less than 48 inches nor more
than six feet in height and which shall contain no vertical interspace of
more than two inches, except as hereinafter set forth, and no horizontal
rail or component or ornament on the outside or inside usable as a
footstep and which shall satisfy the minimum requirements:
(1) Wood picket: three-fourths-inch stock, vertical interspace of three
inches.
(2) Iron picket: from one-half-inch bar stock, vertical interspace of four
inches.
(3) Chain link. Vertical chains shall be No. 11 gauge minimum wire and
a maximum of two inches apart.
(4) Woven or other solid fence. Strength shall be equivalent to one of
the foregoing, satisfactory to the Zoning Officer.
(5) All gates in such fence shall be secured by a lock when the owner or
tenant is absent from the premises and by an effective safety latch
at all other times.
(6) A dwelling or accessory building may be used as a part of the
required enclosure.
B. Exception. Aboveground pools shall be exempt from fencing
requirements if they meet the following requirements:
(1) Pool walls shall be 48 inches high, and the vertical distance of the
top of pool wall structures to the nearest horizontal surface,
whether it be the ground or nearby retention structures, decks or
walkways, must be 48 inches or greater. (NOTE: No retaining wall,
deck or other structure with horizontal surface may be located less
than six feet horizontally from the pool wall without at least a fortyeight-
inch-high insurmountable barrier and/or locking gate
preventing access from such a structure/surface to the surface of
the pool.)
(2) Ladders must be removed and secured away from the pool when
not in use.
(3) Ladders affixed to the pool must have a locking feature.
(4) It shall be required that all aboveground pools have an
insurmountable barrier of 48 inches around the entire perimeter of
the pool, with locking gates (48 inches high) at all points of access
to the pool.
§ 139-6 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 139-7
1:642
§ 139-7. Application for permit.
All applications for permits shall be made in writing, in duplicate, and shall
include plans, drawings or other data as may be required by the Zoning
Officer and shall satisfactorily indicate the method of fencing the facility. A
fee shall be chargeable for all permits in accordance with a schedule to be
adopted by the Board of Supervisors.187
§ 139-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $300 and costs of prosecution, and in default of payments
thereof, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days in the Montgomery
County Jail. Each day's continuance of the violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 143
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Ch. 35.
Fees — See Ch. 76.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Zoning — See Ch. 153.
187. Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Fees.
§ 139-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-8
1:643

ARTICLE I
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-11188]
§ 143-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 12
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS OR HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female, and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business
profession or other activity as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1251. § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area with in the corporate limits of the
Township of Towamencin.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 143-2 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
188. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. I, Emergency and Municipal Services
Tax, adopted 11-26-1973 by Ord. No. 73-9, as amended Nothing herein shall be construed
to repeal the imposition and collection of an occupation privilege tax, plus applicable
penalties and interest, for calendar year 2005 and all prior calendar years, or of an
emergency and municipal services tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar
years 2006 and 2007, as the same exist prior to this amendment.
§ 143-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-2
1:645
§ 143-2. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Towamencin
Township during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that
year in the amount of $52 assessed on a pro rata basis in accordance with
the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the following
purposes as the same may be allocated by the Board of Supervisors from
time to time: emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services; road construction and/or
maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85. Subch. F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political subdivision.
The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year,
irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a person
may be employed.
§ 143-3. Exemption and refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
§ 143-2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-3
1:646
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring, The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax. Upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year employer shall withhold the
local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2) a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
§ 143-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-3
1:647
§ 143-4. Duty of employers to collect.
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Township, in consultation with the Collector and DCED,
shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims for any
tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which procedures
shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal law relating
to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments. Refunds
made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day
the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of the
calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Township or the Collector shall determine eligibility
for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision is hereby charged with the duty
of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each pay roll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll
period basis for each pay roll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each pay roll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
§ 143-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-4
1:648
§ 143-5. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 143-6. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the thirtieth day following the
end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 143-7. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the thirtieth day following the end of each quarter.
§ 143-8. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or plates of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 143-3 of this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 143-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-8
1:649
§ 143-9. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 143-10. Administration of tax.
A. The sites of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation that is
concurrent employment or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
pay merits of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer of self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered
subject to municipal approval to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
§ 143-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-10
1:650
§ 143-11. Suits for collection.
§ 143-12. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of an employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 143-13. Saving clause.
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or if no return was made to ascertain the tax due.
Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the Collector the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefore shall in addition be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
§ 143-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-13
1:651
§ 143-14. Effective date.
The tax imposed by this article shall be effective on January 1, 2008, and all
calendar years thereafter unless repealed or modified by ordinance of the
Township.
§ 143-15. (Reserved)
Pennsylvania as to any individual the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 143-13 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-15
1:652
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)189
§ 143-16. through § 143-20. (Reserved)
189. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Construction Tax, adopted 1-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-1, was
repealed 4-23-2008 by Ord. No. 08-01.
§ 143-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-16
1:653

ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-24-1988 by Ord. No. 88-3]
§ 143-21. Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Amendment to Real
Estate Transfer Tax Ordinance of Third Day of January 1955."
§ 143-22. Authority.
This realty transfer tax is levied under the authority of Article XI-D, entitled
"Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," of the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer
Tax Act, which is a new article added by Act 77-1986 (Act of July 2, 1986,
No. 77, P.L. 318) to the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer Act, Act 14-1981
(Act of May 5, 1981, No. 14, P.L. 36), as amended. The Pennsylvania Real
Estate Transfer Tax Act is codified as 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. and Article
XI-D is codified as 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 143-23. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form
of unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more
persons other than a private trust or descendant's estate.
COLLECTOR — The Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby appointed "collector' of the tax levied by this
article.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory or
foreign country or dependency.
DISTRICT — All that certain area situate within Towamencin Township
and known as "Towamencin Township."
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys,
transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise
of title to real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of
trust or other instruments of like character given as security for a debt
and deeds of release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the
legal title does not pass to the grantee until the total consideration
specified in the contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof
unless the consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding 30
years or instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility
easement. Document shall also include a declaration of acquisition
required to be presented for recording under § 143-29 of this article.
§ 143-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-23
1:655
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75%
of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least
75% of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by
members of the same family. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers or sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment,
or both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is
primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real
estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or
fewer persons and which:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
(1)
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
(2)
(3) Fur-farming;
(4) Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
(5) Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within this commonwealth,
including without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance
of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and
equipment in an industrial plant.
(1)
(2) A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or
occupancy agreement.
(3)
§ 143-23 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-23
1:656
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TOWNSHIP — Towamencin Township.
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
TRANSFER — Any transaction, act, settlement, proceeding or process
whereby all or part of the interest in any lands, tenements,
hereditaments or other real property situate wholly or partially within
the Township shall, by document, be transferred, conveyed, assigned or
otherwise vested.
VALUE: —
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate; or
(1)
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of
the value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible
assets which are freely transferable and actively traded on an
established market.
(2)
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time,
the termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific
number of years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee
simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold; or
(1)
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of
a right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of
a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple,
life estate or perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation,
a leasehold interest or possessory interest under a lease or
occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold
interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has
equity. In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that
a right or option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the
rental charged to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating
the rental charge is established.
(2)
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length
for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration
therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances
thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby,
whether or not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and
ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where such liens
or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are
charged against others' real estate, provided that where such
documents shall set forth a nominal consideration, the value
thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual
consideration for the contract of sale;
(1)
§ 143-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-23
1:657
§ 143-24. Imposition of tax. [Amended 11-29-2006 by Ord. No.
06-07]
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon
the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions
without consideration or for consideration less than the actual
monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy
agreement, a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of
properties or the real estate of an acquired company, the actual
monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting the
assessed value of the real estate for local real estate purposes for
the common level ratio or assessed values to market values of the
taxing district as established by the State Tax Equalization Board,
or a commensurate part of the assessment where the assessment
includes other real estate;
(2)
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value
of which is not determinable under Subsection (1) or (2), the actual
monetary worth of such interest; or
(3)
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures
or other permanent improvements to real estate between the
grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not
removed thereby or between the grantor, the agent or principal of
the grantor or a related corporation, association or partnership and
the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
(4)
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and neuter.
A. Towamencin Township adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized
under that Article subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax
imposed under this section shall be at the rate of 1/2 of 1%.
B. The tax imposed under Subsection A and all applicable interest and
penalties shall be administered, collected, and enforced under the Act
of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, known as the
"Local Tax Enabling Act"), provided that if the correct amount of the tax
is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, Towamencin
Township, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971
(72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect, and enforce
the tax, interest, and penalties.
C. Any tax imposed under Subsection A that is not paid by the date the tax
is due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent
municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53
P.S. § 7101, et seq.), as amended known as the "Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate
§ 143-23 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-24
1:658
§ 143-25. Evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by the
collector affixing on the document an official stamp or a writing setting forth
the date of payment of the tax and the amount of tax paid.
§ 143-26. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 143-27. Excluded transactions.
imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in Section
806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as
amended, known as the "Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate
permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the commonwealth is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at sheriff's sale or
Tax Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms the transfer previously recorded, but which does not
extend or limit existing record, legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties takes shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
§ 143-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-27
1:659
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband and wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of
a brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or
the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by
the grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transaction for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of
an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this section.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department190 reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
190. Editor's Note: "Department" refers to the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.
§ 143-27 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-27
1:660
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to the nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conservation, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations to other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used for such transfer or for
commercial purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 5O1(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
and which has, as its primary purpose, preservation of land for
historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open-space
opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof. In order to exercise any
exclusion provided in this section, the true, full and complete value
of the transfer shall be shown on the statement value. For leases of
coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of value may be
limited to an explanation of the reason such document is not
subject to tax under this article.
§ 143-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-27
1:661
§ 143-28. Transfers between associations or corporations and
members.
Except as otherwise provided in § 143-27, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 143-29. Acquired companies.
§ 143-30. Credits against tax.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation for the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an "acquired company" upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes, has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an "acquired company" when, because of voluntary
or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition to the collector for recording for the
affixation of documentary stamps evidencing payment of the tax. Such
declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings in the
acquired company in the Township.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
§ 143-27 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-30
1:662
§ 143-31. Statement of value; violations and penalties.
§ 143-32. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the demise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contact by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
A. Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the
true, full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a
statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with the
transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and
complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not
subject to tax under this article. The provision of this subsection shall
not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from
taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented for
the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the
document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting
forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why
such document is not subject to tax under this article. Evidence of
payment shall be affixed to the original document and the certified copy.
The certified copy and statement of value shall be filed with the
collector.
B. If the Recorder of Deeds should record any document upon which taxes
are imposed by this article without the proper document or
accompanied statement of value he shall, upon summary conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $300 and costs of prosecution.
A. Make, execute, deliver, accept or present for recording or cause to be
made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording any
document without the fall amount of the tax thereon being duly paid.
§ 143-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-32
1:663
§ 143-33. Violations and penalties.
B. Make use of any documentary stamp to denote payment of any tax
imposed by this article without canceling such stamp as required by
this article or as prescribed by the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate other provisions of this
article or any rules and regulations promulgated by the Township under
this article or any rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue to the extent they are applicable to the tax levied hereunder.
D. Fail to record a declaration of acquisition as required by this article.
E. Fraudulently cut, tear or remove from a document any documentary
stamp.
F. Fraudulently affix to any document upon which tax is imposed by this
article any documentary stamp which has been cut, torn or removed
from any other document upon which tax is imposed by this article or
any documentary stamp of insufficient value or any forged or
counterfeited stamp or any impression of any forged or counterfeited
stamp, die, plate or other article.
G. Willfully remove or alter the cancellation marks of any documentary
stamp, or restore any such documentary stamp, with the intent to use
or cause the same to be used after it has already been used, or
knowingly buy, sell, offer for sale or give away any such altered or
restored stamp to any person for use, or knowingly use the same.
H. Knowingly have in his possession any altered or restored documentary
stamp which has been removed from any document upon which tax is
imposed by this article, provided that the possession of such stamps
shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to violate the provisions of
this subsection.
I. Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in his
possession any forged or counterfeited documentary stamps.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of § 143-32A through D of
this article shall be guilty of a summary offense.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of § 143-32E through I of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
C. Any person who makes a false statement of value or declaration of
acquisition when he does not believe the statement or declaration to be
true is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
D. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
§ 143-32 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-33
1:664
§ 143-34. Lien for delinquent taxes.
E. In the case of failure of any acquired company to record a declaration of
acquisition as required by this article unless it can be shown that such
failure is due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of
the amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month with
an additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
F. A penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the unpaid tax per month or fraction of a
month, not to exceed 25% of the aggregate, is imposed for failure to pay
the tax on time. Interest, per annum, shall be imposed and calculated at
a rate equal to the rate imposed and adjusted from time to time by the
United States government upon delinquent taxpayers.
G. All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest from the due
date, shall be recovered as other debts of like character are recovered.
H. In addition, at the discretion of the court, any person liable for payment
of the tax shall also he liable for reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by
the Township in the prosecution of a suit if such is utilized to collect this
tax.
A. Any tax determined to be due and remaining unpaid after demand for
the same and all penalties and interest thereon shall be a lien, in favor
of the Township, upon the property, both real and personal, of such
person, but only after said lien has been entered and docketed on
record by the Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas having
jurisdiction as permitted and provided by law.
B. At any time after a determination of additional tax, penalty or interest is
made, certified copies of all liens for such taxes, penalties and interest
shall be transmitted to the Prothonotary, and it shall be the duty of the
Prothonotary to enter and docket the same on record in his office,
which lien shall be indexed as judgments are not indexed. After the
determination becomes final, a writ of execution may directly issue
upon such lien without the issuance and prosecution to judgment to
issue writ of scire facias, provided that not less than 10 days before
issuance of any execution on the lien notice shall be sent by certified
mail to the taxpayer at his last known post office address. No
Prothonotary shall require as a condition precedent to the entry of such
liens the payment of any costs incident thereto.
C. The lien imposed hereunder shall have priority from the date of its
recording, as aforesaid, and shall be fully paid and satisfied out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of property subject thereto before any
other obligation, judgment, claim, lien or estate to which said property
may subsequently become subject, except costs of the sale and of the
writ upon which the sale was made and real estate taxes and municipal
claims against such property, but shall be subordinate to mortgages and
other liens existing and duly recorded or entered of record prior to the
§ 143-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-34
1:665
§ 143-35. Proceeds of sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and shall have priority out of
the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of sale and of the writ upon which the
sale is made, and the sheriff or other officer conducting said sale shall pay
the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 143-36. Enforcement.
§ 143-37. Collector.
recording of the tax lien. In the case of a judicial sale of property
subject to a lien imposed hereunder upon a lien or claim over which
the lien imposed hereunder has priority, as aforesaid, such sale shall
discharge the lien imposed hereunder to the extent only that the
proceeds are applied to its payment, and such lines shall continue in
full force and effect as to the balance remaining unpaid. If the proceeds
of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the
purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
D. The lien imposed hereunder shall continue for five years from the date
of its entry on record and may be renewed and continued in the manner
now or hereafter provided for the renewal of judgments.
E. The tax may also be collected by suit in assumpsit from any or all of the
parties to the transfer, who shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
A. In order to determine whether the proper amount of tax has been paid,
without limiting any other rights of the Township, the Township shall
have the right to review all documents or records relating to any real
estate transaction or any related transactions and to take such other
steps as the Township shall deem necessary or appropriate, including a
review or audit of any documents or records of any party to a real estate
transaction, to determine the fair market value of the real estate or any
other relevant matter, as determined by the Township. Upon request of
the Township and at such place and time as specified by the Township,
any party shall make available to the Township any documents or
records requested by the Township.
B. In the event that any tax is not paid when due, the Township may
enforce payment of the tax, together with all penalties, by suit in
assumpsit or any other appropriate means.
A. The Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County shall be the collection
agent for this tax, as provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, without
compensation from the Township.
§ 143-34 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-37
1:666
§ 143-38. Rules and regulations.
The Township may promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and
regulations for the interpretation, collection and enforcement of the tax.
§ 143-39. Interpretation.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the collector shall not
accept for recording any document unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each political
subdivision.
C. On or before the 10th day of each month, the collector shall pay over to
the Township all taxes collected under this article, less 2% for use of the
county, and shall also provide a report containing the information
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections
of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. In accordance with Act 77-1986, any Recorder of Deeds who shall
record any document upon which tax is imposed under this article
without payment of taxes required by this article, as is indicated in the
document or accompanying statement of value, shall, upon summary
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs of prosecution.
A. To the extent this article imposes a tax on a real estate transaction
which is subject to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax imposed by Act 77-1986 and to the extent not inconsistent herewith
or with rules or regulations adopted by the Township, this article shall
be interpreted in the same manner as Act 77-1986 in accordance with
the regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances enforced immediately prior to adoption of this article, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new
enactments.
C. This article is intended to supplement the realty transfer tax in effect
prior to adoption of this article by imposing a tax on real estate
transactions not covered by prior ordinances and now taxable under
Act 77-1986. This article shall impose a tax on all transactions taxable
under ordinances levying a realty transfer tax in force immediately
prior to adoption of this article, and also on all transactions which the
Township is permitted to tax under Act 77-1986 to the fullest extent
possible.
D. To the extent the provisions of this article tax real estate transactions
taxable under ordinances levying a realty transfer tax in force
immediately prior to adoption of this article, this article shall supersede
said prior ordinances.
§ 143-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-39
1:667
E. In the event that this article is,declared invalid, the prior ordinance or
ordinances of the Township levying a realty transfer tax shall remain in
full force and effect and shall not be affected in any way by adoption of
this article.
F. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under
the authority of any ordinance in force prior to adoption of this article.
§ 143-39 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-39
1:668
ARTICLE IV
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax191
[Adopted 10-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-7; amended in its entirety
10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 11-08192]
§ 143-40. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the Tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Towamencin Township.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of Tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or
reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
THIS ENACTMENT — This article.
§ 143-41. Imposition of tax; rate. [Amended 12-26-2018 by Ord. No.
18-07193]
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority, subject to
§ 143-41D below.
191. Editor's Note: Former Article IV, Per Capita Tax, adopted 3-29-1989 by Ord. No. 89-3, was
repealed 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-14.
192. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2012.
193. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it shall be effective on 1-1-2019 and be
applicable to earned income and net profits on or after 1-1-2019.
§ 143-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-41
1:669
§ 143-42. Exemption.
Any person whose total income from all sources is less than $5,000 per
annum shall be exempt from this earned income and net profits tax upon
processing a claim for exemption with the officer pursuant to rules and
regulations of the Township of Towamencin Board and/or the officer.
§ 143-43. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of
the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity, of
any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority,
subject to § 143-41E below.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1%.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the taxing authority based on
the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations; and with policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by
the collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937.
§ 143-41 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-44
1:670
§ 143-44. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit the tax, and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 143-45. List of occupants.
The owner of an apartment house or rental unit located in the Township of
Towamencin or the authorized representative of the owner shall submit to
the Township Manager a list of the occupants, consisting of the names and
apartment designations, of all persons 18 years of age and older residing
in the apartment house or rental unit and who are not transient occupants.
The list shall be submitted within 60 days from December 31 and shall be
updated quarterly thereafter every April 1, July 1, October 1 and January 1.
§ 143-46. Collection of tax.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
§ 143-47. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 143-48. Purpose; effect on prior provisions.
The primary purpose of this enactment is to conform the earned income
and net profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame
required by Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income
or net profits of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read
as stated in this enactment. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior
enactment conflicting with the provisions of this enactment is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in
force immediately prior to adoption of this enactment, the provisions of
this enactment are intended as a continuation of such prior enactment and
not as a new enactment. If this enactment is declared invalid, any prior
enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall
not be affected by adoption of this enactment. If any part of this enactment
is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior enactment levying a similar
tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
enactment. The provisions of this enactment shall not affect any act done
or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish an
offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to adoption
of this enactment. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, this
enactment shall amend and restate on the effective date194 any enactment
194. Editor's Note: See definition of "effective date" in § 143-40.
§ 143-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-48
1:671
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the effective date.
§ 143-48 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-48
1:672
ARTICLE V
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
[Adopted 1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-01195]
§ 143-49. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT or LERTA — Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act of the
Commonwealth, 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq., as amended.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Towamencin Township Board of
Supervisors.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY — County of Montgomery, Pennsylvania, acting by and through its
Board of County Commissioners, or acting by and through its authorized
representatives.
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY — The property within the Township identified in this
article and attached as Exhibit A.196
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction, or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating an industrial,
commercial or other business located on the eligible property and owned
by an individual, association or corporation so that it becomes habitable
or attains higher standards of safety, health, economic use or amenity, or
is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing
such standards; "improvements" does not include any ordinary upkeep or
maintenance.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITIES — Towamencin Township, Montgomery
County, and the North Penn School District.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, municipal authority, or other group or entity.
SCHOOL DISTRICT — North Penn School District, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, acting by its Board of School Directors, or acting by and
through its authorized representatives.
TOWNSHIP — Towamencin Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
acting by and through its Board of Supervisors, or acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
§ 143-50. Eligible property.
The Township hereby designates the following property as a "deteriorated
area" determined within the meaning of the Act, and one in which the Local
195. Editor's Note: This article was originally adopted as Ch. 154 but was renumbered to
maintain the organization of the Code.
196. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 143-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-50
1:673
Taxing Authorities may grant a tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of
the Act: 1758 Allentown Road as more specifically described on Exhibit A.197
§ 143-51. Exemption amount.
§ 143-52. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
A. The eligible property is hereby exempted from all real estate property
taxes, that portion of additional assessment attributable to the actual
costs of new improvements to the eligible property for which proper
application has been made in accordance with this article.
B. The exemptions authorized by this article shall be in accordance with
the standard exemption schedule under § 143-51C subject to provisions
and limitations hereinafter set forth.
C. The schedule of real property taxes to be exempted shall be in
accordance with the following percentage of the assessed valuation of
new improvements to the eligible property:
Standard Exemption Schedule
Tax Year(s) Following
Completion of Construction
Exemption Portion of
Increased Assessed Valuation
1 100%
2 90%
3 80%
4 70%
5 60%
6 50%
7 40%
8 30%
9 20%
10 10%
D. A tax exemption granted under this article shall not terminate upon the
sale or exchange of the eligible property.
A. If the owner of the eligible property desires tax exemption pursuant to
this article, said owner shall apply in writing for such exemption on a
form to be provided by the Township at the principal office of the
Township, and must be received by the Township within 60 days
following the date of issuance of a building permit for any new
improvements.
197. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 143-50 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-52
1:674
§ 143-53. Disqualification.
B. The Township shall make available to the owner of said eligible
property desiring to apply for tax exemption in accordance with this
article an application form (the "application") which shall require such
person to supply the following information:
(1) The name of the owner or owners of the eligible property;
(2) The location of the eligible property, including the tax parcel
identification number assigned to such property for real property
tax purposes;
(3) The type of new improvements to be made on the eligible property
(industrial, commercial or other business);
(4) The nature of the improvements to be made on the eligible
property;
(5) The date on which the relevant building permit was issued, the date
on which construction commenced or the estimated date on which
it shall commence;
(6) The cost or estimated cost of the new improvements;
(7) Whether the eligible property has been condemned by any
governmental body for noncompliance with laws or ordinances;
and
(8) Such additional information as the Township may reasonably
require.
C. The appropriate official of the Township shall forward a copy of such
completed application to the County and school district within 30 days
following the date on which such application is filed.
D. The cost of new improvements to be exempted and the schedule of
taxes exempted at the time of an initial request for tax exemption made
in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be applicable to
that exemption request, and any subsequent amendment to this article,
if any, shall not apply to applications filed with the Township prior to
their adoption.
E. The Township may reject an application that is incomplete or fails to
provide any of the information required under this article.
A. If the property owner of the eligible property elects to appeal the
assessed value of the property under LERTA during any exemption
period granted, said property shall be disqualified from participation in
the LERTA Program upon the filing of such an appeal to the Board of
Assessment.
§ 143-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-53
1:675
§ 143-54. Expiration.
The provisions of this article shall expire upon the fifth anniversary of its
enactment, unless extended by ordinance duly adopted. Any property tax
exemptions granted under the provisions of this article shall be permitted
to continue according to the exemption schedule even if this article expires
or is repealed.
§ 143-55. Appeals.
Appeals from the reassessment and the amounts eligible for exemption
under this article may be taken by the taxpayer or the local taxing
authorities as provided by law.
B. If the property owner of the eligible property fails to pay when due any
and all nonexempt real estate taxes together with water/sewer rents
relating the property's participation in the LERTA Program, said failure
shall result in the property's disqualification from participation in the
LERTA Program.
C. Any other matter that is determined by the Township to be in
contravention of this article shall result in disqualification from
participation in the LERTA Program.
§ 143-53 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 143-55
1:676
Chapter 147
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles, motorized — See Ch. 149.
§ 143-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-55
1:677

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-14-1982 by Ord. No. 82-9]
§ 147-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 147-2. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 147-3. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as amended,
enacted or reenacted, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. The Manager and Police Department shall have the following powers to
regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Manager and Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of such regulation, shall, upon summary conviction thereof, be
liable to the penalties as hereinafter set forth in this article.
A. The Manager and Police Department may, from time to time, designate
places upon and along the highways in the Township where, for a period
of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall
designate such locations by proper signs and markings. Such
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective as if
specified in this article. No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle
or tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction,
and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or
marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section.
§ 147-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-3
1:679
§ 147-4. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the police officers of Towamencin
Township, who are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways
and intersections of the Township in accordance with the provisions of this
article and the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code and applicable regulations.
§ 147-4.1. Authority to designate towing and storage agent. [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-04]
Section 6309.2 of the Vehicle Code requires local law enforcement officers
to immobilize motor vehicles under certain circumstances as set forth
therein. Section 6309.2 of the Vehicle Code further authorizes local
municipalities to designate a towing and storage agent for the towing and
storage of vehicles immobilized pursuant to that Section.
§ 147-4.2. Designation of towing and storage agent. [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-04]
The Board of Supervisors shall, from time to time by resolution, designate
approved towing and storage facilities for the towing and storage of
vehicles pursuant to this article.
§ 147-5. Speed limits.
Excepting those highways under the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or the Montgomery County
Department of Roads and Bridges, all roads, streets and highways within
Towamencin Township shall have speed limits of 25 miles per hour unless
otherwise specified by this article.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for testing and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances relative to traffic and parking.
A. [Added 9-6-1983 by Ord. No. 83-7; amended 9-29-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-7; 4-27-1994 by Ord. No. 94-3; 8-31-1994 by Ord. No.
94-9] The following highways shall have speed limits of 25 miles
per hour:
Name of Street Location
Bookbinder Way Entire length
Buckboard Way Entire length
Candlemaker Way Entire length
Cannon Way Entire length
Carriage Way Entire length
Constitution Road Entire length
Homestead Circle Entire length
§ 147-3 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-5
1:680
Name of Street Location
Knollbrook Drive Entire length
Lamplighter Way Entire length
Liberty Bell Drive Entire length
Miller Way Entire length
Millwrighter Way Entire length
Musket Circle Entire length
Painter Way Entire length
Printer Way Entire length
Sailmaker Way Entire length
Sawmill Way Entire length
Shipwrighter Way Entire length
Shoemaker Way Entire length
Spring Meadow Lane Entire length
Spring Valley Road Entire length
Springside Way Entire length
Spur Way Entire length
Stonemason Way Entire length
Tailor Way Entire length
Tanner Way Entire length
Thresher Way Entire length
Tinsmith Way Entire length
Weikel Road [Added
5-26-1999 by Ord. No.
99-4]
From Allentown Road to Orvilla Road
Woodside Circle Entire length
B. The following highways shall have speed limits of 15 miles per hour:
Location
Forge Gate Apartments property
North Penn High School property
C. The following highways shall have speed limits of 30 miles per hour:
Name of Street Location
Gristmill Drive [Added
11-24-1993 by Ord. No.
93-12]
Entire length
Kareve Drive —
§ 147-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-5
1:681
Name of Street Location
Weikel Road [Added
8-31-1994 by Ord. No.
94-9]
From Allentown Road to Orvilla Road
D. The following highways shall have speed limits of 35 miles per hour:
Name of Street Location
Anders Road Entire length
Clemens Road [Added
10-28-1987 by Ord. No.
87-15]
Entire length
Derstine Road Entire length
Fretz Road Entire length
Gehman Road [Added
3-14-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
Between Detwiler Road and Tomlinson
Road
Green Lane Road Entire length
Hedrick Road [Added
10-28-1987 by Ord. No.
87-15]
Between Kerr Road and Old Forty Foot
Road
Keeler Road Entire length
Kerr Road [Added 6-4-1984
by Ord. No. 84-4]
Between Metz Road and Hedrick Road
Kriebel Road [Added
7-9-1985 by Ord. No. 85-5;
amended 10-28-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-15]
Between Sumneytown Pike and Old
Forty Foot Road
Kulp Road [Added
10-28-1987 by Ord. No.
87-15]
Entire length
Morris Road [Added
3-22-2006 by Ord. No.
06-03]
Entire length
Old Morris Road [Added
10-28-1987 by Ord. No.
87-15]
Entire length
Quarry Road Entire length
Reiff Road Entire length
Reinert Road [Added
11-30-1994 by Ord. No.
94-12]
Entire length
Rittenhouse Road Entire length
§ 147-5 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-5
1:682
§ 147-5.1. Turns prohibited on red signal. [Added 4-17-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-2]
There shall be no turn on red permitted at the following traffic signals:
Signal on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Allentown Road [Added
9-27-1997 by Ord. No.
97-7]
North Derstine Road
Allentown Road [Added
9-27-1997 by Ord. No.
97-7]
North Fretz Road
Derstine Road [Added
9-27-1997 by Ord. No.
97-7]
— Allentown Road
Name of Street Location
Schlosser Road [Added
6-4-1984 by Ord. No. 84-4]
Between Metz Road and Hedrick Road
Snyder Road [Added
12-17-2003 by Ord. No.
03-08]
Entire length
Springer Road [Added
10-28-1987 by Ord. No.
87-15]
Entire length
Sumneytown Pike [Added
12-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-14]
From Valley Forge Road to Old Forty
Foot Road
Towamencin Avenue [Added
11-28-2001 by Ord. No.
01-8]
Entire length
Trumbauer Road [Added
10-28-1987 by Ord. No.
87-15]
Entire length
E. The following highways shall have speed limits of 40 miles per hour:
Name of Street Location
Detwiler Road198 Entire length
Wambold Road Entire length
Mainland Road [Added
3-9-2016 by Ord. No.
16-05]
Entire length
198. Editor's Note: The entry for Morris Road, which immediately followed this entry, was
superseded 3-22-2006 by Ord. No. 06-03. See now Subsection D.
§ 147-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-5.1
1:683
Signal on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Green Lane Road
[Added 12-11-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-11]
— Sumneytown Pike
Fretz Road [Added
9-27-1997 by Ord. No.
97-7]
— Allentown Road
Old Forty Foot Road
[Added 1-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-1]
— Sumneytown Pike
Orvilla Road [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-1]
— Allentown Road
Sumneytown Pike East Bustard Road
Troxel Road [Added
1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-1]
— Allentown Road
Woodlawn Drive [Added
11-27-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-14]
South Allentown Road
§ 147-5.2. Turns prohibited at intersections. [Added 9-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-03]
There shall be no turns permitted at the following intersections at the times
provided:
Turn
Restriction
on
Direction of
Travel
At
Intersection
of
Turn
Prohibited
Time of
Restriction
Allentown
Road
West Weikel Road Right 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Orvilla Road South Weikel Road Left 6:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
§ 147-6. One-way streets.
The following are hereby established as one-way streets:
Street Between
Direction of
Travel
Rittenhouse Road
[Added 9-11-2019
by Ord. No. 19-11]
Old Forty Foot Road and
Clemens Road
Westbound
§ 147-5.1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-7
1:684
§ 147-7. Stop intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position upon
the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the second-named
highway. All motor vehicles approaching any such intersection upon the
first-named highway, in the direction or directions indicated in each case,
shall come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any
such intersection in accordance with the mandates of the Motor Vehicle
Code.
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Abbey Lane Allentown Road
Abbey Lane [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Abbey Lane and Woodlawn Drive
Access Road to Township Building
[Added 4-24-1991 by Ord. No.
91-4]
Sumneytown Pike
Access Road to Township Building
[Added 4-24-1991 by Ord. No.
91-4]
Access Road to Lamplighter Plaza
Allentown Road Derstine Road
Allentown Road Fretz Road
Anders Road Kriebel Road
Anders Road Valley Forge Road
Archer Lane [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Hunter Hill Drive
Bancroft Road Valley Forge Road
Berkley Way [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Ide Drive
Berwick Place Valley Forge Road
Beth Lane [Added 4-24-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-4]
Rampart Lane
Boyd Avenue Valley Forge Road
Boyd Avenue [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Woodlawn Drive
Braddock Lane Bishop Wood Boulevard (East)
Breckenridge Place Bishop Wood Boulevard (West)
Bridal Path Drive Sumneytown Pike
Bridal Path Drive [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Wagon Wheel Lane
Bridge Road Old Forty Foot Road
§ 147-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-7
1:685
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Bromley Drive Bishop Wood Boulevard (East)
Brookside Circle [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Parkview Drive
Burgundy Way [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Reinert Road
Bustard Road Morris Road
Bustard Road [Amended
12-18-1991 by Ord. No. 91-14]
Bustard Road
Bustard Road Sumneytown Pike
Buttonwood Drive [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Bridal Path Drive
Buttonwood Drive [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Wagon Wheel Lane
Canterbury Drive Green Lane Road
Cardinal Way [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Reinert Road
Carpenter Lane [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Militia Drive
Central Drive Allentown Road
Central Drive Columbia Avenue
Cherry Lane Columbia Avenue
Cherry Lane [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Woodlawn Drive
Clemens Road Rittenhouse Road
Clemens Road Sumneytown Pike
Conestoga Lane Stonybrook Lane
Constitution Road [Added
8-31-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
Weikel Road (both directions)
Constitution [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Weikel Road (400 feet from Allentown
Road)
Constitution Road [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Weikel Road (599 feet from Orvilla
Road)
Coventry Way Kerr Road
Creek Way Morris Road
Crossbow Way [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Archer Lane
Dager Circle Bishop Wood Boulevard (East)
Deerfield Drive [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Parkview Drive
§ 147-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-7
1:686
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Delaware Avenue [Added
7-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-09]
Winding Road
Detwiler Road Forty Foot Road
Detwiler Road Gehman Road
Detwiler Road Wambold Road
Drinnon Way [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Tennis Circle
Dutchmans Circle Liberty Bell Drive
Eagle Way Reinert Road
Erie Drive [Added 4-24-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-4]
Winding Road
Erie Drive [Added 4-24-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-4]
York Avenue
Fairview Way [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Ide Drive
Fieldstone Way [Added
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 95-11]
Allentown Road
Finnel Drive Allentown Road
Finnel Drive [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Pioneer Road
Flintlock Drive Anders Road (2)
Forge Gate Apartments Snyder Road
Fretz Road Wambold Road
Green Lane Road Kriebel Road
Green Lane Road Liberty Bell Drive
Green Lane Road Morgan Way
Green Lane Road Sumneytown Pike
Gristmill Drive [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Welsh Road
Heebner Lane Forty Foot Road
Heebner Lane [Added 8-31-1988
by Ord. No. 88-11]
Tennis Circle
Hedrick Road Kerr Road
Hickory Way [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Cardinal Way
Hillside Avenue Valley Forge Road
Homestead Circle [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Sawmill Way
§ 147-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-7
1:687
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Hunter Hill Drive Valley Forge Road
Ide Drive [Added 4-24-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-4]
Canterbury Drive
Ide Drive Green Lane Road
Industrial Boulevard Wambold Road
Ivywood Way [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Canterbury Drive
Katherine Way [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Kimberly Way
Keeler Road Allentown Road
Keeler Road Quarry Road
Keeler Road Tennis Circle (2)
Keeler Road Troxell Road
Kerr Road Metz Road
Kimberly Way [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Derstine Road
Kindle Drive Ambler Lane
Kindle Drive Snyder Road
Knollbrook Drive [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Spring Valley Road (2)
Kriebel Road Bustard Road
Kriebel Road Metz Road
Kriebel Road Old Forty Foot Road
Kriebel Road Springer Road
Kriebel Road Sumneytown Pike
Kulp Road Kriebel Road
Kulp Road Old Morris Road
Lakeview Drive [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Old Morris Road
Lantern Lane [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Militia Drive
Liberty Bell Drive Bishop Wood Boulevard (East)
Liberty Bell Drive Bishop Wood Boulevard (West)
Liberty Bell Drive Bustard Road
Lisa Lane [Added 12-11-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-11]
Oxford Road
Logger Lane Bromley Drive
§ 147-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-7
1:688
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Mark Drive [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Steven Lane (2)
Meadow Glen Drive Anders Road
Meadow Glen Drive Bridal Path Drive
Michael Way [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2; amended
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 95-11]
Keeler Road
Militia Drive Allentown Road (2)
Morris Road Bustard Road
Mt. Vernon Street [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Erie Drive
Musket Circle [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Allentown Road
Musket Circle [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Musket Circle
Nash Avenue Allentown Road
Nash Avenue [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Woodlawn Drive
North Penn High School exit Snyder Road
North Penn High School exit Valley Forge Road
Oak Boulevard Columbia Avenue
Old Forde Way Green Lane Road
Old Forty Foot Road Hedrick Road
Old Forty Foot Road Sumneytown Pike
Old Morris Road Bustard Road
Old Morris Road Old Forty Foot Road
Orchard Lane Weikel Road
Oxford Road [Added 12-11-1995
by Ord. No. 95-11]
Snyder Road
Parkside Lane Liberty Bell Drive
Parkview Drive Kriebel Road
Parkview Drive [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Rampart Lane
Patricia Way [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Heebner Lane
Pheasant Hill Road Green Lake Road
Pheasant Hill Road Kriebel Road
§ 147-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-7
1:689
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Pheasant Hill Way [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Kriebel Road
Pickwick Lane [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Conestoga Lane
Pickwick Lane Troxell Road
Pioneer Road [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Nash Avenue
Pioneer Road [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Woodlawn Drive
Pross Road [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Nash Avenue
Pross Road [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Swartley Road
Quarry Road Forty Foot Road
Rampart Lane Green Lane Road
Rampart Lane Kriebel Road
Rampart Lane Pheasant Hill Road (2)
Red Oak Way [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Cardinal Way
Reiff Road Quarry Road
Reiff Road Sumneytown Pike
Reinert Road Allentown Road (2)
Reinert Road Tomlinson Road
Rittenhouse Road Bustard Road
Rittenhouse Road Old Forty Foot Road
Robin Way [Added 2-27-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-2]
Cardinal Way
Robin Way [Added 2-27-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-2]
Tomlinson Road
Sailmaker Way [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Gristmill Drive
St. Andrews Way [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Ide Drive
Salem Drive Weikel Road
Sawmill Way [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Troxell Road
Schlosser Road Hedrick Road
Schlosser Road Metz Road
§ 147-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-7
1:690
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Sherwood Way [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Canterbury Drive
Shoemaker Way [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Gristmill Drive
Snyder Road Troxell Road
Snyder Road Valley Forge Road
Specht Place [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Village Way
Springer Road Old Morris Road
Spring Meadow Lane [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Morris Road
Spring Meadow Lane [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Spring Valley Road
Springside Way [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Sawmill Way
Spring Valley Road [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Morris Road
Spring Valley Road [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Spring Meadow Lane
Spur Road [Added 2-27-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-2]
Gristmill Drive
Spur Road [Added 2-27-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-2]
Shipwrighter Way
Squires Way Creek Way
Staley Circle Bishop Wood Boulevard (West)
Steven Land [Added 12-11-1995
by Ord. No. 95-11]
Oxford Road
Steven Lane Troxell Road
Stonebridge Circle [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Trumbauer Road
Stonybrook Lane [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Pickwick Lane
Stonybrook Lane Weikel Road
Stratton Drive Liberty Bell Drive
Sunnylea Road Boyd Avenue
Sunnylea Road [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Nash Avenue
Susan Drive [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-21]
Keeler Road (269 feet from Quarry
Road)
§ 147-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-7
1:691
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Susan Drive [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Keeler Road (520 feet from Tennis
Way)
Swartley Road Boyd Avenue
Swartley Road [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Nash Avenue
Tennis Circle [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Keeler Road (507 feet from Allentown
Road)
Tennis Circle [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Keeler Road (Tennis Circle and Tennis
Way)
Tennis Way [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Keeler Road
Theresa Way [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Beth Lane
Tomlinson Road Allentown Road
Tomlinson Road Forty Foot Road
Tomlinson Road Fretz Road
Township Building Parking Lot
[Added 4-24-1991 by Ord. No.
91-4]
Access Road
Troxell Road Sumneytown Pike
Trumbauer Road Kriebel Road
Trumbauer Road Morris Road
Tyler Way [Added 2-27-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-2; 12-11-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-11]
Michael Way
Unruh Way [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Schlosser Road
Valley View Way Morris Road
Valley View Way [Added
8-31-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11]
Near intersection of Valley View Way
and Morris Road
Valley View Way [Added
8-31-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11]
Northernmost section
Village Way Sumneytown Pike
Vo-Tech School Sumneytown Pike
Wagon Wheel Drive Anders Road
Walnut Lane [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Sunnylea Road
Walnut Lane [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Woodlawn Drive
§ 147-7 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-7
1:692
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Wambold Road Sumneytown Pike
Washington Avenue [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Sunnylea Road
Washington Avenue [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Woodlawn Drive
Wayne Avenue [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Pioneer Road
Wayne Avenue [Added
4-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4]
Woodlawn Drive
Weikel Road [Amended
8-31-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
Allentown Road
Weikel Road [Added 8-31-1994
by Ord. No. 94-10]
Orvilla Road
Weikel Road Snyder Road
Wiebel Way [Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-2]
Forty Foot Road
William Penn Way [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2;
amended 8-31-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-10]
Constitution Road
Winding Road Central Drive
Woodlawn Drive Allentown Road
Woodlawn Drive Columbia Avenue
Woodside Circle [Added
2-27-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
Sawmill Way
Yeakel Way [Added 4-24-1991
by Ord. No. 91-4]
Morgan Way
York Avenue Central Drive
§ 147-8. Restriction on vehicular traffic. [Amended 12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-15; 8-28-1991 by Ord. No. 91-8; 11-30-1994 by Ord. No.
94-13; 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 01-9; 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a class vehicle that is
restricted from being operated upon a highway as described below;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the operation of any
restricted class vehicle upon any highway or portion thereof listed below
where such operation thereon shall be necessary in order to pick up or
deliver any goods, wares, merchandise or material from or to any premises
located upon any such highway or portion thereof;
§ 147-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-8
1:693
A. Vehicle classes and definitions. The United States Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration Scheme F Vehicle
Classifications.
FHWA Vehicle Classes with Definitions
Class 1. Motorcycles (Optional) – All two or three-wheeled
motorized vehicles. Typical vehicles in this category
have saddle type seats and are steered by handlebars
rather than steering wheels. This category includes
motorcycles, motor scooters, mopeds, motor-powered
bicycles, and three-wheel motorcycles. This vehicle type
may be reported at the option of the State.
Class 2. Passenger Cars – All sedans, coupes, and station wagons
manufactured primarily for the purpose of carrying
passengers and including those passenger cars pulling
recreational or other light traders.
Class 3. Other Two-Axle, Four-Tire Single Unit Vehicles – All twoaxle,
four-tire, vehicles, other than passenger cars.
Included in this classification are pickups, panels, vans,
and other vehicles such as campers, motor homes,
ambulances, hearses, carryalls, and minibuses. Other
two-axle, four-tire single-unit vehicles pulling
recreational or other light trailers are Included in this
classification. Because automatic vehicle classifiers have
difficulty distinguishing class 3 from class 2, these two
classes may be combined into class 2.
Class 4. Buses – All vehicles manufactured as traditional
passenger-carrying buses with two axles and six tires or
three or more axles. This category includes only
traditional buses (including school buses) functioning as
passenger-carrying vehicles. Modified buses should be
considered to be a truck and should be appropriately
classified.
Class 5. Two-Axle, Six-Tire, Single-Unit Trucks – All vehicles on a
single frame including trucks, camping and recreational
vehicles, motor homes, etc., with two axles and dual
rear wheels.
Class 6. Three-Axle Single-Unit Trucks – All vehicles on a single
frame including trucks, camping and recreational
vehicles, motor homes, etc., with three axles.
Class 7. Four or More Axle Single-Unit Trucks – All trucks on a
single frame with four or more axles.
Class 8. Four or Fewer Axle Single-Trailer Trucks – All vehicles
with four or fewer axles consisting of two units, one of
which is a tractor or straight truck power unit.
§ 147-8 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-8
1:694
§ 147-9. Vehicle weight limits established.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross weight in
FHWA Vehicle Classes with Definitions
Class 9. Five-Axle Single-Trailer Trucks – All five-axle vehicles
consisting of two units, one of which is a tractor or
straight truck power unit.
Class 10. Six or More Axle Single-Trailer Trucks – All vehicles
with six or more axles consisting of two units, one of
which is a tractor or straight truck power unit.
Class 11. Five or fewer Axle Multi-Trailer Trucks – All vehicles
with five or fewer axles consisting of three or more
units, one of which is a tractor or straight truck power
unit.
Class 12. Six-Axle Multi-Trailer Trucks – All six-axle vehicles
consisting of three or more units, one of which is a
tractor or straight truck power unit.
Class 13. Seven or More Axle Multi-Trailer Trucks – All vehicles
with seven or more axles consisting of three or more
units, one of which is a tractor or straight truck power
unit.
B. Restricted highways.
Name of Highway Limits Classes Restricted
Clemens Road From Mainland Road
to Rittenhouse Road
Classes 6 through 13
inclusive
Derstine Road
[Added 11-14-2018
by Ord. No. 18-06]
Northbound from
Allentown Road to
municipal limit
Classes 6 through 13
inclusive
Fretz Road From Tomlinson Road
to Allentown Road
Classes 6 through 13
inclusive
Kriebel Road From Sumneytown
Pike to the point
intersecting Anders
Road
Classes 6 through 13
inclusive
Reinert Road Entire length Classes 6 through 13
inclusive
Towamencin Avenue Entire length Classes 6 through 13
inclusive
Trumbauer Road Morris Road to
Kriebel Road
Classes 6 through 13
inclusive
§ 147-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-9
1:695
excess of that herein respectively prescribed upon any of the highways or
portions thereof described below:
Name of Highway
Max. Gross
Weight
(tons) Location
Rittenhouse Road
[Added 9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-11]
13 Between Old Forty Foot Road
and Clemens Road
§ 147-10. General parking regulations. [Amended 6-27-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-02]
§ 147-11. Parking prohibited.
A. Parking on the streets or highways within Towamencin Township shall
be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, applicable
rules and regulations unless otherwise specified in this article.
B. Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly
within the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this
article for any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked
otherwise.
A. Parking prohibited at certain times. [Added 8-30-1989 by Ord. No.
89-11]
(1) Parking shall be prohibited at the following times and the following
locations on the designated sides of the street in accordance with
duly posted official signs:
Name of
Highway Side Location Time Limitation
Amber Way Both Entire length No parking during
school hours
Bridle Path
Drive [Added
11-28-1990 by
Ord. No.
90-12]
Both Sumneytown
Pike to
Meadow Glen
Drive
No parking during
school hours
Candlewood Way
[Added
12-17-2003 by
Ord. No.
03-08]
Both Entire length No parking during
snow emergency
§ 147-9 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-11
1:696
Name of
Highway Side Location Time Limitation
Kareve Drive
[Added
12-17-2003 by
Ord. No.
03-08]
Both Entire length No parking during
snow emergency
Kindle Drive Both Entire length No parking during
school hours
Norwyck Way
[Added
12-17-2003 by
Ord. No.
03-08]
Both Entire length No parking during
snow emergency
Oxford Road
[Added
12-11-1995 by
Ord. No.
95-11]
Both Entire length No parking during
school hours
Ridgewood Way
[Added
12-17-2003 by
Ord. No.
03-08]
Both Entire length No parking during
snow emergency
Saratoga Lane
[Added
12-17-2003 by
Ord. No.
03-08]
Both Entire length No parking during
snow emergency
Snyder Road Both From Valley
Forge Road to
Weikel Road
No parking during
school hours
Snyder Road Both From Weikel
Road to Troxell
Road
No parking
Steven Lane
[Added
12-11-1995 by
Ord. No.
95-11]
Both From Oxford
Road to Mark
Drive
No parking during
school hours
(2) For purposes of enforcement of this section, the term "school
hours" shall be defined as 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. weekdays, from
September 1 to June 15, excluding holidays.
§ 147-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-11
1:697
B. Parking prohibited at all times. Parking shall be prohibited at all times
in the following locations on that side which has been duly posted with
official signs:
Name of Highway Side Location
Allentown Road
[Added 9-25-1996
by Ord. No. 96-10]
North From northwest corner of
Allentown Road and Weikel Road
west for a distance of 590 feet
Allentown Road North From Ingelwood Elementary
School to Woodlawn Avenue
Allentown Road South From Weikel Road to Woodlawn
Avenue
Bishop Wood
Boulevard East
North Entire length
Bishop Wood
Boulevard West
South Entire length
Braddock Lane South Entire length
Breckenridge Place West Entire length
Bromley Drive North Entire length
Central Drive North From intersection with Columbia
Avenue east for a distance of 50
feet
Columbia Avenue
[Repealed
10-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-07]
Columbia Avenue
[Amended
10-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-07]
North From intersection with Oak
Boulevard east for a distance of
100 feet
Columbia Avenue
[Amended
10-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-07]
North From intersection with Oak
Boulevard west for a distance of
145 feet
Columbia Avenue
[Amended
10-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-07]
South Between intersections with
Woodlawn Drive and Central
Drive
Dager Circle North Entire length
Dutchmans Circle Both Entire length
§ 147-11 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-11
1:698
Name of Highway Side Location
Franklin Street
[Amended
12-18-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-14]
East From Bustard Road to
Sumneytown Pike
Green Lane Road
[Added 9-24-2008
by Ord. No. 08-05]
Both From Kriebel Road to Pheasant
Hill Road
Gristmill Drive
[Added 2-27-1991
by Ord. No. 91-3]
Both Entire length
Heebner Way
[Added 8-31-1994
by Ord. No. 94-7]
North 140 feet centered on the center
line of the emergency access to
the Walton Farm Elementary
School
Heebner Way
[Added 8-31-1994
by Ord. No. 94-7]
South 200 feet centered on the center
line of the emergency access
emergency access to the Walton
Farm Elementary School
Logger Lane South Entire length
Montgomery Avenue Both From curved part to Sumneytown
Pike
Oak Boulevard South From intersection with Columbia
Avenue east for a distance of 50
feet
Oak Boulevard South From intersection with Columbia
Avenue west for a distance of 59
feet
Parkside Lane Both Entire length
Staley Circle West Entire length
Stratton Drive East Entire length
Sumneytown Pike
[Amended
12-18-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-14]
Both Southwest corner of Bustard Road
Sumneytown Pike Both From Valley Forge Road to Forty
Foot Road
Troxell Road
[Added 10-28-1987
by Ord. No. 87-15]
West At the corner of Troxell Road and
Carriage Road for 50 feet from
the intersection
§ 147-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-11
1:699
§ 147-12. Parking of certain vehicles in residential zones
prohibited.
Name of Highway Side Location
Trumbauer Road
[Added 2-11-2009
by Ord. No. 09-03]
East From Morris Road for a distance
of 450 feet
Trumbauer Road
[Added 2-11-2009
by Ord. No. 09-03]
West Entire length
Valley Forge Road West From North Penn High School
entrance to Sumneytown Pike
Woodlawn Drive
[Added 7-17-1991
by Ord. No. 91-5]
Both From Allentown Road east for a
distance of 150 feet from
Allentown Road west for a
distance of 150 feet
Woodlawn Drive North From intersection with Columbia
Avenue west for a distance of 50
feet
C. Stopping or standing prohibited at all times. Stopping or standing shall
be prohibited at all times in the following locations: [Added 7-17-1991
by Ord. No. 91-5]
Name of Highway Side Location
Forty Foot Road Both From Sumneytown Pike east for a
distance of 420 feet
D. Legislative intent. The Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township,
in accordance with the advice of the Township's Police Department,
finds that it is in the interest of public safety to prohibit the overnight
parking of certain sized vehicles on roads within the Township. Such
larger vehicles can intrude into travel lanes, inhibit sight distance, and
deplete available parking all of which threatens the safety of residents
and travelers and diminishes the quality of life throughout the
Township. [Added 3-27-2019 by Ord. No. 19-03]
(1) Any truck, except for those included in Class 1 through 3 as
specified by the Federal Highway Administration (FWHA) vehicle
classifications, shall not be parked on any roads or highways within
Towamencin Township between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. In addition, no truck tractor, truck camper, trailer, bus, motor
home, or house coach of any class shall be parked on any roads or
highways within Towamencin Township between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 147-11 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-12
1:700
A. When signs are posted giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for the
owner or operator of any truck, truck tractor or trailer or commercial
vehicle with a registered gross weight or combination weight in excess
of 9,000 pounds to park such vehicle at any time on any public street in
a residentially zoned area situate in Towamencin Township, except for
delivery or servicing to a home in such area.
B. No truck parking. No trucks shall be parked in the following locations:
[Added 9-25-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
Name of Street Side Location
Bookbinder Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Bustard Road [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— Sumneytown Pike to
Kriebel Road
Candlemaker Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Grist Mill Drive [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Lamplighter Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Millers Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Millwrighter Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Painter Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Pickwick Lane — —
Printer Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Sailmaker Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Salem Way — —
§ 147-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-12
1:701
§ 147-13. Parking for handicapped persons.
Name of Street Side Location
Shipwrighter Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Shoemaker Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Spur Road [Added 9-22-2004
by Ord. No. 04-05]
— —
Stonemason Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Stoneybrook Lane — —
Tailor Way [Added 9-22-2004
by Ord. No. 04-05]
— —
Tanner Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Thresher Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Tinsmith Way [Added
9-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-05]
— —
Troxel Road [Added
10-23-1996 by Ord. No.
96-12]
— At its intersection with
Pickwick Lane
Weikel Road — From Allentown Road to
Orvilla Road
Weikel Road [Added
10-23-1996 by Ord. No.
96-12; amended 12-17-2003
by Ord. No. 03-08]
Both From Allentown Road to
Snyder Road
A. No owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall park any motor vehicle in
a parking space on public or private property posted with official signs
and reserved for the use of those handicapped persons designated
herein unless such owner or operator is authorized to do so. Such signs
may be erected on private property with the consent of the property
owner.
§ 147-12 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-13
1:702
§ 147-14. Restricted parking zones.
B. An owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall be authorized to park said
vehicle in the designated spaces reserved for handicapped persons only
upon receipt by the owner or operator of either:
(1) A special registration license plate issued by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other
state or commonwealth which designates the vehicle so licensed as
owned and/or operated by a handicapped person or a disabled
veteran; or
(2) A parking placard issued by the Department of Transportation of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state or
commonwealth which designates the user having the right to use
the vehicle for the purpose of assisting the handicapped person or
disabled veteran.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be charged with
a violation of Section 3354(d)(3) of the revised Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code and shall be guilty of a summary offense as provided for
therein. Such person shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $15, together with costs of prosecution.
A. Fire zones. No owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall park any
motor vehicle on public or private property in an officially designated
and posted fire zone.
B. Removal and impounding of illegally parked and abandoned vehicles.
(1) No owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall park, abandon or
leave any motor vehicle unattended upon any street or highway in
such a way that it blocks or interferes with the flow of traffic in the
Township.
(2) Should any owner or operator violate the provisions of Subsection
B(1) and fail to immediately remove or have said vehicle removed
when directed to do so, the police shall have the authority to
remove or direct the removal of said vehicle.
(3) The removed motor vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the
Motor Vehicle Code.
(a) Within 12 hours after removal and impounding of such vehicle,
notice of the fact that the vehicle has been removed and
impounded shall be sent to the registered owner of the vehicle,
designating the place from which the vehicle was removed, the
reason for its removal and impounding and the place where it
has been impounded.
§ 147-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-14
1:703
§ 147-15. Snow emergency regulations.
(b) The owner or operator shall be liable for the cost of removal
and impounding of the vehicle in addition to any other penalty
provided herein.
A. Designation of emergency routes. In order to facilitate the movement of
traffic and to combat the hazards of excessive snow and ice on the
streets and highways in the Township, the Board of Supervisors hereby
designates the following as snow emergency routes:
(Reserved)
B. Declaration of emergency. The Township Manager or the Police
Department shall declare a snow emergency when, in his or its opinion,
precipitation and temperature have created hazardous driving
conditions on the streets and highways of the Township.
C. Regulations. Upon the declaration of a snow emergency, it shall be
unlawful during the period of such emergency for any person to park a
motor vehicle or tractor or to allow the same to remain parked on any
designated snow emergency route, or to operate any motor vehicle or
tractor on any designated snow emergency route, unless such motor
vehicle or tractor shall be equipped with snow tires, chains or other
adequate equipment to provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle
or tractor in motion so that other traffic will not be blocked or seriously
impeded.
D. Signs. The township shall erect official signs along snow emergency
routes advising of the streets or highway's being designated as a snow
emergency route and generally advising of the regulations during a
snow emergency.
E. Clearing of roadways. [Added 4-24-1996 by Ord. No. 96-3;
amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-13]
(1) In order to facilitate the clearing of Township roadways during the
time of a snow emergency, it shall be unlawful during the period of
such emergency for any person to park a motor vehicle on the
following designated roadways within the Township:
Street Between Side
Anders Road Entire length Both
Boone Way Entire length West
Boyd Avenue Entire length Both
Columbia Avenue Entire length Both
Dean Drive Entire length East
Detwiler Road Entire length Both
Green Lane Road Entire length Both
§ 147-14 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-15
1:704
§ 147-15.1. Cautionary signs. [Added 10-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
S-turn and fifteen-miles-per-hour cautionary signs shall be installed at the
following locations:
Street Location
Weikel Road 200 feet north of the intersection of Allentown Road
and Weikel Road
Weikel Road 250 feet east of the intersection of Orvilla Road and
Weikel Road
§ 147-15.2. Restricted use of brake retarders. [Added 10-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-05]
Street Between Side
Grist Mill Drive Entire length Both
Keeler Road Entire length Both
Kriebel Road Entire length Both
Liberty Bell Road Entire length Both
Morris Road Entire length Both
Morgan Way Entire length West
Oak Boulevard Entire length Both
Old Morris Road Entire length Both
Quarry Road Entire length Both
Snyder Road Entire length Both
Specht Place Entire length East
Towamencin Avenue Entire length Both
Village Way Entire length South
Weikel Road Entire length Both
Woodlawn Drive Entire length Both
Yeakel Way Entire length North
(2) The Township shall erect official signs along such roadways
advising of the no-parking regulations during a snow emergency.
A. No person shall use or operate a brake retarder on any vehicle traveling
on the below listed sections of roads. This prohibition shall become
effective upon completion of posting of signage in accordance with
PennDOT regulations.
§ 147-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-15.2
1:705
Street Direction of Travel Location
Allentown Road Southbound from
Fretz Road/Derstine
Road intersection
50 feet past Fretz
Road/Derstine Road
intersection to 175 feet
before Forty Foot Road
Allentown Road Northbound from
Forty Food Road
125 feet past Forty
Foot Road to 100 feet
before Fretz Road/
Derstine Road
intersection
Detwiler Road Northbound from
Forty Foot Road
200 feet past Forty
Foot Road to 100 feet
before Wambold Road
Detwiler Road Southbound from
Wambold Road
150 feet past Wambold
Road to 150 feet before
Forty Foot Road
Forty Foot Road Northbound from
Sumneytown Pike
230 feet past
Sumneytown Pike to
1,580 feet after
Allentown Road
Forty Foot Road Southbound from
Welsh Road
240 feet past Welsh
Road to 1,990 feet past
Towamencin Avenue
Sumneytown Pike Eastbound 150 feet east of
Wambold Road to 250
feet east of Old Forty
Road
Sumneytown Pike Westbound 180 feet west of Old
Forty Foot Road to
Wambold Road
Wambold Road Eastbound from
Sumneytown Pike
100 feet from
Sumneytown Pike to
150 feet past Detwiler
Road; 150 feet past
Fretz Road to 150 feet
before Allentown Road
B. Official signs giving notice of the prohibition shall be erected and
maintained by the Township.
C. Emergency vehicles required or authorized to have brake retarders are
exempt from regulations of this section.
D. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 147-15.2 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-15.2
1:706
§ 147-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1996 by Ord. No.
96-3]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a civil enforcement proceedings and, upon a finding of liability, shall pay
a fine of $15.
E. Any person(s) or entity(ies) who or which violate any of the provisions of
this section, upon a summary conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100 and not more than $300, as well as costs of
prosecution. To the extent permitted by state law, such fine shall be
paid over to the Towamencin Township Treasurer.
F. This section shall be enforced by the Towamencin Township Police
Department.
G. In accordance with the requirements of 67 Pa. Code § 179.10,
prohibition of use of brake retarders shall not be effected without prior
written approval of PennDOT.
§ 147-15.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-16
1:707

ARTICLE II
Commuter Parking
[Adopted 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-14]
§ 147-17. Legislative intent.
The Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township finds that certain
residential areas of townships are subject to commuter vehicle parking,
therefore depriving the residents of those areas of spaces in which to
park their own vehicles; those residential streets are also subject to a
high degree of commuter traffic which substantially reduces the quality of
the ambient air level; and the overburdening of existing streets and roads
generally creates an undesirable dangerous condition to the general health,
safety and welfare of the community. Therefore, the Township Supervisors
wish to establish a residential parking permit program for certain affected
areas where parking is limited by township ordinance; it being the belief of
the Supervisors that it is in the best interest of the people of the Township
to provide for the establishment of such a residential parking zone.
§ 147-18. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and terms listed in this section as
follows shall have the following meanings:
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area by a
person not a resident of that residential area.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living
which normally include provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation, but also includes rooms.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled, except one which is
propelled solely by human power.
PROPRIETOR — A person who owns or leases real estate within a
residential area of which he is not a resident but who owns or manages a
business enterprise or professional office maintained at that address.
RESIDENT — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains either a voting residence or bona fide
occupancy, or both, at that address.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A contiguous area containing public highways or
parts of public highways primarily abutted by residential property or
residential and nonbusiness property, such as schools, parks, places of
worship, hospitals and nursing homes.
STREET — A way intended for general public use through means of
approach for vehicles and pedestrians. The word shall include the words
"road," "highway" and "thoroughfare."
§ 147-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-19
1:709
§ 147-19. Criteria.
The residential areas designated in § 147-20 of this article are deemed
impacted and hence eligible for residential parking during periods of time
when on-street parking is prohibited by other ordinance or regulation of the
Township of Towamencin.
§ 147-20. Designated permit areas.
The following areas are designated as areas where permits will be issued
for motor vehicles to be parked during normally prohibited hours:
Name of
Highway Side Location Time Limitation
Amber Way Both Entire
length
No parking between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Kindle Drive Both Entire
length
No parking between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
§ 147-21. Application and eligibility for permit.
Any person residing in a residence abutting on the streets set forth in
§ 147-20 above, or a proprietor of property immediately adjacent to a street
or other location within a residential permit parking area, shall be eligible
for a permit, but in no event shall more than two permits be issued per
dwelling unit or residence. Application for a residential parking permit shall
be made to the Chief of Police of Towamencin Township, or his designee in
the Police Department, by the person desiring the permit. Each application
shall contain the following information: the name of the owner or the driver
of the motor vehicle; the address of the resident; the make, model and
registration number of the motor vehicles for which the permit must be
used; and the driver number as taken from the applicants current driver's
license. The applicant shall be required, at the time of making application,
to present proof of residency in said area and proof of ownership of a motor
vehicle registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 147-22. Permit fee; term.
The permit shall be good for residential parking in accordance with a
fee schedule as adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of
Towamencin Township. The permit shall be for the calendar year or the
remaining balance thereof. Residential parking permits may be renewed by
qualified residents in accordance with the above § 147-21 upon the payment
of the annual fee on or before December 31 of each year.
§ 147-19 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-23
1:710
§ 147-23. Display of permit.
When the vehicle is parked in a prohibited zone, but allowed by permit in
accordance with this article, the permit shall be displayed prominently in
accordance with the instructions as set forth on the permit.
§ 147-24. Expiration of permit.
A permit expires and is void when the owner or user of the permit no longer
resides within the district as defined above at the end of each calendar year.
A resident shall remove a permit sticker from any permitted motor vehicle
upon its expiration or upon moving outside the district.
§ 147-25. Responsibility of permit holder.
§ 147-26. Revocation of permits.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the authority to revoke the
residential parking permit of any permit holder found to be in violation
of any provision of this article. Upon written notification to him of the
revocation, the permit holder shall surrender the permit to the Chief of
Police. Failure to do so when so requested shall constitute a violation of this
article.
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the holder
of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or park a
motor vehicle operated by him in any designated residential parking
area during those times when parking of motor vehicles is prohibited in
that area. While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has
been issued is so parked, that permit shall be displayed so as to be
clearly visible through the windshield of the vehicle. A residential
parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder a parking
space within a designated residential permit parking area.
B. Except during the time limits set forth in § 147-20, a residential parking
permit shall not authorize its holder to stand or park a motor vehicle in
any place or at any time when stopping, standing or parking of motor
vehicles is generally prohibited or set aside for other specified types of
vehicles, nor shall the permit exempt its holder from the observance of
any traffic or parking regulation.
C. No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the
permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on a vehicle
operated; any such use or display by a person other than the permit
holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the permit holder
and by the person who so used or displayed the parking permit.
D. It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person falsely to
represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to
furnish false information and application to the Chief of Police or his
designee in order to obtain a residential parking permit.
§ 147-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-27
1:711
§ 147-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, including misuse
of any permit, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
$15, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 147-27 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 147-27
1:712
ARTICLE III
Designated Crosswalks and Related Signage
[Adopted 6-30-1999 by Ord. No. 99-5]
§ 147-28. Placement of crosswalks.
In accordance with the recommendations of the engineering and traffic
study dated May 18, 1999, high visibility crosswalks shall be placed across
Constitution Road and across Weikel Road at each of the intersections of
those two roads in accordance with the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania and
all applicable Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations.
§ 147-29. Installation of signs.
Official "Yield to Peds in Crosswalk" and "Pedestrian Crossing" signs shall
be installed contemporaneously with the placement of the crosswalks.
§ 147-30. Purchase and installation by appropriate officers.
The appropriate officers of the Township are authorized and directed to
purchase and install, in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code
of Pennsylvania and the regulations promulgated thereunder, all necessary
signs.
§ 147-31. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the
Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania as it pertains to fines and other penalties.
§ 147-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-31
1:713
Chapter 149
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 107. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 147.
§ 149-1. Legislative intent.
The provisions of this chapter are designed to secure, promote and protect
the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, peace and quiet
of the residents of Towamencin Township by requiring the registration of
motorized vehicles and regulating the use thereof in order to alleviate
problems, such as but not limited to loud, unnecessary and unusual noises
within the Township, damage and destruction of personal property,
unauthorized use of private lands, disturbances through the creation of
unnecessary dust and debris and other inconveniences caused by motorized
vehicles to the residents of Towamencin Township.
§ 149-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORIZED VEHICLE — Any vehicle propelled by motor which may or
may not be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including but
not limited to all vehicles which are required to be licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for use on public highways but which are
not licensed because of the owner's intention not to use said vehicles on
public highways and all other motorized vehicles which are not covered
by the Vehicle Code or other applicable statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. This definition shall not be construed to include properly
licensed motor vehicles operated upon the public highways, streets, roads
and private driveways in accordance with the law, power lawn mowers and
garden tractors, agricultural equipment used in the course of farming or
commercial equipment being properly used in trade or business by the
owner or on the owner's behalf.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE — All houses, apartments, mobile homes and other
permanent structures occupied by one or more persons as their primary
home and residence.
TOWNSHIP — Towamencin Township.
§ 149-3. Registration permit required.
No person, firm, association, corporation or other entity shall own, possess,
keep, maintain, use or operate, or permit to be possessed, kept, maintained,
§ 147-31 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 149-3
1:714
used or operated, any motorized vehicle within the Township without first
obtaining a registration permit.
§ 149-4. Application for registration permit.
Application for a motorized vehicle registration permit shall be made to
the Chief of Police or other authorized representative within 30 days after
the vehicle is brought into the Township, on forms prescribed by him,
which shall set forth, among other information deemed to be required, the
full name, address and telephone number of the owner; the manufacturer,
name, serial number and a general description of the motorized vehicle;
and the name, address and telephone number of all owners of property not
owned by the applicant upon which the applicant has permission to operate
the motorized vehicle and the location thereof.
§ 149-5. Issuance of permit; fee; display.
§ 149-6. Operation of motorized vehicles.
A. Upon approval of the application and payment of the proper fee, the
Chief of Police or other authorized representative shall issue a
registration permit for the motorized vehicle to the applicant.
B. The fee for each registration permit shall be $5 per motorized vehicle.
The fee fixed herein may be modified from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors.
C. The registration permit shall be affixed to the motorized vehicle and
displayed in a readily visible manner on the rear of the motorized
vehicle at all times.
D. The registration permit shall remain valid unless revoked, as
hereinafter provided, or until there shall be a change of ownership of
the motorized vehicle. The change of ownership shall terminate the
registration permit.
A. The sound level of a motorized vehicle operated within the Township
shall not exceed 73 decibels at a distance of 50 feet.
B. Every motorized vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in
good working order which is in constant operation. No muffler cutout,
bypass or similar device shall be installed or used on a motorized
vehicle within the Township.
C. A motorized vehicle shall be operated only during daylight hours, with
operation specifically prohibited prior to one hour before sunrise and
later than one hour after sunset, except that operation will be permitted
during dark hours if not within 500 feet of a private residence.
D. A motorized vehicle shall not be operated on private property of
another without the express written permission of the owner or
occupant of the property. The written permission shall be in the
§ 149-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-6
1:715
§ 149-7. Required equipment.
All motorized vehicles operated within the Township shall have the
following equipment in addition to or in conjunction with all equipment
possession of the operator when the motorized vehicle is being
operated on the private property.
E. A motorized vehicle shall not be operated on public school grounds
without express permission or provision to do so by the proper
governing authorities of the school district.
F. A motorized vehicle shall not be operated on publicly owned property,
parks, playgrounds or recreational areas without express provision or
permission to do so by the appropriate public authority. The Township
Park Board may, with the approval of the Board of Supervisors, from
time to time, establish areas of use on municipally owned or controlled
lands where motorized vehicles may be ridden.
G. A motorized vehicle shall not be operated in a careless, reckless or
negligent manner that would endanger the safety of any person or
property.
H. A motorized vehicle shall not be operated in such a manner as to raise
or cause excessive amounts of dust or debris.
I. A motorized vehicle shall not be operated in such a manner as to
damage or destroy any real or personal property of another. In addition
to any other penalties for the violation of this chapter, a violator of this
subsection shall be liable to make restitution for any damage caused to
private or public property.
J. A motorized vehicle shall not be operated on a sidewalk or within the
right-of-way of any public or private street being maintained or used as
a thoroughfare for legally licensed vehicular traffic unless the operator
has a valid motor vehicle operator's license and the motorized vehicle is
properly registered and licensed with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as a motor vehicle. All provisions of the Vehicle Code and
Township ordinances regulating equipment and operation will apply to
such use.
K. One person only shall operate a motorized vehicle. The operator shall
not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on said
motorized vehicle unless such motorized vehicle is designed to carry
more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the
permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons or upon
another seat permanently attached to the vehicle to the rear or side of
the operator.
L. A motorized vehicle shall not be left unattended with the engine
running while located on property not owned by or under the control of
the owner or operator of the motorized vehicle.
§ 149-6 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 149-7
1:716
required by the Vehicle Code if the motorized vehicle is licensed as a motor
vehicle:
§ 149-8. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 151
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED, INOPERATIVE OR JUNK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 147.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 149.
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or a part of a principal building
used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the owner or
tenant of the premises and for the storage of not more than two motor
vehicles owned and used by persons other than the owner or tenant of the
premises. Not more than two commercial vehicles or trucks may be stored
in a "private garage."
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, other than a private or storage garage, one
or more stories in height, used solely for the commercial storage, service or
repair of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, STORAGE — A building, which is not a private or public garage
one story in height, used solely for the storage of motor vehicles (other than
trucks), but not for the sale. service or repair thereof or for the sale of fuel
accessories or supplies.
A. Adequate brakes in good working condition.
B. If used at night, at least one headlight and one taillight in good working
condition, which must be in use any time the motorized vehicle is being
operated in semidarkness or partial or complete darkness.
A. Any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 for the first offense and a
fine of not more than $300 for a second and subsequent offenses.
B. Upon conviction of a third or subsequent offense, the Township shall
have the right to revoke for a period of one year the registration permit
of the owner committing said offenses or permitting said offenses to
occur.
§ 149-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-1
1:717
REGISTRATION — Authority for a vehicle to operate-on a highway as
evidenced by issuance of an identifying card and plate or plates in
conformance with the Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, particularly 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 1301 et seq.
UNLAWFUL STORAGE — To allow a motor vehicle to remain on his, their
or its property or on the property of which he, they or it are the tenants or
in charge or control for a period of more than 30 days if such vehicle is not
registered or does not have the ability to be registered.
VEHICLE — A device in or upon which any person or property is or may
be transported on or upon a highway, except devices used exclusively upon
rails or tracks.
§ 151-2. Outside storage unlawful; notice to remove; applicability.
§ 151-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction before a
District Justice, shall pay a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $300
for each day the motor vehicle is not removed after receipt of the notice to
do so and, in default of payment of such fine and costs of prosecution, shall
be sentenced to not more than 10 days' imprisonment.
A. All persons of record, owners, agents in charge or tenants or occupiers
of dwellings within the Township limits shall not permit the outside
storage of vehicles which do not have current registration and
inspection documentation in accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code.
B. The Township employee designated by the Township Supervisors,
Zoning Officer, Building Inspector or Township Manager is hereby
authorized and empowered to notify the owner or agent in charge,
tenant or occupier of any private premises within the Township limits to
remove and properly dispose of any vehicle not registered. Such notice
shall be given by certified mail addressed to the person's last known
address or by personal service on the individual or by posting on the
property.
C. Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, agent in charge, tenant or
occupier so notified to properly dispose of said vehicle within five
working days of the date of said notice, the issuing party is authorized
and empowered to commence prosecution to said violator or violators
prescribed by law.
D. This section shall not apply to vehicles which are not registered if they
are removed or located to a public or private garage where restoration
can be completed safely in accordance with other ordinances.
§ 151-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 151-3
1:718
Chapter 153
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Change of occupancy — See Ch. 59.
Construction codes — See Ch. 62.
Driveways — See Ch. 67.
Fees — See Ch. 76.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 82.
Grading and excavating — See Ch. 87.
Right-of-Way Map — See Ch. 97.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 100.
Nuisances — See Ch. 104.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
124.
Sewers — See Ch. 127.
Signs and posters — See Ch. 130.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 132.
Streets, curbs and sidewalks — See Ch. 133.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
136.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 139.
§ 151-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-3
1:719

ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Jurisdiction
§ 153-100. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Towamencin Township
Zoning Ordinance of 1956, as amended by Ordinance No. 95-10 of 1995."
§ 153-101. Title.
The title of this chapter is "An ordinance regulating the height, bulk,
erection, construction, alteration, razing, removal and size of structures;
the percentage of lot which may be occupied; the size of yards, courts, and
other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the intensity
of use of land, watercourses and other bodies of water for trade, industry,
residence, recreation, public activities and other purposes, and the use of
land for agriculture, water supply, conservation or other purposes, in all
portions of Towamencin Township."
§ 153-102. Declaration of legislative intent. [Amended 5-23-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-7]
This chapter, except to the extent that those regulations of mineral
extraction by local ordinances and enactments have heretofore been
superseded and preempted by the Act of May 31, 1945 (P.L. 1198, No. 418),
known as the "Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act," the Act
of December 19, 1984 (P.L. 1093, No. 219), known as the "Noncoal Surface
Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act," and the Act of December 19,
1984 (P.L. 1140, No. 223), known as the "Oil and Gas Act," and to the extent
that the subsidence impacts of coal extraction are regulated by the Act of
April 27, 1966 (1st Sp. Sess., P.L. 31, No. 1), known as the "Bituminous Mine
Subsidence and Land Conservation Act," and that regulation of activities
related to commercial agricultural production would exceed the
requirements imposed under the Act of May 20, 1993 (P.L. 12, No. 6), known
as the "Nutrient Management Act," regardless of whether any agricultural
operation within the area to be affected by the chapter would be a
concentrated animal operation as defined by the Nutrient Management Act,
the Act of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43), known as the "Agricultural Area
Security Law," or the Act of June 10, 1982 (P.L. 454, No. 133), entitled "An
Act Protecting Agricultural Operations from Nuisance Suits and Ordinances
Under Certain Circumstances," or that regulation of other activities are
preempted by other federal or state laws, may permit, prohibit, regulate and
restrict uses of land, water sources and other bodies of water in accordance
with Article VI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247),
as amended, and is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To promote the health, safety, and the general welfare of the Township.
B. To promote, protect, encourage, and facilitate coordinated practical
community development.
§ 153-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-102
1:721
§ 153-103. Statement of community development objectives.
Giving effect and enforcement to the following land use and development
policies and proposals established by the Towamencin Township
Comprehensive Plan dated and duly adopted by the Board of Supervisors on
February 9, 1989, as last amended, and herein incorporated by reference.
C. To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, vehicular parking
and loading, water supply, sewage, schools, parks and other public
requirements.
D. To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the
Township.
E. To provide for the conservation, protection and preservation of natural
and historic resources and prime agricultural land and activities to the
greatest extent practicable.
F. To encourage the conservation of the natural, scenic and historic values
and amenities of the environment including woodlands, wetlands,
aquifers, floodplains and the like.
G. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth and provide for
opportunities for the development of a variety of land use types.
H. To encourage maintenance, management of forested or open space, and
promote the conduct of forestry as a sound and economically viable use
of forested land throughout the Township.
I. To protect prime agricultural land and promote the establishment of
agricultural security areas.
J. To encourage the continuity, development and viability of agricultural
operations and to not restrict agricultural operations or changes to or
expansion of agricultural operations in geographic areas where
agriculture has traditionally been present, unless the agricultural
operation will have a direct adverse affect on the public health and
safety.
K. To provide for the reasonable development of minerals in the Township.
A. Guiding and encouraging the future development of the Township in
accordance with comprehensive planning of land use and population
density that represents the most beneficial and convenient
relationships among the residential, commercial, industrial and
recreational areas within the Township, having regard to their
suitability for the various uses appropriate to each of them and their
potentiality for such uses, as indicated by topography, soil conditions,
existing man-made conditions, community facilities and trends in
population, housing, commerce and industry, in the direction and
manner of the use of land, in building, development, and economic
activity, considering such conditions and trends both within the
§ 153-102 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-103
1:722
§ 153-104. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the
public health, safety and general welfare of the residents, and the physical
and natural environment of the Township. In applying and interpreting the
provisions of this chapter the following provisions shall apply:
Township and with respect to the relation of the Township to
surrounding areas.
B. Protecting the character and the social and economic stability of each
of such areas and encouraging their orderly and beneficial growth
while identifying the need for preserving agricultural land and
protecting natural resources as relevant in protecting said character
and social and economic stability.
C. Protecting and conserving the value of land and buildings throughout
the Township, depending upon necessity or circumstances, appropriate
to the various zoning districts established herein.
D. Bringing about, through proper timing, the gradual conformity of land
use to the Comprehensive Plan aforesaid, and minimizing conflicts
among the uses of land and buildings.
E. Aiding in bringing about the most beneficial relation between land use
and the circulation of traffic throughout the Township, having
particular regard to traffic to and from the expressways, and to
avoidance of congestion in the streets and the provision of safe and
convenient access appropriate to the various land uses.
F. Aiding in providing a guide for public policy and action in the efficient
provision of public facilities and services, in the provision of safe and
proper sanitary sewage disposal, and for private enterprise in building
development, investment and other economic activity relating to land
use.
A. Whenever any regulations made under authority of this chapter require
a greater width or size of yards, courts or other open spaces, or require
a lower height of buildings or lesser number of stories, or require a
greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other more
restrictive standards than are required in or under other statute, the
provisions of the regulations made under authority of this chapter shall
be controlling.
B. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require a greater width or
size of yards, courts or other open spaces, or require a greater
percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other more
restrictive standards than are required by any regulation made under
authority of this chapter, the provision of said statute shall be
controlling.
§ 153-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-104
1:723
§ 153-105. Conflicts with other provisions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or interfere with any
existing ordinances or enactment, or with any rule, regulation or permit
adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as the same may be
inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 153-106. Severability.
It is hereby declared by the Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township
that the provisions, sections and subsections of this chapter are severable
in accordance with the following provisions:
C. This chapter does not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner impair
or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except
those specifically or implicitly repealed by this chapter, or any private
restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private
agreement unless repugnant hereto.
D. Those provisions of the Towamencin Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,199 as last amended, concerned with varying
design standards shall not be considered to be in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter.
E. Since it is impossible to provide standards for every conceivable use
within this chapter, any use not specifically listed within this chapter,
unless prohibited as stipulated herein, may be permitted by the Zoning
Hearing Board after public notice, hearing and testimony as a special
exception and said use shall be subject to the special exception
provisions of this chapter and shall be permitted only within the district
in which the most closely related use is currently permitted by this
chapter as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this
chapter to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such
decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated
in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of
this chapter shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
B. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision
or provisions of this chapter to any lot, building or other structure, or
tract of land, to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of
such decision shall be limited to the person, property, or situation
immediately involved in the controversy, and the application of any such
provision to other persons, property, or situations shall not be affected.
199. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-104 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-107
1:724
§ 153-107. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective five days after the date of its formal
adoption by the Towamencin Township Board of Supervisors, and in
accordance with applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247,200 as amended.
§ 153-108. Repealer.
The existing Zoning Ordinance, adopted April 2, 1956, as amended through
December 19, 1990, and entitled "The Towamencin Township Zoning
Ordinance of 1956," and all supplements and amendments thereto, upon
adoption of this chapter, are hereby repealed. This chapter does not repeal
provisions of other laws or ordinances except those specifically or implicitly
repealed by this chapter. Further provided, however, if the present chapter
is held to be ineffective or invalid by reason of some irregularity in, or
impediment to, its passage, this repealer shall also be ineffective as
aforesaid. Then, and only in that event, the Zoning Ordinance of 1956,
together with its supplements and amendments, would remain in full force
and effect, only and until such time as the irregularity in, or impediment to,
this chapter has been overcome.
§ 153-109. Uniformity of application.
The regulations of this chapter shall apply uniformly to each class, use
and structure within each district except as otherwise provided herein and
permitted under provision of Article VI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
§ 153-110. Application of regulations.
Hereinafter, there shall be no change of the use of any land, structure or
portion thereof, the change, alteration, or extension of a nonconforming
use or structure, or the construction, razing, moving, erection, structural
change, alteration of, or addition to, any structure or portion thereof, the
grading or earth moving, and/or erection of any stationary sign unless
and until a valid permit has been approved by, and acquired from, the
Towamencin Township Zoning Officer or his designated representative in
conformance with all the regulations and procedures herein specified.
Failure to obtain a required permit shall constitute a violation of this
chapter as herein provided.
200. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-110
1:725

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 153-200. Appointment of Zoning Officer.
For the administration and enforcement of this chapter, a Zoning Officer,
who shall not hold any elective office in the Township, shall be appointed.
The Zoning Officer shall meet qualifications established by the Board of
Supervisors and shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors a working knowledge of municipal land use and zoning.
§ 153-201. Administration of chapter.
The Zoning Officer shall have exclusive jurisdiction in the administration
and enforcement of this chapter and shall be empowered thereby to
exclusively render land use determinations regarding the application and
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance and any provision therein.
§ 153-202. Powers and duties of Zoning Officer.
A. The Zoning Officer shall administer the Zoning Ordinance in
accordance with its literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit
any construction or any use or change of use or occupancy which does
not conform to the specific requirements of this chapter.
B. It shall further be the duty of the Zoning Officer, and he is hereby
granted the exclusive power and authority, to:
(1) Receive and review all applications and plans and issue permits
when there is compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter,
other Township ordinances and with the laws of the
commonwealth. In the case of permit denial, the Zoning Officer
shall cite the specific section(s) of noncompliance in a written land
use determination and shall specify the appeal process from said
determination.
(2) Review all subdivision and land development plans and issue a
written report to the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board,
and Board of Supervisors, as the case may be, regarding the plans'
conformance or nonconformance with the requirements of this
chapter. All provisions of noncompliance shall be cited by chapter
section and subsection.
(3) Enforce the provisions of this chapter by the issuance of
enforcement orders or by other means. Such written orders shall
be served personally or by certified mail upon the persons, firms, or
corporations deemed by the Zoning Officer to be in violation of the
terms of this chapter.
(4) Receive applications for special exceptions, variances and appeals
from Zoning Officer determinations and forward these applications
§ 153-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-202
1:727
§ 153-203. Interpretation of chapter provisions.
In interpreting the language of the Zoning Ordinance to determine the
extent of restriction upon the use of property, the Zoning Officer shall
interpret said language, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of
the language written and enacted by the Board of Supervisors, in favor of
the property owner and against any implied extension of said restriction.
§ 153-204. Permit requirement.
There shall be no change of use of land or a structure or portion thereof,
and prior to the change, alteration, or extension of a nonconforming use or
structure, or the construction, razing, moving, erection, structural change,
alteration of, or addition to, any structure or portion thereof, the grading or
earth moving, and/or erection of any stationary sign unless and until a valid
and appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board for public notice, hearing
and written decision in accordance with this chapter.
(5) Receive applications for conditional uses and forward said
applications to the Board of Supervisors for public notice, hearing
and written decision in accordance with this chapter.
(6) Receive applications for preliminary opinions and render written
land use determinations thereof in accordance with this chapter.
(7) Conduct, or have conducted by his designated representative,
investigations and inspections as required to determine compliance
or noncompliance with the terms of this chapter.
(8) Institute civil enforcement proceedings before the District Justice,
or other court of competent jurisdiction, as a means of enforcement
when acting within the scope of his employment.
(9) Keep a permanent record of all plans and applications for permits,
and all permits issued and denied including any special conditions
and/or notations regarding same. All records, excluding ongoing
enforcement proceeding, shall be open for public inspection upon
appropriate notice to the Zoning Officer.
(10) Maintain the Official Zoning Map showing the current zoning
classifications of all land in the Township.
(11) Present such additional facts, records, and/or similar information
to the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board, or Board of
Supervisors upon their request.
(12) Maintain a registry of nonconforming uses, structures and lots as
may be practicable, and in accordance with Section 613 of the
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).201
201. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10613.
§ 153-202 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-204
1:728
permit has been approved by, and acquired from, the Towamencin Township
Zoning Officer or his designated representative in conformance with all the
regulations and procedures herein specified. Failure to obtain a required
permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter as herein provided.
§ 153-205. Permit application.
Applications for permits shall be made in writing by the owner or his duly
authorized agent to the Zoning Officer on such forms as may be furnished by
the Township. Each application shall contain all information necessary for
the Zoning Officer to ascertain whether the proposed erection, alteration,
use or change of use and/or occupancy complies with the provisions of this
chapter. The Zoning Officer at a minimum may require any or all of the
following information to be provided:
A. The name of the applicant and the owner of record of the property in
question along with the property identification by street address and
Tax Map, block and unit number.
B. A statement as to the existing and proposed use of the building and/or
land.
C. A plot plan showing the location, dimensions, and height of existing and
proposed buildings and uses including their relationship, orientation
and distance to all property and street lines.
D. The location, size, arrangement, and capacity of all areas to be used for
motor vehicle access, off-street parking, off-street loading and
unloading, and provisions to be made for lighting such areas as may be
required by this chapter.
E. The location, dimensions, and arrangements of all open spaces, yards,
sewage disposal systems, wells, and buffer yards, including methods to
be employed for screening as may be required by this chapter.
F. Provisions to be made for the treatment and disposal of effluent, for an
adequate water supply, and storm drainage as may be required by this
chapter.
G. The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or intended to be
used for dwelling and other purposes, including the proposed density in
terms of dwelling units per acre.
H. In the case of grading, as defined by this chapter, a description of the
methods to be employed for the control of soil erosion, sedimentation
and stormwater runoff, to include:
(1) A grading plan showing and describing all changes to the site
including cuts, fills, first floor elevations, paving, utilities, rights-ofway,
easements, the exact location of on-site waste disposal
systems, wells and reserved waste disposal system areas, when
applicable.
§ 153-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-206
1:729
§ 153-206. Fees.
Fees for permits and certificates of use and occupancy shall be paid in
accordance with a fee schedule as adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors and all such fees shall be paid into the Township Treasury.
Each applicant for a permit, certificate, appeal, special exception, variance,
conditional use, preliminary opinion, or other requested activity regulated
by this chapter shall, at the time of making application, pay a fee in
accordance with the aforementioned fee schedule for the cost of
administrative and technical review and processing of said application by
the Township.
§ 153-207. Issuance of permits.
Permits shall be granted or denied after a complete written application has
been filed with the Zoning Officer. All land use activities authorized by the
Zoning Officer shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter
and/or written decision of the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be.
§ 153-208. Life of permits.
A. Any erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of a
building or other structure including a sign authorized by a permit or
decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be commenced, and any
change in use of a building or land authorized by a permit or decision of
the Zoning Hearing Board shall be undertaken, within six months after
the date of issuance of the permit or written decision of the Board,
provided:
(1) In the case of a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board, that, prior to
the six-month expiration, written request for a time extension is
made by the applicant to the Zoning Hearing Board, and that the
Zoning Hearing Board may, at its discretion, grant or deny an
extension of time to obtain a permit and/or commence the
previously authorized activity. Written request for a time extension
shall not require a formal application or fee provided that all action
taken by the Board regarding said request is conducted in an open
public meeting and further provided that the applicant provide, or
compensate the Township for, adequate public notice.
(2) In the case of a permit issued by the Zoning Officer, that prior to
the six-month expiration, written request for a time extension is
made by the applicant to the Zoning Officer who, at his discretion,
may grant or deny an extension of time to commence the previously
authorized activity.
(3) That the extension of time as granted by the Zoning Hearing Board
or the Zoning Officer, as the case may be, shall be limited to a
period of six months per extension, with a maximum of two
extensions permitted per permit or decision of the Board. The
§ 153-206 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-208
1:730
§ 153-209. Enforcement notice.
In the event that the Zoning Officer determines that a violation of the
Zoning Ordinance may exist, the Zoning Officer shall initiate enforcement
proceedings by sending an enforcement notice by return receipt certified
mail or personal service as herein required. Said notice shall be sent to the
owner of record of the real property on which the violation has occurred, to
any persons who have filed a written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding said property, and to any other person requested to be notified
in writing by the owner of record of said premises. All enforcement notices
shall, at a minimum, include the following:
§ 153-210. Enforcement jurisdiction.
The District Justice or other court of competent jurisdiction shall have
jurisdiction over proceedings brought in enforcement of this chapter.
§ 153-211. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of any provision of this chapter, or who fails
applicant may be charged an administrative fee by the Zoning
Hearing Board and/or Zoning Officer for said extension.
B. Upon expiration of the time limits as established in Subsection A herein,
a permit or a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall become null
and void, requiring a new application, fee, hearing, decision and permit
as may be required. Upon reapplication, the applicant shall be bound by
the zoning regulations in effect at the present time, and shall not have
any vested rights in the preexisting ordinances for work elements not
yet started under the provision of the original permit.
A. The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom
the municipality intends to take action;
B. The location of the property in violation;
C. The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have
not been met, citing in each instances the applicable provisions of the
chapter by section and subsection;
D. The date before which compliance must be attained;
E. That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in accordance with
procedures set forth herein;
F. That failure to comply with the notice requirements within 10 days, or
as may otherwise be specified therein, unless stayed by appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board, shall constitute a violation, with possible
sanctions as set forth in the notice and in accordance with this chapter.
§ 153-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-211
1:731
to comply with any requirement, order or directive of the Zoning Officer,
or of a permit or certificate issued under provision of this chapter, shall
be subject to fines and penalties of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality as
a result thereof, which fines and penalties may be collected by suit or
summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township of Towamencin,
providing no judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice or
other court of competent jurisdiction. Proceedings for the violation of the
chapter and for the collection of fines and penalties imposed thereby may
be commenced by warrant, or by summons, at the discretion of the District
Justice or other court of competent jurisdiction before whom the proceeding
is begun. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees
collected for the violation of the Zoning Ordinance shall be paid over to the
Township Treasury.
§ 153-212. Appeals to Zoning Hearing Board.
Appeals from written determinations of the Zoning Officer in his
administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be taken by any
affected party to the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with this chapter
and applicable provisions of the MPC, Act 247,202 as amended.
§ 153-213. Appeals to court.
The procedures as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended, shall constitute the exclusive mode for securing review
of any decision rendered pursuant to this chapter or deemed to have been
made under this chapter.
§ 153-214. Preliminary opinion.
In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure
assurance that the Zoning Ordinance and/or Official Zoning Map under
which he proposes to build is free from challenge, and recognizing that
the procedure for preliminary approval of his development may be too
cumbersome or may not be unavailable, the landowner, equitable or
otherwise, may advance the date from which time a challenge to the Zoning
A. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
202. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-211 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-214
1:732
Ordinance and/or Official Zoning Map will run in accordance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended, by the following procedure:
A. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his
proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary
opinion as to their compliance with the applicable Zoning Ordinances
and Maps. Such plans and other materials shall not be required to meet
the standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or
for the issuance of a building permit so long as they provide reasonable
notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for a
preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
B. If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with the Zoning Ordinance and Map, notice
thereof shall be published once each week for two successive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall
include a general description of the proposed use or development,
including its location, by some readily identifiable directive, and the
place and times where the plans and other materials may be examined
by the public.
C. Upon a favorable preliminary opinion, the time limitations for
commencing an appeal before the Board, as provided by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, shall
run from the time when the second notice thereof has been published.
§ 153-214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-214
1:733

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 153-300. Establishment of districts.
The Township of Towamencin is hereby divided into districts of different
types, each type being of such number, shape, kind and area, and of such
common unity of purpose and adaptability of use, that they are deemed
most suitable to carry out the objectives of this chapter and the objectives
of the Township Comprehensive Plan.
§ 153-301. Classes of districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, Towamencin Township is hereby divided
into districts which shall be designated as follows:
A. Residential districts.
R-200 Agricultural/Residential
R-180 Residential
R-175 Residential
R-125 Residential
R-50 Residential
MH Manufactured Housing
MR Multifamily Residential
MRC Mixed Residential Cluster
B. Commercial districts.
VC Village Commercial
PBC Planned Business Campus
SC Shopping Center
C Commercial
C. Industrial district.
LI Limited Industrial
D. Institutional districts.
IN Institutional
IN-A Institutional A
E. Floodplain Conservation District.
F. Towamencin Village Overlay District.
G. Residential Business and Professional Overlay District. [Added
7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-09]
§ 153-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-301
1:735
§ 153-302. Official Zoning Map.
Land use districts are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled
"Official Zoning Map of Towamencin Township," which accompanies, and
which with all explanatory notations and reference to other data contained
thereon, is hereby made part of this chapter.203
§ 153-303. Statements of purpose and intent of districts.
H. Entertainment Lifestyle Overlay District. [Added 7-27-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-10]
A. Residential districts. The purpose of these districts is to accommodate a
variety of residential housing types to include single-family, two-family
and multifamily dwellings as may be required to provide for a balance
of housing types to meet the current and the anticipated future housing
needs of the Township and to support the objectives of the Township
Comprehensive Plan. Special districts have been established which are
designed to encourage cluster development with open space areas
reserved for natural resource protection and recreation as well as to
preserve the agricultural activities in the Township. The planning and
design of these districts are intended to ensure that appropriate
infrastructure and associated facilities are available for these types of
uses and that the uses will blend with other uses in surrounding areas.
(1) R-200 Agricultural/Residential. The purpose of this district is to
provide for the continued agricultural use of this portion of the
Township and to promote the preservation of same and to provide
for large lot single-family detached residential units in a rural
setting to preserve the appearance and rural characteristics of the
district.
(2) R-180 Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide for
single-family detached residential units on large lots to encourage
and preserve the appearance and rural characteristics of the
district.
(3) R-175 Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide for
single-family detached dwellings in a suburban-like setting.
(4) R-125 Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide for
single-family detached dwellings in a transitional suburban-like
setting.
(5) R-50 Residential. This district is intended to provide for singlefamily
detached and single-family semidetached dwellings in an
urban-like setting. The district provides the opportunity for
detached housing which is affordable while promoting a
neighborhood environment.
203. Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 153-301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-303
1:736
(6) MH Manufactured Housing. The purpose of this district is to
establish standards of performance and to promote the desirable
benefits which planned manufactured housing developments will
have upon the Township and the residents within them. This
district is intended to promote the most recent technology of home
building and land development to ensure, to the greatest degree
practicable, compatibility with surrounding land uses and essential
utilities, and to promote the general welfare by extending greater
opportunities for affordable housing and a diversity of housing
types.
(7) MR Multifamily Residential. The purpose of this district is to
encourage the development of single-family attached and
multifamily/apartment housing within the Township; to encourage
the logical and timely development of land for multifamily and
garden apartment purposes in accordance with the objectives,
policies, and proposals of the Comprehensive Plan; to assure the
suitable design of the district in order to protect the surrounding
environment of adjacent and nearby neighborhoods; and to ensure
that proposed multifamily developments will constitute a
residential environment of sustained desirability and stability and
not produce a volume of traffic in excess of the capacity for which
access streets are designed.
(8) MRC Mixed Residential Cluster. The purpose of the planned
residential cluster district is to encourage a creative approach to
the use and development of land while preserving open space and
natural features, to promote a more desirable visual character in
residential areas and to provide affordable housing and a variety of
housing types in the Township within a neighborhood setting with
usable open areas designed into the neighborhood and with the
creation of, and connection to, open space corridors throughout the
district and Township.
B. Commercial districts. These districts are established and specifically
planned to accommodate retail sales, office and service type uses that
are considered necessary for the function and convenience of the
residents of the Township.
(1) Village Commercial. This district is intended to provide for small
and limited service, commercial and office uses that are in
character with the existing mixed-use commercial and residential
Village of Kulpsville.
(2) Planned Business Campus. This district is intended to provide for
and to encourage the development of larger scale, modern business
campuses in a preplanned arrangement of buildings with a single
architectural theme and appropriate landscaping and open spaces
which are primarily comprised of office uses with ancillary service,
commercial and retail uses as appropriate to service the employee
base of the planned business campus. The intent of this district is
§ 153-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-303
1:737
also to encourage high quality business park development which
enhances the employment opportunities in the Township and is
designed with adequate road access and public utilities to minimize
adverse impacts on the natural systems and residential uses in the
surrounding area.
(3) Shopping Center. This district is intended for larger scale
development than is permitted in other commercial districts. These
community shopping centers are intended to service the Township
residents and those of surrounding communities.
(4) Commercial. This district is intended to be the Township's general
commercial area wherein individual service, commercial and
business uses are provided to serve the local commercial service
needs of the residents of the Township.
C. Limited Industrial District. This district is intended to provide for
limited and nonoffensive industrial uses. The intent of this district is to
encourage limited industrial development which relates to adjacent
land uses as a "good neighbor," with appropriate design standards to
avoid adverse impacts on neighboring uses.
D. Institutional districts.
(1) Institutional District. This district is intended to provide the
opportunity for the use and location of a variety of institutional uses
including but not necessarily limited to community, group, and
senior citizen housing and support facilities, and religious, cultural
and educational uses.
(2) IN-A Institutional-A. This district is intended to provide for a more
limited number of uses than permitted in the Institutional District
on tracts of at least nine acres considered to be transition zones
situated between residential districts and major streets classified
as collector or arterial highways in the 1988 Comprehensive Plan,
as may be amended.
E. Floodplain Conservation District. [Amended 3-23-2016 by Ord. No.
16-06]
(1) The Floodplain Conservation District is intended to prevent the loss
of health, life and property from flood and to regulate, restrict and/
or prohibit uses and structures at, along, and near natural and
artificial bodies of water and watercourses as provided by Sections
604(2) and 605(2)(iii) of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act 247, as
amended.
(2) In addition to the purpose and statement of community
development objectives found in the Zoning Ordinance of
Towamencin Township, the specific intent of this district shall be to
protect areas of floodplain subject to, and necessary for, the
containment of floodwaters, and to permit and encourage the
§ 153-303 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-303
1:738
retention of open space land uses which will be so located and
utilized as to constitute a harmonious and appropriate aspect of
the continuing physical development of Towamencin Township.
Furthermore, in light of the Township's certification as eligible for
federal flood insurance, it is the intent of this district to provide
adequate protection for flood-prone properties within Towamencin
Township.
(3) The specific purpose and intent of the Floodplain Conservation
District is provided in Chapter 82, Floodplain Management, of the
Towamencin Township Code.
F. Towamencin Village Overlay District.
(1) This district is intended to provide the opportunity for the
redevelopment of the Village of Kulpsville in accordance with the
Towamencin Village Master Plan.
(2) The implementation of the Towamencin Village Master Plan will
require the support, cooperation, and representation of the public,
private, business and residential communities within the Township.
The role of the Township in this cooperative effort includes the
adoption of the Zoning Ordinance amendment which provides for
the establishment of the Towamencin Village Overlay District. The
purpose of the Towamencin Village Overlay District is to allow and
control a variety of uses, established in conformance with
performance standards for area, bulk, setback, building heights,
parking, and signage, all in furtherance of the implementation of
the Plan.
(3) In order for the Towamencin Village Master Plan to be successfully
implemented over time, the Plan must be sensitive to changing
market conditions as well as to municipal and community planning
and design concerns. Therefore, and in conjunction with the urban
design concept and scale of development proposed for the
Towamencin Village Overlay District, the following shall be the
specific purpose and intent of the district:
(a) To plan for and develop a coordinated and comprehensive land
use and transportation system for the Towamencin Village
Master Plan.
(b) To develop a multimodal transportation system in accordance
with new federal highway and environmental regulations while
providing for and encouraging a pedestrian oriented
environment and providing a trail system that will link the
Towamencin Village to the neighborhoods.
(c) To provide for a mixture of uses and to encourage multimodal
transportation.
§ 153-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-303
1:739
§ 153-304. Interpretation of district boundaries.
The Zoning Officer in the administration of this chapter shall be responsible
for, and shall render determinations regarding, the locations of lots within
(d) To establish and maintain the necessary design and market
incentives to attract new corporate, business, retail and
residential users.
(e) To provide design standards and landscaping specifications for
site planning, exterior architectural themes for buildings, and
a master traffic and circulation plan for vehicles and
pedestrians as detailed within the Towamencin Village Land
Use and Design Manual.
(f) To develop design standards that will encourage structure
parking facilities in order to maximize the opportunities for a
village oriented pedestrian friendly environment while
maximizing the open space within the Towamencin Village.
G. Residential Business and Professional Overlay District. [Added
7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-09]
(1) The purpose of the Residential Business and Professional Overlay
District is to:
(a) Allow limited business and professional uses as a transition
between major roads and existing residential areas.
(b) Limit the impact of nonresidential development on residences
by requiring a residential character, limiting the scale of
buildings, controlling the location of parking areas and
requiring buffer landscaping.
(c) Control access and limit the impact of development on the
Township's major roads.
(d) Allow residences that are located on smaller lots and close to
other residences to convert to business and professional uses,
provided that the residential character of the neighborhood is
not changed.
H. Entertainment Lifestyle Overlay District. [Added 7-27-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-10]
(1) The purpose of the Entertainment Lifestyle Overlay District is to
provide for the consolidation and redevelopment of large
commercial properties with adjacent, nonresidentially zoned
properties in order to provide sufficient land area to accommodate
a redevelopment in the current commercial market, and to allow
and control a variety of uses, establish in conformance with
performance standards for area, bulk, setback, building heights,
parking, and signage, all in furtherance of the plan.
§ 153-303 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-304
1:740
the Township as indicated on the Official Zoning Map. In determining
district boundaries, the following rules shall apply:
§ 153-305. Federal- and state-owned property.
Whenever federal- or state-owned property is included in one or more
zoning districts, it shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter only
insofar as permitted by the Constitution and laws of the United States of
America and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding
with the center line of streets, highways, railroad lines, streams, power
lines or other public utility lines such center line shall be construed to
be such boundary.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundary; or where district boundaries are extensions of lot lines or
connect the intersections of lot lines, such lines shall be said district
boundary.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to center lines of streets or highways, such district boundary
shall be construed as being parallel to, and at such distance from, said
center lines as indicated on the Zoning Map.
D. The Floodplain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay
district applicable to all zoning districts and lots contained therein in
accordance with the following provisions: [Amended 3-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-06]
(1) Should the Floodplain Conservation District be declared
inapplicable to any tract by reason of action of the Township
Supervisors in amending this chapter or Chapter 82, Floodplain
Management; or the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court of
competent jurisdiction in interpreting the same; the zoning
applicable to such lot shall be deemed to be the district in which it
is located without consideration of this district.
(2) Should the zoning of any parcel or any part thereof in which the
Floodplain Conservation District is located be changed through any
legislative or administrative actions or judicial discretion, such
change shall have no effect on the Floodplain Conservation District
unless such change was included as part of the original application.
(3) All changes to the boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation
District are subject to review and approval of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(4) The Floodplain Conservation District is delineated as those areas of
the Township subject to flooding as defined in Chapter 82,
Floodplain Management, of the Towamencin Township Code.
§ 153-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-306
1:741
§ 153-306. Municipal uses.
The provisions of this chapter with respect to lot area, lot width, yard
regulations, coverage regulations, height regulations, parking and any and
all other regulations or requirements of this chapter (with the exception of
those of the Floodplain Conservation District) shall be inapplicable to any
municipal uses of property. Unless specifically excluded, municipal use of
any property shall be deemed to be a permitted use within any district.
§ 153-306 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-306
1:742
ARTICLE IV
Permitted Land Uses Per District
§ 153-400. Table of Permitted Land Uses by District.204
§ 153-401. R-200 Residential Agricultural District.
In all R-200 Residential Agricultural Districts the following regulations shall
apply unless otherwise specified in Article V of this chapter:
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as setbacks, lot sizes, lot width, building areas
and heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the R-200 District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
Ag-1 Agriculture
Ag-2 Agricultural Sales/Farm Stands
Ag-3 Greenhouse
Ag-4 Intensive Agriculture
Ag-6 Nursery
E-6 Municipal Facility
R-1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
A-3 Family Day-Care
A-4 Home Occupation
A-5 Livestock in Residential Area
A-6 Outside Storage
A-7 Recreation Vehicles
A-8 Residential Accessory Structures
A-9 Spa/Hot Tubs
A-10 Swimming Pools
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (600 square feet or
less) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
A-14 Home Office [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
204. Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Land Uses by District is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 153-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-401
1:743
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
A-20 Wind Energy System [Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No.
16-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the R-200 District provided
that all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional
use approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public
notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
Ag-5 Kennel
Ag-7 Riding Academy/Boarding Stable
B-3 Veterinary Office or Clinic
C-11 Bed-and-Breakfast Inn
C-14 Recreational Campsites
E-1 Cemetery
E-9 Place of Worship
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (601 square feet or
more) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the R-200 District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
C-19 Golf Course
R-10 Residential Conversion
A-1 Accessory Apartment1
A-18 Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted [Added
2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
NOTES:
1 For family member only.
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area All uses 2 acres
Minimum lot width Residential 200 feet
Nonresidential 300 feet
§ 153-401 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-401
1:744
C. Setback requirements. [Amended 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
Regulation Use Type
Requirement
(feet)
Minimum front yard All uses1 75
Minimum side yards Residential uses
One 40
Aggregate 100
Nonresidential uses
One 50
Aggregate 150
Accessory structures1 20
Minimum rear yards Residential uses 60
Nonresidential uses 75
Accessory structures1 20
NOTES:
1 Permitted only for residential uses and located only to the rear of
the principal building. On flag lots, accessory structures may be
permitted to the front or side of the principal structure, but shall
not be less than 35 feet from the front lot line or 20 feet from the
side lot line.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage Residential 7%
Nonresidential 25%
Impervious coverage Residential 12%
Nonresidential 45%
E. Maximum height regulations. [Amended 11-14-2018 by Ord. No.
18-05; 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
Use Type Requirement
Principal residential structure 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2 stories
Principal structure,
nonresidential
65 feet1
Residential accessory
structure
14 feet, not exceeding one story2
§ 153-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-401
1:745
NOTES:
1 By special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that
for every foot of height in excess of 35 feet there shall be added to each
yard requirement one corresponding foot in width or depth.
2 If the residential accessory structure has a pitched roof with a slope
of 18° or greater, the maximum height can be increased to 24 feet, not
exceeding 1 1/2 stories.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: No parking area or driveway shall be located closer than
20 feet to any property line, except the portion of the driveway
required for normal ingress and egress.
G. Additional requirements for nonresidential storage building. In addition
to the requirements set forth in Article X, Conditional Uses, the
following criteria shall apply in considering the approval or denial of
conditional use applications for nonresidential storage buildings in the
R-125 District:
(1) Outdoor vehicle storage is prohibited.
(2) The building shall comply with all fire protection requirements and
shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system.
(3) Storage of hazardous or flammable materials is prohibited.
(4) The hours of operation shall be consistent with those of the primary
building.
(5) Exterior lighting shall be placed not higher than 25 feet above
grade and shall be screened so as to not permit the source of
illumination to be seen from off the premises. Only incandescent or
color corrected types of illumination shall be used. The hours of
illumination of such lights shall be limited to the hours of business
operation and shall otherwise be extinguished between 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. prevailing time.
(6) The nonresidential storage building and primary building must be
under common ownership.
(7) Maximum gross floor area shall not exceed 9,000 square feet.
(8) The nonresidential storage building must be an accessory to an
institutional use only.
(9) The minimum lot size is 12 acres.
§ 153-401 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-402
1:746
§ 153-402. R-180 Residential District.
In all R-180 Residential Districts the following regulations shall apply unless
otherwise specified in Article V of this chapter:
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as setbacks, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the R-180 District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
Ag-1 Agriculture
Ag-2 Agricultural Sales/Farm Stands
Ag-3 Greenhouse
Ag-4 Intensive Agriculture
Ag-6 Nursery
E-6 Municipal Facility
R-1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
A-3 Family Day-Care
A-4 Home Occupation
A-5 Livestock in Residential Areas
A-6 Outside Storage
A-7 Recreational Vehicles
A-8 Residential Accessory Structures
A-9 Spa/Hot Tubs
A-10 Swimming Pools
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (600 square feet or
less) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
A-14 Home Office [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
A-20 Wind Energy System [Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No.
16-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the R-180 District provided
that all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional
use approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public
§ 153-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-402
1:747
notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
Ag-5 Kennel
Ag-7 Riding Academy/Boarding Stable
B-3 Veterinary Office or Clinic
C-11 Bed-and-Breakfast Inn
E-1 Cemetery
E-9 Place of Worship
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (601 square feet or
more) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the R-180 District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
C-19 Golf Course
R-10 Residential Conversion
A-1 Accessory Apartment1
A-18 Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted [Added
2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
NOTES:
1 For family member only.
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area Agricultural uses 3 acres
All other principal
uses
60,000 square feet
Minimum lot width All uses 175 feet
C. Setback requirements. [Amended 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
Regulation Use Type
Requirement
(feet)
Minimum front yard All uses1 50
Minimum side yards Agricultural and
nonresidential uses
§ 153-402 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-402
1:748
Regulation Use Type
Requirement
(feet)
One 50
Aggregate 100
Residential uses
One 30
Aggregate 60
Accessory structures1 15
Minimum rear yards Agricultural and
nonresidential uses
50
Residential uses 40
Accessory structures1 15
NOTES:
1 Permitted only for residential uses and located only to the rear of
the principal building. On flag lots, accessory structures may be
permitted to the front or side of the principal structure, but shall
not be less than 25 feet from the front lot line or 15 feet from the
side lot line.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage All uses 12%
Impervious coverage ll uses 20%
E. Maximum height regulations. [Amended 4-24-2019 by Ord. No.
19-04]
Use Type Requirement
Principal residential structure 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2
stories
Principal structure, nonresidential 65 feet1
Residential accessory structure 14 feet, not exceeding one story2
§ 153-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-402
1:749
§ 153-403. R-175 Residential District.
In all R-175 Residential Districts the following regulations shall apply unless
otherwise specified in Article V of this chapter:
NOTES:
1 By special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that
for every foot of height in excess of 35 feet there shall be added to each
yard requirement one corresponding foot in width or depth.
2 If the residential accessory structure has a pitched roof with a slope
of 18° or greater, the maximum height can be increased to 24 feet, not
exceeding 1 1/2 stories.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: No parking area or driveway shall be located closer than
10 feet to any property line, except the portion of the driveway
required for normal ingress and egress.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as setbacks, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the R-175 District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
Ag-1 Agriculture
Ag-2 Agricultural Sales/Farm Stands
E-6 Municipal Facility
R-1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
A-3 Family Day-Care
A-4 Home Occupation
A-5 Livestock in Residential Areas
A-7 Recreational Vehicles
A-8 Residential Accessory Structures
A-9 Spa/Hot Tubs
A-10 Swimming Pools
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
§ 153-402 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-403
1:750
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (600 square feet or
less) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
A-14 Home Office [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added
2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the R-175 District provided
that all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional
use approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public
notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
Ag-6 Nursery
B-1 Medical offices [Added 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-06]
C-9 Golf Course [Added 11-17-2004 by Ord. No. 04-06]
C-11 Bed-and-Breakfast Inn
C-20 Miniature Golf, Driving Range, Batting Cage
E-9 Place of Worship
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (601 square feet or
more) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the R-175 District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
R-10 Residential Conversion
A-1 Accessory Apartment1
A-18 Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted [Added
2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
A-20 Wind Energy System [Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No.
16-03]
NOTES:
1 For family member only.
B. Lot area and width requirements.
§ 153-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-403
1:751
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area Agricultural uses 3 acres
All other principal
uses
60,000 square feet1
30,000 square feet2
Minimum lot width All uses 175 feet1
125 feet2
NOTES:
1 For lots where neither public water or public sewer are provided, or
where only public water or public sewer, but not both, is provided.
2 For lots where both public water and public sewer are provided.
C. Setback requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum front yard All uses 50 feet
Minimum side yards Agricultural and
nonresidential uses
50 feet
Residential uses 30 feet1
20 feet2
Accessory structure3 10 feet
Minimum rear yards Agricultural and
nonresidential uses
50 feet
Residential uses 40 feet
Accessory structure3 10 feet
NOTES:
1 For lots where neither public water or public sewer are provided, or
where only public water or public sewer, but not both, is provided.
2 For lots where both public water and public sewer are provided.
3 Permitted only for residential uses and located only to the rear of the
principal building.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
§ 153-403 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-403
1:752
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage All uses 18%1
Impervious coverage All uses 30%2
NOTES:
1 Provided that the permissible minimum lot area is 30,000 square feet.
For all other lot areas, the total building coverage shall not exceed
12%.
2 Provided that the permissible minimum lot area is 30,000 square feet.
For all other lot areas, the total impervious coverage shall not exceed
20%.
E. Maximum height regulations.
Use Type Requirement
Principal residential structure 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2
stories
Principal structure, nonresidential 65 feet1
Residential accessory structure 14 feet, not exceeding one story
NOTES:
1 By special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that
for every foot of height in excess of 35 feet there shall be added to each
yard requirement one corresponding foot in width or depth.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: No parking area or driveway shall be located closer than
five feet to any property line, except the portion of the driveway
required for normal ingress and egress.
G. Conditional use criteria for B-1 Medical Office Uses. In addition to the
provisions of Article X of the Zoning Ordinance, the following additional
criteria shall apply in considering the approval or denial of B-1
Conditional Use applications in this district: [Added 5-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-06]
(1) The B-1 Medical Office use may be applied only to lots which are
lawfully in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance.205
(2) The B-1 Medical Office use shall be restricted to one medical office
facility in one building.
205. Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 19-06, adopted 5-8-2019.
§ 153-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-403
1:753
(3) Street frontage. A lot shall have a minimum of 150 feet frontage
which is located solely on an arterial highway as defined in § A101
of the Towamencin Engineering Standards206 and shall not abut the
right-of-way of another street.
(4) Minimum lot area: 27,500 square feet.
(5) Maximum lot area: 43,560 square feet.
(6) Maximum building coverage: 18%.
(7) Maximum impervious coverage: 55%.
(8) Parking: Minimum of one space per 250 square feet of gross floor
area.
(9) Building requirements. Proposed buildings and additions must
have a residential character and must include the following
features:
(a) A pitched roof covering at least 80% of the building with a
minimum pitch of 18° (4/12).
(b) Residential scaled windows and doors.
(10) Parking location.
(a) No parking other than that associated with required driveway
access shall be permitted within the minimum front yard
setback.
(b) No parking shall be closer than five feet to the side or rear
property lines.
(11) Buffer yards. A minimum ten-foot wide buffer yard shall be
provided along the boundaries of all residential uses and parking
shall not be permitted within such buffer. Parking shall be
permitted in the area of any other buffer yard required by the
Towamencin Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance207 but shall not be permitted within the said minimum
ten-foot-wide buffer yard.
(12) Site lighting. All parking area lighting shall be extinguished no
later than one hour after the medical office closes or 9:00 p.m.,
whichever is earlier. All proposed parking area lights shall be
mounted at a height of no greater than 20 feet above finished
grade.
(13) Signage relating to the B-1 Medical Office use, other than any
existing signs, shall comply with requirements applicable to the
R-175 Residential District.
206. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Appendix 136A.
207. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-403 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-403
1:754
§ 153-404. R-125 Residential District.
In all R-125 Residential Districts the following regulations shall apply unless
otherwise specified in Article V of this chapter:
(14) Stormwater facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
Towamencin Township Stormwater Management Ordinance,208
with no exemptions provided, for any proposed impervious surface
coverage greater than the allowable maximum for permitted uses
in the R-175 Residential District.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as setbacks, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the R-125 District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
E-6 Municipal Facility
R-1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
A-3 Family Day-Care
A-4 Home Occupation
A-7 Recreation Vehicles
A-8 Residential Accessory Structures
A-9 Spa/Hot Tubs
A-10 Swimming Pools
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (600 square feet or
less) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
A-14 Home Office [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the R-125 District provided
that all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional
use approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public
notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
208. Editor's Note: See Ch. 132, Stormwater Management.
§ 153-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-404
1:755
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (601 square feet or
more) [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
E-9 Place of Worship
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the R-125 District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
R-10 Residential Conversion
A-1 Accessory Apartment1
A-18 Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted [Added
2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
A-20 Wind Energy System [Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No.
16-03]
NOTES:
1 For family member only.
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area All uses 30,000 square feet1
25,000 square feet2
Minimum lot width All uses 125 feet1
115 feet2
NOTES:
1 For lots where neither public water or public sewer are provided, or
where only public water or public sewer, but not both, is provided.
2 For lots where both public water and public sewer are provided.
C. Setback requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum front yard All uses 50 feet1
40 feet2
Minimum side yards All uses 20 feet1
15 feet2
Accessory structure3 10 feet
§ 153-404 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-404
1:756
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum rear yards All uses 40 feet1
30 feet2
Accessory structure3 10 feet
NOTES:
1 For lots where neither public water or public sewer are provided, or
where only public water or public sewer, but not both, is provided.
2 For lots where both public water and public sewer are provided.
3 Permitted only for residential uses and located only to the rear of the
principal building.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage All uses 20%1
Impervious coverage All uses 35%2
NOTES:
1 Provided that the permissible minimum lot area is 25,000 square
feet. For all other minimum lot areas, the total building coverage shall
not exceed 18%.
2 Provided that the permissible minimum lot area is 25,000 square
feet. For all other minimum lot areas, the total impervious coverage
shall not exceed 30%.
E. Maximum height regulations.
Use Type Requirement
Principal residential structure 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2
stories
Principal structure, nonresidential 65 feet1
Residential accessory structure 14 feet, not exceeding one story
NOTES:
1 By special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that
for every foot of height in excess of 35 feet there shall be added to each
yard requirement one corresponding foot in width or depth.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
§ 153-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-404
1:757
§ 153-405. R-50 Residential District.
In all R-50 Residential Districts the following regulations shall apply unless
otherwise specified in Article V of this chapter:
(2) Setbacks: No parking area or driveway shall be located closer than
five feet to any property line, except the portion of the driveway
required for normal ingress and egress.209
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as setbacks, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the R-50 District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
E-6 Municipal Facility
R-1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
R-3 Twin
R-4 Duplex Dwelling
A-7 Recreational Vehicle
A-8 Residential Accessory Structures
A-9 Spa/Hot Tubs
A-10 Swimming Pools
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (600 square feet or
less) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
A-14 Home Office [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the R-50 District provided
that all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional
use approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public
notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (601 square feet or
more) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
209. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Additional requirements for nonresidential storage
buildings, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-17-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-09.
§ 153-404 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-405
1:758
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the R-50 District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
R-10 Residential Conversion
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area Single-family
detached dwelling
12,000 square feet
Twin and duplex 7,500 square feet1
All other principal
uses
15,000 square feet
Minimum lot width Single-family
detached dwelling
80 feet
Twin and duplex 50 feet1
All other principal
uses
80 feet
NOTES:
1 Minimum lot size required for each individual unit.
C. Setback requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum front yard All uses 25 feet
Minimum side yards Single-family
detached
15 feet
Twin and duplex 15 feet
All other principal
uses
25 feet
Accessory structure1 5 feet
Minimum rear yards All uses 25 feet
Accessory structure1 5 feet
NOTES:
1 Permitted only for residential uses and located only to the rear of the
principal building.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
§ 153-405 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-405
1:759
§ 153-406. MH Manufactured Housing District.
In all MH Districts the following regulations shall apply unless otherwise
specified in Article V of this chapter:
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage All uses 25%
Impervious coverage All uses 40%
E. Maximum height regulations.
Use Type Requirement
Principal residential structure 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2
stories
Principal structure, nonresidential 65 feet1
Residential accessory structure 14 feet, not exceeding one story
NOTES:
1 By special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that
for every foot of height in excess of 35 feet there shall be added to each
yard requirement one corresponding foot in width or depth.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: No parking area or driveway shall be located closer than
five feet to any property line, except the portion of the driveway
required for normal ingress and egress.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as setbacks, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the MH District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
E-6 Municipal Facility
R-7 Mobile or Modular Home
A-7 Recreational Vehicles
A-8 Residential Accessory Structures (excluding garages and
carports for individual units)
A-10 Swimming Pools (for common use only and not for
individual units within development)
§ 153-405 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-406
1:760
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (600 square feet or
less) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
A-14 Home Office [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the MH District provided that
all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional use
approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public notice
and hearing and further provided that all applicable requirements
for the use and district have also been satisfied:
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (601 square feet or
more) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the MH District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
none.
B. Lot area, width, density, and open space requirements.
Regulation Requirement
Minimum lot area 10 acres1
Maximum density Four dwelling units per acre
Minimum lot width 350 feet
Common open space At least 10% of the tract area must be
designated for common open space
usable for active recreational
purposes; this area shall not include
any required setback areas
NOTES:
1 Every area to be used for mobile or modular homes or other
structures must be served exclusively by the municipal sanitary waste
disposal system and a public water supply system.
C. Setback requirements.
(1) Setback from zoning district line. No dwelling unit or other
building may be located closer than 40 feet from the MH District
line. When adjacent to any residential district no dwelling unit or
§ 153-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-406
1:761
other building maybe located closer than 100 feet from the MH
District line.
(2) Setback from property line. No dwelling unit or other building may
be located closer than 20 feet from any property line within the MH
District.
(3) Setback from streets. Except as indicated below, no dwelling unit
or any side of another building or accessory use shall be located
closer than 25 feet to the ultimate right-of-way line of any public
interior street, or to the edge of the cartway, of interior roadways,
or to the edge of any common pedestrian walkway, within a MH
District. However, setbacks from the street from which the
required parking area is accessed must meet the provisions of
Subsection C(4) below and the required size of the parking area. A
projection or small roof over the front door of a dwelling unit shall
be permitted to encroach into the setback required by this
paragraph provided such encroachment is no greater than five feet
and the width of such projection does not exceed eight feet and the
projection remains a roof only and is not enclosed in any way,
inclusive of screening. No more than six homes in a row shall have
the same setback; where varied setbacks are utilized, the
difference shall be at least four feet.
(4) Setback from parking facilities. No dwelling unit or accessory use
shall be located within 10 feet of any parking area, except in the
case of attached carports or garages where no setbacks from the
parking area shall be required and private parking spaces for a
designated dwelling unit where the setback may be reduced to 7 1/
2 feet between the dwelling unit and the parking spaces. The buffer
must be planted with a continuous hedge of evergreens minimum
three feet in height.
D. Distance between structures. Dwelling units and roofed structures shall
be separated from each other, and from other buildings at their closest
points by a minimum of 30 feet.
(1) Reduction of the distance between structures. The minimum
distance between dwelling units may be reduced from 30 feet to 17
feet provided the following conditions have been met:
(a) The minimum distance shall also apply to the distance between
a deck, patio, enclosed porch, and/or an area of an attached
awning and the area of an adjacent dwelling unit, deck, patio,
enclosed porch, and/or attached awning; and
(b) Such dwelling units shall be staggered so that no greater than
2/3 of any facade, when measured at right angles, shall be less
than 30 feet to an adjacent dwelling unit, patio, enclosed
porch, and/or attached awning area as permitted above.
E. Maximum coverage regulations.
§ 153-406 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-406
1:762
§ 153-407. MR Multifamily Residential District.
In all MR Districts the following regulations shall apply unless otherwise
specified in Article V of this chapter:
(1) Impervious coverage: 50%.
F. Maximum height regulations.
(1) All structures: 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2 stories.
G. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: No parking spaces or driveways shall be permitted in the
forty- or one-hundred-foot zoning district setback line as the case
may be.
H. Application, review and approval or disapproval. Plans for any
development shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,210 as last amended,
and specifically in accordance with the plan requirement section and
the processing procedure article therein.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as yard, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the MR District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
E-6 Municipal Facility
R-4 Duplex Dwelling
R-5 Townhouse
R-6 Multiplex
R-12 Garden Apartment
A-10 Swimming Pool (for common use only and not for
individual units)
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (600 square feet or
less) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
A-14 Home Office [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
210. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-407
1:763
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the MR District provided that
all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional use
approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public notice
and hearing and further provided that all applicable requirements
for the use and district have also been satisfied:
E-3 Day-Care Center/Nursery School
A-12 Nonresidential Accessory Buildings (601 square feet or
more) [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the MR District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
R-9 Community/Group Home
R-11 Boarding Houses
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area Duplex development 1 acre
Townhouse
development
2 acres
Multiplex
development
2 acres
Garden apartment
development
10 acres
All other principal
uses
1 acre
Minimum lot width Duplex 75 feet
Multiplex 250 feet
Garden apartment 450 feet
All other principal
uses
125 feet
§ 153-407 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-407
1:764
Units Units
Regulation Use Type Per Acre
Per
Building
Maximum density and
units per building
Duplex 4 2
Townhouse 4 3 to 5
Multiplex 4 3 to 5
Garden
apartment
4 8
All other
principal uses
— —
C. Setback requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum front yard Garden apartments
and multiplexes
75 feet
All other principal
uses
25 feet
Minimum side yards Duplex dwelling 15 feet
Garden apartment 50 feet1
Multiplex 40 feet1
All other principal
uses
25 feet
Minimum rear yards Garden apartment 75 feet1
Multiplex 60 feet1
All other principal
uses
25 feet
NOTES:
1 A minimum setback of 100 feet is required where the adjoining lot is
zoned or is used for other than garden apartment or multiplex
residential purposes.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage All uses 25%
Impervious coverage All uses 35%
E. Maximum height regulations.
§ 153-407 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-407
1:765
Use Type Requirement
Principal residential structure 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2 stories1
Principal structure,
nonresidential
65 feet2
NOTES:
1 Excluding basements in garden apartments. Actual building heights
for garden apartments may be restricted by the height limitations
imposed by the Fire Department and the available water pressure and
other pertinent conditions.
2 By special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that
for every foot of height in excess of 35 feet there shall be added to
each yard requirement one corresponding foot in width or depth.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks:
(a) No building shall be located closer than 20 feet to any parking
area or paved internal road.
(b) No individual dwelling unit's parking area or driveway shall be
located closer than five feet to any property line, except for
interior lots of townhouses or duplexes which can have zero
setbacks, except the portion of the driveway required for
normal ingress and egress.
G. Special district requirements. The general plan for garden apartments
or multiplex development shall include evidence and facts showing that
it has considered and made provisions for, and the development shall be
executed in accordance with, the following essential conditions:
(1) General requirements.
(a) The proposed development shall be substantially in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan of the Township, shall consider
the surrounding land features of the area including but not
limited to residences, schools, parks, other reservations of
open spaces, locations, width and grade of streets, location and
arrangement of parking spaces, local and regional business
areas and shopping centers, densities proposed for
surrounding areas, and other such features as shall contribute
to the harmonious development of the area, with due regard to
the character of the neighborhood and its peculiar suitability
for this type of use.
(b) The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance
with an overall plan and shall be designed as a unified
§ 153-407 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-407
1:766
architectural unit with appropriate landscaping in accordance
with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,211 as
last amended.
[1] If the development is to be carried out in stages, each
stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements
and the intent of this chapter shall be fully complied with
at the completion of any stage.
[2] The developer shall assure the provision of required
improvements by means of a proper completion guarantee
in the form of a bond or the deposit of funds or securities in
escrow to cover the cost of the improvements. The work
shall be performed in accordance with all requirements
and the approved plans.
(c) The area shall be adaptable to community development being
located in relation to major thoroughfares, streets, railroads,
public transportation, shopping or other facilities, and as far as
possible shall have within or through it no major thoroughfare
or other physical feature which will tend to destroy the
neighborhood or community cohesiveness.
(d) There shall be no habitable dwelling unit with a floor elevation
below the finished grade.
(e) Number of rooms. A one-bedroom unit shall contain a
maximum of three rooms, exclusive of baths, halls and closets;
each two-bedroom unit shall contain a maximum of four rooms,
exclusive of baths, halls and closets; and each three-bedroom
unit shall contain a maximum of five rooms, exclusive of baths,
halls and closets. Separate dining areas or nonsleeping areas
and their design within the unit may be provided if authorized
as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) In the case of a condominium development, the "declaration"
recorded pursuant to the provisions of the Unit Property Act212 of
Pennsylvania shall contain the requirements that the Towamencin
Township Supervisors be given notice of all meetings of the unit
owners and all meetings of the council, together with a provision
that the Towamencin Township Supervisors or their
representatives shall be entitled to attend all such meetings. The
"Code of Requirements" adopted pursuant to the Unit Property Act
of Pennsylvania shall likewise contain a requirement that the
Towamencin Township Supervisors or their representatives be
given notice of, or shall have the right to attend, all meetings of unit
owners and all meetings of the council.
211. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
212. Editor's Note: The former Unit Property Act was repealed 7-2-1980 by P.L. 286, No. 82. See
now 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 153-407 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-407
1:767
§ 153-408. MRC Mixed Residential Cluster District.
In all MRC Residential Districts the following regulations shall apply unless
otherwise specified in Article V of this chapter:
(a) No permit for condominium development shall be granted until
there shall have been filed with the Township Secretary a
certified copy of the "declaration," the "declaration plan," and
the "Code of Regulations," adopted in accordance with the Unit
Property Act of Pennsylvania.
(b) In the event that all or part of the property subject to the unit
"declaration" shall be removed from the provisions of the Unit
Property Act by means of a "revocation" or an "amendment"
recorded pursuant to the provisions of the Act, or by any other
means whatsoever, then all use and occupancy of the units
shall cease until such time as adequate provision has been
made to assure proper maintenance of the common elements
of the condominium and approved by the Township
Supervisors.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as yard, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the MRC District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
E-6 Municipal Facility
R-1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
R-2 Small Lot Single
R-5 Townhouse
R-6 Multiplex
R-12 Garden Apartment
A-7 Recreational Vehicles
A-8 Residential Accessory Structures
A-9 Spa/Hot Tubs
A-10 Swimming Pools
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-14 Home Office [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
§ 153-407 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-408
1:768
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the MRC District provided
that all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional
use approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public
notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied: none
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the MRC District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied: none
B. Prerequisites for MRC mixed residential cluster development. The
following necessary conditions must be satisfied before the Board of
Supervisors will consider a Zoning Map amendment to permit mixed
residential cluster development:
(1) The tract of land proposed for mixed residential cluster
development must contain a minimum area of 100 acres (excluding
the rights-of-way of existing public roads).
(2) The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership, or shall
be the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the
entire tract and will be developed under single direction and
completely in accordance with an overall approved plan.
(3) The tract of land to be developed shall be located in an area where
the uses and density permitted in a mixed residential cluster
development will be consistent with the objectives and intent of the
Comprehensive Plan.
(4) The proposed development shall be served by both centralized
water facilities and public sewer facilities deemed acceptable by
the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation by the Township
Engineer.
C. Submission requirements for an application for rezoning to the MRC
Mixed Residential Cluster District.
(1) A preliminary plan indicating the use of the entire tract shall be
submitted in accordance with the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,213 as last amended.
(2) The application for a Zoning Map amendment to permit mixed
residential cluster development shall be accompanied by a
development impact study prepared by a qualified individual or
firm.
213. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-408 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-408
1:769
(3) The developer shall submit written evidence that he has an interest
in the property in the proposed MRC site which shall consist in size
of at least the minimum permitted tract size in the MRC District.
This interest shall be in the form of a fee simple title; or an option to
acquire a fee simple title within a specified time period; or a
leasehold interest in excess of 40 years; or a substantial interest in
a joint venture agreement, real estate investment trust or other
real estate syndication which has or can obtain a fee simple title; or
a marketable title subject to certain restraints which will not
subsequently restrict its development within a reasonable time.
(4) All mortgages, easements, restricting land use, liens and
judgments which may affect the site shall be identified.
D. Development regulations. The following development regulations shall
apply for all proposed mixed residential cluster developments:
Regulation Requirement
Minimum tract size 100 acres
Maximum permitted density 2.5 dwelling units per acre1
Required dwelling type mix Minimum of three different unit
types
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum percentage
of total units
Single-family
detached
50%
Other unit types
(each)
15%
NOTES:
1 Total acreage to be measured excluding the rights-of-way of existing
public streets.
E. Lot area and width requirements for permitted use types within MRC
District.
(1) Minimum lot area:
Use Type Requirement
Single-family detached
dwelling
12,000 square feet1
Townhouse 2,000 square feet2
Small lot singles 6,400 square feet3
Multiplex 3,500 square feet4,6
Garden apartment 2,000 square feet5,6
§ 153-408 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-408
1:770
NOTES:
1 Provided that the average lot size is 14,000 square feet and
provided further that no more than two minimum size lots shall be
located side by side or back to back.
2 Provided that the average lot size is 2,500 square feet in area.
3 Provided that the average lot size is 8,500 square feet in area.
4 Per dwelling unit with a maximum net density of 10 dwelling
units per acre.
5 Per dwelling unit with a maximum net density of 12 dwelling
units per acre.
6 Net density includes all buildings and all required and
associated use areas including access, parking, recreational
facilities, and yards.
(2) Minimum lot width:
Use Type Requirement
Single-family detached
dwelling
80 feet1
Townhouse 20 feet1
Small lot single 60 feet3,4
Multiplex 200 feet
Garden apartment 350 feet
NOTES:
1 Provided that the lot width at the street line is not less than 50
feet.
2 Provided that the average lot and building width of all units is
not less than 22 feet.
3 Provided that the lot width at the street line is not less than 40
feet.
4 Provided that the minimum lot width at the building setback line
for a unit on the bulb of a cul-de-sac may be reduced to not less
than 50 feet.
F. Setback requirements.
(1) Minimum front yard: [Amended 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
§ 153-408 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-408
1:771
Use Type Requirement
Single-family detached
dwelling
30 feet1
Townhouse and multiplex 35 feet1
Small lot single 25 feet2
Garden apartments 75 feet1
NOTES:
1 No more than 50% of the total dwelling units on a single street
or parking court shall be located at the minimum setback line.
Setback variations for single-family detached dwellings shall be
no less than five feet and not more than six dwelling units in a
row shall have the same setback. All fences shall comply with
§ 136-518 of the Towamencin Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
2 Provided that up to 40% of units may be reduced to 20 feet and
further provided that no more than three lots with a setback of
less than 25 feet shall be provided in a row. All fences shall comply
with § 136-518 of the Towamencin Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
(2) Minimum side yards:1
Use Type Requirement
Single-family detached
dwelling
15 feet
Townhouse 10 feet
Small lot single See Note 2
Multiplex 35 feet
Garden apartments 75 feet3
Accessory structures4 10 feet
NOTES:
1 Two side yards are required per dwelling unit or combination
of dwelling units comprising a single building unless otherwise
indicated.
2 One side setback shall be a minimum of five feet . The other
side setback shall be a minimum of 14 feet. There shall be a
minimum distance of 19 feet between houses on contiguous lots.
No more than 60% of a publicly dedicated easement shall be used
in calculating the distance of the side yard.
§ 153-408 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-408
1:772
NOTES:
3 Individual buildings may have a minimum setback from lot lines
of adjacent residential lots within the MRC development of 50 feet,
and further provided that, where a building abuts permanent open
space within the development, the setback can be reduced to 25
feet from the open space property line.
4 Permitted only for single-family detached dwellings (except
where prohibited) and small lot singles. For single-family detached
dwellings accessory structure must be located only in side and
rear yards. For small lot singles, accessory structure must be
located only in the building envelope and to the side or rear of the
principal building.
(3) Minimum rear yards:
Use Type Requirement
Single-family detached
dwelling
30 feet
Townhouse 20 feet
Small lot single 25 feet
Multiplex 50 feet1
Garden apartments 75 feet1
Accessory structures2 10 feet
NOTES:
1 Individual buildings may have a minimum setback from lot lines
of adjacent residential lots within the MRC development of 50 feet,
and further provided that where a building abuts permanent open
space within the development the setback can be reduced to 25
feet from the open space property line.
2 Permitted only for single-family detached dwellings (except
where prohibited) and located only in side and rear yards.
G. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage Single-family
detached dwelling
20%
Townhouse 50%
Small lot single 30%
Garden apartments
and multiplex
35%
§ 153-408 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-408
1:773
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Impervious coverage Single-family
detached dwelling
40%
Townhouse 50%
Small lot single 55%
Multiplex and
garden apartments
50%
H. Maximum height regulations.
(1) Principal structure: 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2 stories.
(2) Residential accessory structures: 14 feet, not exceeding one story.
I. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: Driveways may be located adjacent to side lot line.
J. Outparcels. The MRC District may contain separately-owned parcels of
less than 100 acres which have not previously been developed or
subdivided under the MRC District. Such parcels shall be governed by
the following regulations:
(1) Lot area. The maximum permitted density on any outparcel
proposed for subdivision shall be 2 1/2 dwelling units per gross
acre (excluding the rights-of-way of existing public roads).
However, in no case shall any lot be less than 18,000 square feet.
[Amended 7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-10]
(2) Lot width. A lot width of not less than 85 feet shall be required at
the building setback line and 50 feet at the street line. [Amended
10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15]
(3) Use, yard and coverage requirements. Use, setback, coverage,
height and parking requirements shall be in accordance with the
single-family detached dwelling requirements of this article.
K. Special development regulations. The following special development
regulations shall be applied to any proposed MRC development:
(1) Separation of use types. Different use types within a planned MRC
development shall, to the greatest extent practicable, be separated
by natural features.
(2) Buffer requirements.
(a) External. A buffer yard shall be required around the total
perimeter of the tract. The yard shall be part of the area
assigned to residential lots, unless the lots are expanded by the
§ 153-408 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-408
1:774
width of the buffer, and the use and function of the buffers are
restricted by deed.
[1] Whenever structures with two or more dwelling units in
the MRC District will abut existing single-family detached
dwelling on an adjacent property, a buffer at least 15 feet
wide shall be required which will eventually provide an
effective visual screen at least 15 feet in height. The
primary component of this buffer shall be a row of
evergreen trees spaced not more than 10 feet apart on
center, at least six feet in height when planted; secondary
components shall include mounding, opaque fencing or
other vegetative material as required by the Board of
Supervisors.
[2] Whenever any residential units in the district will abut
existing commercial or business development, or where
the residential units in the MRC District would not be
significantly different in terms of density and structural
type than those which abut it, a less restrictive buffer may
be required. This buffer shall also be at least 15 feet wide,
but could be any combination of evergreen or deciduous
vegetation, mounding or fencing which would ease and
soften, but not essentially block the view from one side to
the other, and would eventually attain a height of 15 feet.
[3] Buffer requirements can be waived by the Board of
Supervisors wherever buffers exist which will fulfill the
same function, or where the units in the MRC District will
be of the same structural type, and approximately the
same density of the dwelling units adjacent to the MRC
District.
(b) Internal. Landscaped buffers at least 15 feet in width will be
required within the MRC development whenever multifamily
dwelling units abut other permitted housing types. The
primary component of this buffer will be the same as detailed
in the external buffer requirements specified in Subsection
K(2)(a) above.
(3) Requirements for open space. The following regulations shall
govern the characteristics and maintenance of the required open
space created by an MRC mixed residential cluster development:
(a) Characteristics of required open space. Open space created
shall have the following minimal requirements:
[1] The land area to be set aside for permanent preservation
as open space shall be located and so shaped as to be
suitable for the purpose intended. Consideration shall be
given to contiguous portions of existing and potential open
§ 153-408 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-408
1:775
space lands in adjacent tracts. The Board of Supervisors
may require the preservation in the Comprehensive Plan.
[2] A minimum of 25% of the gross tract acreage shall be set
aside as open space land. At least 25% of all open space
lands must be planned for active recreational purposes. In
addition, open space land may be required to be set aside
by the Board of Supervisors, at the recommendation of the
Township Planning Commission, if in their opinion, the site
contains appropriate land for such purposes, provided this
does not result in restricting the applicant's entitlement to
the maximum density permitted by this chapter.
[3] Any land in excess of the minimum percentage of open
space land required herein, gained from reducing building
lot areas pursuant to this chapter, may be used for either
of the following:
[a] Additional open space land, for any of the proposed
uses allowed by the provisions of this section.
[b] Building lots in excess of the minimum size required.
(b) Maintenance of required open space. The following
requirements shall govern the maintenance of the required
open space:
[1] The open space land to be set aside or reserved for park,
woodlands, conservation, playground, active recreational
use or other open space purposes, such as the
preservation of natural features, must first be offered for
dedication to the Township, or may be reserved for private
use, if Township officials decline to accept the offer of
dedication, in which case satisfactory arrangements shall
be made, acceptable to the Township, for the maintenance
of all such areas.
[2] The location, extent, and purpose of land proposed to be
set aside for open space or for recreational use must be
reviewed and approved by the Township Planning
Commission before the provisions of this article apply. A
private recreational use such as a golf course or a
swimming pool, whose use is limited to the owners or
occupants of lots located within the subdivision and other
such nearby land-owners who may wish to become
members of the corporation, may be approved as common
land. Other uses on site which may qualify as common land
may include but not be limited to, historic buildings or
sites, natural parks and parkway areas, landscaped parks,
bridle paths, landscaped walkways, extensive areas with
tree cover, and the low land along streams or areas of
§ 153-408 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-408
1:776
rough terrain where such areas are extensive and have
natural features worthy of preservation.
[3] Necessary covenants, easements and/or restrictions must
be established to provide for public utilities, drainage,
trails for hiking or bicycling, or any other permitted use
designated for the benefit of owners or occupiers of the
development if the open space is to be privately owned.
[4] If a development includes a proposal to dedicate to the
Township land for park and/or open space use, under
provisions of this section, the total land area to be
dedicated shall be delineated on the subdivision plan with
a note stipulating that the legal means of conveyance shall
be by dedication.
[5] If a development includes, as part of its open space land,
lands deemed by the Board of Supervisors with the
recommendation of the Township Planning Commission to
be a key element in the Township open space system
according to the Towamencin Township Comprehensive
Plan, such land shall be required to be dedicated to the
Township.
[6] If the open space land is to be retained by the property
owners, the Township will require that the property
owners provide for and establish a homeowners'
association, or other organization or funded community
trust for the ownership and maintenance of the open
space, and that such organization shall not be dissolved
nor shall it dispose of the open space by sale or otherwise,
except to an organization conceived and established to
own and maintain the open space, or by dedication to, and
acceptance by the Township. In the event that a
homeowners' association is contemplated, the association
shall, to the greatest degree practicable, be established
from the start of the project and all homeowners shall be a
party thereof. In addition, homeowners' associations may,
as determined appropriate by the Township Supervisors,
maintain dedicated open space or lease back dedicated
open space land from the Township.
[7] If the open space land is to be controlled by other than the
Township, then all property owners of the tract shall have
equal rights and obligations in the organization and these
rights and obligations shall be included in all deeds which
shall be properly recorded and the agreement containing
these rights and obligations shall be approved by the
Board of Supervisors at the same time as the plan is
approved. In the event that the organization, established
to own and maintain open space land, or any successor
§ 153-408 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-408
1:777
organization shall, at any time after establishment of the
MRC development, fail to maintain the open space land
in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
development plan, the Township may serve written notice
upon such organization or upon the property owners of
the MRC development setting forth the manner in which
the organization has failed to maintain the open space
land in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include
a demand that such deficiencies or maintenance be
corrected within 30 days thereof and shall state the date
and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within
14 days of the notice. At such a hearing the Township
may modify the terms of the original notice as to the
deficiencies and may give an extension of time within
which they shall be corrected. If the deficiencies set forth
in the original notice or in the modifications thereof shall
not be corrected within said 30 days of any extension
thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the taxable
values of nearby properties and to prevent the open space
land from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon
said open space, and maintain the same for a period of
one year. Said maintenance by the Township shall not
constitute a taking of said open space, nor vest in the
public any rights to use same. Before the expiration of said
year, the Township shall, upon its initiative, or upon the
request of the organization therefore responsible for the
maintenance of the open space land, call a public hearing
upon notice to such organization, or to be held by the
Board of Supervisors, at which hearing such organization
or the residents of the cluster development shall show
cause why such maintenance by the Township shall not,
at the option of the Township, continue for a succeeding
year. If the Board of Supervisors shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain said open space
land in reasonable condition, the Township shall cease to
maintain said open space land at the end of said year.
If the Board of Supervisors shall determine that such
organization is not ready and able to maintain said open
space land in a reasonable condition, the Township may
in its discretion continue to maintain said open space land
during the next succeeding year and, subject to a similar
hearing and determination in each year thereafter.
[8] The cost of maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the development and
shall become a lien on said properties. The Township, at
the time of entering upon said open space land for the
purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of lien in the
office of the Prothonotary of the County, upon the
§ 153-408 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-408
1:778
properties affected by the lien within the MRC
development.
(4) Development impact study. To ensure that a proposed MRC
development will not have an adverse effect upon the natural
features of the site, as well as upon the provision of light and air,
water, transportation, police and fire protection, schools, utilities
and other public facilities, the Board of Supervisors and the
Township Planning Commission shall evaluate the impact of the
development upon the site, the surrounding neighborhood, and the
facilities and services of Towamencin Township as listed below. The
applicant shall provide all of the information, data and studies
needed to reach conclusive evaluations of these items.
(a) The conformance of the proposed development with the
Comprehensive Plan of Towamencin Township, and
compatibility with existing and proposed land uses adjacent to
the site.
(b) The impact on existing floodplains, waterways, heavily wooded
areas, steep slopes and other sensitive natural features, if any.
(c) The impact on the Township and regional transportation
system and the ability of adjacent streets and inter-sections to
efficiently and safely handle the traffic generated by the
proposed development.
(d) The impact on the Township's school district including an
estimate of new pupils generated by the proposed
development.
(e) The impact on nearby commercial facilities within the
Township and surrounding municipalities.
(f) The impact on public utilities including but not limited to
sewage disposal, water supply, storm drainage and electrical
utilities.
(g) The impact upon provisions of police and fire protection.
(h) The impact on the open space and recreation facilities of
Towamencin Township.
(i) The impact upon the character of the surrounding
neighborhood. The applicant must show the proposed
development will not adversely affect the surrounding
neighborhood.
(j) Required documentation shall include the following:
[1] The location and size of the site, with evidence supporting
the general adequacy for development.
§ 153-408 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-408
1:779
[2] The proposed residential density of the development and
the percentage mix of the various dwelling types.
[3] The location, size, accessibility and proposed use of the
open space, manner of ownership and maintenance, and a
copy of the covenant to be incorporated in the individual
deeds, if applicable.
[4] Conceptual plans of proposed utility and drainage
systems.
[5] Plans and renderings indicating the design, unity and
aesthetic relationship of building and landscaping within
the proposed development.
[6] The text of covenants, easements and existing restrictions
or those to be imposed upon the land or structure
including provisions for public utilities, and trails for such
activities as hiking or bicycling, if applicable.
(5) Evaluation of development impact study. The development impact
study required in herein, shall be evaluated to determine the
suitability of the site in question to accommodate the magnitude of
development proposed, as well as the impact of the proposed
development on the community facilities and services of
Towamencin Township. The following alternative findings shall
result from the evaluation process:
(a) Evaluation which leads to a positive assessment for a proposed
development shall be approved by the Board.
(b) Evaluations which lead to an overall negative assessment for a
proposed development shall lead to a denial by the Board.
(c) Evaluations which lead to an overall negative assessment for a
proposed development may lead to a conditional approval by
the Board either: when the developer agrees to undertake
activities or improvements which will compensate or correct
deficiencies or negative impacts caused by the implementation
of the proposed development; or when the developer agrees to
implement the proposed development at a lower density, as
specified by the Board.
(6) Special development regulations for small lot singles. The following
special development regulations shall apply to all small lot singlefamily
detached dwelling units within a planned MRC development:
(a) Deed restriction against construction outside of building
envelope. Before approval of any subdivision plan in
accordance with this subsection, the plan shall show clearly, in
a manner acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, with
appropriate legends, those areas outside of the required
§ 153-408 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-408
1:780
§ 153-409. (Reserved)
§ 153-410. VC Village Commercial District.
In all VC Districts the following regulations shall apply unless otherwise
specified in Article V of this chapter:
setback areas where additional building or structures are
prohibited. The owner and/or developer conveying any lot
developed hereunder shall insert in the agreement of sale for
each of the lots a provision informing the prospective buyer
of the size of the lot, that permission to construct singlefamily
detached homes on said lot was obtained from the Board
of Supervisors on the condition of insertion of such a deed
restriction to be recorded within the deed upon the conveyance
of each lot which shall prohibit any construction outside the
building envelope. As a further restriction, the developer/
owner shall require that the owner or user of any lot shall not
allow to be parked thereon, any vehicle greater than 19 feet in
length.
(b) Contiguous open space requirement. In considering any
proposal of development in accordance with this section, the
Board of Supervisors shall require a provision of contiguous
open space of at least 25% of the land area in the area
developed under this subsection.
(c) Fences. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
this chapter or Subsection K(6)(a), above, fences constructed
in accordance with this chapter shall be permitted outside of
the building envelope.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as yard, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the VC District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
(a) The following uses are permitted on a minimum lot size of
5,000 square feet:
R-3 Twin (per unit)
(b) The following uses are permitted on a minimum lot size of
10,000 square feet:
§ 153-408 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-410
1:781
B-1 Medical Office
B-2 Office
R-1 Single-family Detached Dwelling
R-4 Duplex Dwelling
A-2 Dwelling in Combination with Business
A-3 Family Day-Care
A-4 Home Occupation
A-8 Residential Accessory Structures
A-9 Spa/Hot Tubs
A-10 Swimming Pools
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added
2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
(c) The following uses are permitted on a minimum lot size of
20,000 square feet:
C-15 Repair Shop
C-16 Retail Trade and Retail Services
(d) The following uses are permitted on a minimum lot size of
40,000 square feet:
C-5 Convenience Store
C-6 Eating Place [Added 8-24-2005 by Ord. No.
05-03]
C-9 Financial Establishment
C-10 Funeral Home
E-2 Commercial School
E-3 Day-Care Center/Nursery School
E-6 Municipal Facility
E-10 Private Organization
(e) The following uses are permitted on a minimum lot size of
120,000 square feet:
B-5 Business Center
A-13 Accessory Business Park or Business Center Uses
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the VC District provided that
all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional use
approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public notice
§ 153-410 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-410
1:782
and hearing and further provided that all applicable requirements
for the use and district have also been satisfied:
B-6 Conversion
A-15 Convenience Window (on lots greater than 40,000
square feet only) [Added 8-24-2005 by Ord. No.
05-03]
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the VC District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
R-10 Residential Conversion
B. Lot area, frontage and width requirements.
Regulation Lot Size Requirement
Minimum lot area As described in
Subsection A(1) above
Minimum frontage at
street line
5,000+ s.f. 40 feet
10,000+ s.f. 50 feet
Minimum lot width 5,000+ s.f. 45 feet
10,000+ s.f. 65 feet
20,000+ s.f. 100 feet
40,000+ s.f. 150 feet
C. Setback requirements.
Regulation Lot Size Requirement
Minimum front yard 5,000+ s.f. 25 feet
40,000+ s.f. 30 feet
Minimum side yards 5,000+ s.f. 0 feet
10,000+ s.f. 5 feet
20,000+ s.f. 10 feet
40,000+ s.f. 20 feet
Aggregate side yards 5,000+ s.f. 15 feet
10,000+ s.f. 30 feet
20,000+ s.f. 35 feet
40,000+ s.f. 60 feet
Minimum rear yards 5,000+ s.f. 25 feet
§ 153-410 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-410
1:783
Regulation Lot Size Requirement
20,000+ s.f. 30 feet
Minimum landscape
buffer1
5,000+ s.f.
20,000+ s.f.
25 feet
30 feet
40,000+ s.f. 35 feet
Residential accessory structures: An accessory structure is permitted
only for single-family detached, twin, and duplex dwelling units and
must be located to the rear of such principal building and must be no
closer than 10 feet from a side or rear property line.
NOTES:
1 All yards abutting a residential district shall be landscaped in
accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as last amended.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Lot Size Requirement
Building coverage 5,000+ s.f. 15%
40,000+ s.f. 20%
Impervious coverage 5,000+ s.f. 75%
40,000+ s.f. 65%
E. Maximum height regulations.
(1) Principal structure: 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2 stories.
(2) Residential accessory structures: 14 feet, not exceeding one story.
F. Access regulations. The following regulations shall pertain to access for
all lots to be developed in the Village Commercial District:
(1) Accessways leading onto a public street shall be built to the
dimensional requirements specified in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,214 as last amended.
(2) For any lot used for development pursuant to this section, or for a
group of two or more lots which share parking pursuant to
requirements of § 153-703, no more than two points of access onto
a street may be permitted.
(3) Any lot with less than 150 feet at the front street line shall be
limited to one access onto that street. A second access shall be
permitted only if the side or rear lot lines abut another street.
214. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-410 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-410
1:784
§ 153-411. PBC Planned Business Campus District.
In all PBC Districts the following regulations shall apply unless otherwise
specified in Article V of this chapter:
(4) Accessways shall be spaced a minimum of 50 feet on center of any
lot used for development pursuant to this section, or for a group of
two or more lots which share parking pursuant to requirements of
§ 153-703 herein. In addition, accessways shall be spaced a
minimum of 50 feet on center from existing accessways on adjacent
properties whenever feasible. When this is not feasible, common
drives and/or the use of shared common parking pursuant to
§ 153-703 herein shall be encouraged.
(5) Adjacent uses are encouraged to share accessways in order to
minimize points of access on any street.
(6) When a driveway is located in a side yard entirely on one lot, that
side yard must be a minimum of 25 feet and the driveway must be
set back a minimum of five feet from the side property.
G. Parking and internal circulation. The following regulations shall govern
parking and circulation within lots to be developed in the Village
Commercial District:
(1) Parking shall be in accordance with all provisions of this chapter
and the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
as last amended.
(2) The number of parking spaces required for any development shall
be regulated by the requirements contained in § 153-502. For
mixed-use structures, the parking provided shall be equal to the
sum total of required spaces for all uses contained herein.
(3) No parking shall be permitted in the front yard except for
properties used for residential purposes.
(4) No parking shall be located closer than five feet to the side or rear
property lines.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as yard, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the PBC District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
§ 153-410 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-411
1:785
B-2 Office
B-4 Planned Business Park
C-6 Eating Place
C-9 Financial Establishment
E-6 Municipal Facility
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-13 Accessory Business Park or Business Center Uses
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the PBC District provided
that all of the conditions for said use, this district and the
conditional use regulations of this chapter are satisfied and a
conditional use approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors
after public notice and hearing: [Amended 1-22-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-02]
B-7 Medical Equipment Offices and Distribution
C-13 Motel or Hotel
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the PBC District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
[Amended 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
A-20 Wind Energy System
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area Planned business
parks
20 acres
All other uses 3 acres
Minimum lot width Planned business
parks
650 feet
All other uses 100 feet
C. Setback requirements.
§ 153-411 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-411
1:786
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum front yard Planned business
parks 100 feet
All other uses 50
feet
Minimum side yards
(each)
Planned business
parks 50 feet1
100 feet2
All other uses 20 feet
Minimum rear yards Planned business
parks
50 feet1
100 feet2
All other uses 35
feet
NOTES:
1 From nonresidential lot line or district boundary. [Refer to
Subsection G(2) below.]
2 From residential lot line or district boundary. [Refer to Subsection
G(1) below.]
D. Maximum coverage and minimum open space regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage All uses 35%
Impervious coverage All uses 70%
Common open space All uses 20%1
NOTES:
1 Refer to Subsection G(7) below.
E. Maximum height regulations.
Use Type Requirement
All buildings 40 feet1
NOTES:
1 This maximum building height may be increased to 55 feet if the
applicant funds the appropriate fire-fighting equipment capable of
adequately protecting the increased height, provided approval is
granted by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use in accordance
with the standards and criteria set forth herein.
§ 153-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-411
1:787
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: Refer to Subsection G(8) below.
G. Special district requirements.
(1) Residential district boundary yard. The following setbacks and
berm provisions shall apply if a lot is abutting or immediately
adjacent to a residential zoning district, unless an expressway is
located adjacent to the planned business park development:
(a) Buildings with a maximum height of 20 feet shall have a
minimum building setback of 100 feet from a residential zoning
district boundary.
(b) Buildings with a maximum height of greater than 20 feet shall
have a minimum building setback determined as follows: 100
feet, plus four feet for every foot of building height over 20
feet.
(c) If a building in a planned business park development is within
200 feet of an abutting residential zoned lot occupied by an
existing residential use, an earthen berm shall be placed
between such building and the residential use and such berm
shall meet the following standards:
[1] The berm shall have a minimum average height of five feet
above the average ground level on the residential side of
the berm.
[2] The berm shall have a maximum side slope of four to one
on the residential side, and three to one on the planned
business park side.
[3] The majority of all of the plant material required to be
planted between residential and a planned business park
shall be located on the top or on the residential facing of
the berm.
[4] The berm shall be well maintained in grass or other
vegetative ground cover and shall be kept free of rubbish
and weeds.
(2) Nonresidential district boundary setback. The following setbacks
shall apply to a lot abutting or immediately adjacent to a
nonresidential zoning district, except along a property line that is
adjacent to an expressway:
(a) Buildings with a maximum height of 20 feet shall have a
minimum building setback of 50 feet from a nonresidential
zoning district boundary.
§ 153-411 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-411
1:788
(b) Buildings with a maximum height of greater than 20 feet shall
have a minimum building setback determined as follows: 50
feet, plus four feet for every one foot of building height over 20
feet.
(3) Each building shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the
existing right-of-way of an expressway.
(4) Where a lot is developed with two or more buildings, the minimum
distance between buildings shall be not less than 1 1/2 times the
height of the taller building, but in no case less than 40 feet, subject
to public safety approval.
(5) Building coverage. The total horizontal ground area covered by all
buildings shall not be greater than 35% of the lot area.
(6) Impervious coverage. The total horizontal ground area covered by
all impervious services of any lot shall not be greater than 70% of
the lot area. Any areas voluntarily dedicated to and accepted by the
Township for public recreation may count toward the
nonimpervious area requirements of the planned business park.
(7) Common open space. A minimum of 20% of the land and/or water
within a planned business park lot shall be permanently set aside
as common open space. The land area to be set aside for permanent
preservation as open space shall be located and so shaped as to be
suitable for the purpose intended, or improved so that it is well
suited. The Board of Supervisors may require the preservation in
the comprehensive plan. Of the required common open space, a
minimum of 50% shall be located in one continuous tract, with a
minimum width of 25 feet. Consideration shall be given to
contiguous portions of existing and potential open space lands in
adjacent tracts.
(8) No parking or driveway shall be located within the required yard
areas except that portion of the driveway required for normal
ingress and egress, and as specified below:
(a) Within 100 feet of an abutting residential zoning district
boundary.
(b) Within 20 feet of the legal right-of-way of an expressway.
(c) The Board of Supervisors may waive the setback requirement
for parking as a conditional use in accordance with the
standards and criteria set forth herein, where adjacent
developments are to utilize a common parking lot designed to
function as one unit. In such cases, the required number of
parking spaces for each of the uses shall be located on the
respective lot, and all necessary cross-easements shall be
granted.
§ 153-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-411
1:789
(9) Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage is prohibited within a planned
business park except for customary accessory solid waste
containers. All outdoor bulk solid waste containers shall be
enclosed on three of four sides in accordance with the
requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,215 as last amended.
(10) Screening of loading areas. Any loading or unloading spaces
routinely expected to be used by trucks with two or more axles,
shall be screened from view of dwellings and streets exterior to the
planned business park development. Such screening may include
building walls, decorative masonry walls or landscaping.
H. Signs. The requirements of Article VIII of this chapter shall apply to all
planned business park developments.
I. Additional requirements.
(1) Hazards. The following types of uses shall be prohibited in the
planned business park development:
(a) Uses that, in the determination of the Zoning Officer, would
represent a hazard to public health or safety because of toxic,
explosive, genetic, fire, biological or similar hazards.
(b) Uses that are classified within the "H hazardous use
classification" of the Township's Building Code.216
(2) Maintenance guarantees in addition to those as set forth in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,217 as last amended:
(a) The deed to each lot shall include a restriction or covenant
running with the land setting forth the ownership and
maintenance of any and all common facilities that are not
dedicated to the Township or to a Municipal Authority. Said
facilities include but are not necessarily limited to: driveways,
streets, waste water pumping stations, sewer and water mains,
common open spaces or stormwater management facilities.
Such deed restrictions shall grant the Board of Supervisors the
authority to ensure that these facilities are adequately
maintained.
(b) If the Board of Supervisors determines that such facilities are
not being adequately maintained, the Board shall notify all
owners of record in writing. If such maintenance or repairs are
not reasonably begun and continued within 30 days after
sending of such notice, then the Board shall be granted the
authority under such deed restrictions or covenants to have
215. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
216. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes.
217. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-411 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-411
1:790
§ 153-412. SC Shopping Center District.
In all SC Districts the following regulations shall apply unless otherwise
specified in Article V of this chapter:
the necessary work completed and to assess the owners of
record full costs of such work, plus 20% to compensate for the
Township's administrative costs.
(c) The provisions of such deed restrictions or covenants shall be
subject to acceptance by the Board of Supervisors, based upon
review by the Township Solicitor.
(3) All exterior lighting shall be shaded, hooded, deflected or otherwise
screened to prevent the direct rays of the light from shining onto
residentially zoned areas and to prevent glare from disturbing
motorists on streets or access drives.
(4) Utilities. All utility lines within a planned business park
development shall be underground, other than those along
abutting exterior public streets.
(5) Conditional use standards. Conditional uses in a planned business
park development, in addition to compliance with the general
provisions of Article X of this chapter, shall be decided based upon
the applicant proving that the use will meet the following
standards:
(a) Consistency with the intent of the planned business park use
type.
(b) Any standards stated in the applicable provision of this article
related to that specific conditional use.
(c) Standards stated in Article X herein related to conditional
uses.
(6) Eating place requirements. The following additional requirements
shall apply to eating place uses within a planned business park
development:
(a) Shall not be a fast food eating place and shall not include drivethrough
facilities.
(b) May be located within a freestanding building or within
another permitted building.
(c) Shall have traffic access that is fully incorporated into that of
the entire planned business park development.
(d) May be within a hotel and limited to a maximum of 10% of the
total floor area of such building.
§ 153-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-412
1:791
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as yard, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the SC District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
B-1 Medical Office
B-2 Office
C-5 Convenience Store
C-6 Eating Place
C-8 Entertainment
C-9 Financial Establishment
C-15 Repair Shop
C-16 Retail Trade and Retail Services
C-18 Shopping Center
E-2 Commercial School
E-3 Day-Care Center/Nursery School
E-6 Municipal Facility
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the SC District provided that
all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional use
approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public notice
and hearing and further provided that all applicable requirements
for the use and district have also been satisfied:
E-11 Recreational Facility/Community Center
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the SC District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
§ 153-412 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-412
1:792
C-7 Eating Place (drive-through and fast-food on a separate
pad only)
A-15 Convenience Window [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No.
01-10]
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area Shopping center use 5 acres
All other uses 1 acre
Minimum lot width Shopping center use 350 feet
All other uses 125 feet
C. Setback requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum front yard Shopping center use 100 feet1
All other uses 50 feet1
Minimum side yards Shopping center use 25 feet2
50 feet3
All other uses 25 feet
Minimum rear yards Shopping center use 25 feet2
50 feet3
All other uses 35 feet
NOTES:
1 To the ultimate right-of-way of any public street, road, or alley.
2 From any property line.
3 For a side or rear property line adjacent to an agricultural or
residential use or district.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage Shopping center use 20%
All other uses 40%
Impervious coverage Shopping center use 50%
All other uses 75%
E. Maximum height regulations.
§ 153-412 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-412
1:793
§ 153-413. C Commercial District.
In all C Districts the following regulations shall apply unless otherwise
specified in Article V of this chapter:
Use Type Requirement
Principal structure 40 feet1
NOTES:
1 May be increased to a maximum of 65 feet or such increased height
as may be warranted when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board
for such structures as water towers, chimneys, stacks, radio antennae
and transmission towers provided that for every foot of height in
excess of 40 feet there shall be added to each yard requirement one
corresponding foot of width or depth.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: No parking, parking access or service area may be
located closer than 25 feet to a side or rear property line adjacent
to a residential district.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as yard, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the C District provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
B-1 Medical Office
B-2 Office
C-5 Convenience Store
C-6 Eating Place
C-8 Entertainment
C-9 Financial Establishment
C-10 Funeral Home
C-15 Repair Shop
C-16 Retail Trade and Retail Services
E-2 Commercial School
E-3 Day-Care Center/Nursery School
§ 153-412 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-413
1:794
E-6 Municipal Facility
A-2 Dwelling in Combination with a Business
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-12 Nonresidential Storage Building
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
A-19 Attached Exterior Refrigeration Units [Added
2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-04]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the C District provided that
all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional use
approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public notice
and hearing and further provided that all applicable requirements
for the use and district have also been satisfied:
C-2 Vehicle and Equipment Sales
C-4 Car Wash
C-7 Eating Place - Drive Through and Fast Food
C-13 Motel or Hotel
C-20 Miniature Golf, Driving Range, Batting Cage
E-10 Private Organization
E-11 Recreational Facility/Community Center
A-15 Convenience Window [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No.
01-10]
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the C District provided that all of the
standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
B-3 Veterinary Office or Clinic
C-1 Adult Entertainment
C-17 Vehicular Repair and Service Station
I-2 Building Material Sales and Equipment Storage
(4) Accessory uses. By conditional use, the sale of gasoline shall be
permitted as an accessory use to a C-5 Convenience Store which is
situated on a parcel or parcels of land or pad site of at least 1.25
acres, provided that the parcel of land or pad site is on property
located on an arterial highway or controlled access road; provided
that the convenience store itself does not exceed 10,000 square
feet in gross floor area; provided that adequate parking, in
§ 153-413 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-413
1:795
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance is provided on the parcel
or pad site; and further provided that the grant of permission for
gasoline sales shall specifically be conditioned upon site access and
interior circulation being designed to the satisfaction of the Board
of Supervisors during the land development approval process.
Furthermore, should the site be within the designated boundaries
of the Towamencin Village Overlay District on the Township Zoning
Map, the following design elements shall specifically be in
accordance with the Towamencin Village Land Use and Design
Manual, whether or not the owner and/or applicant has opted in
to the Village Overlay District: [Added 9-12-2007 by Ord. No.
07-06; amended 8-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03; 5-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-09]
(a) Each applicant shall submit architectural drawings showing
concepts for facades, roof design, and materials for buildings
and structured parking facilities and incorporate specific
design standards in order to qualify for conditional use
approval.
(b) These design standards shall include, but may not necessarily
be limited to, building and streetscape elements such as the
type of lighting, sidewalk design, street furniture, street signs,
and architectural details and facade materials. The streetscape
elements shall be required along the frontage of the site where
the convenience store is located.
(c) The Board of Supervisors may at its discretion waive or modify
requirements contained within the Towamencin Village Land
Use and Design Manual upon determination that strict
compliance would not further the purpose and intent of the
chapter.
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area All uses1 1 acre
Minimum lot width All uses 150 feet
NOTES:
1 For the one A-2 dwelling unit permitted per lot as an accessory use to
a permitted use on such lot, an additional 5,000 square feet of lot area
shall be added to the minimum requirements herein.
C. Setback requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum front yard All uses 25 feet
Minimum side yards All uses 25 feet1
§ 153-413 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-413
1:796
§ 153-414. LI Limited Industrial District.
In all LI Districts the following regulations shall apply unless otherwise
specified in Article V of this chapter:
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum rear yards All uses 20 feet
NOTES:
1 On a lot the interior side of which abuts a residential district, the side
yard shall have a width of not less than that required in the adjoining
district.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage All uses 65%
Impervious coverage All uses 85%
E. Maximum height regulations.
Use Type Requirement
Principal structure 40 feet1
NOTES:
1 May be increased to a maximum of 65 feet or such increased height
as may be warranted when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board
for such structures as water towers, chimneys, stacks, radio antennae
and transmission towers provided that for every foot of height in
excess of 40 feet there shall be added to each yard requirement one
corresponding foot of width or depth.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: No parking area or driveway shall be located closer than
10 feet to any property line, except the portion of the driveway
required for normal ingress and egress.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as yard, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
§ 153-413 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-414
1:797
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the LI District provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
Ag-1 Agriculture
Ag-3 Greenhouse
Ag-6 Nursery
Ag-8 Agricultural Support Services and Retail
B-2 Office
B-4 Planned Business Park
C-12 Self-Service Storage Facility
E-6 Municipal Use
I-2 Building Material Sales and Equipment Storage
I-3 Contractor Services
I-4 Food Processing
I-9 Wholesale
I-10 Warehouse
U-1 Utility Operating Facility
U-2 Emergency Service
U-3 Railway and Bus Terminal
A-2 Dwelling in Combination with a Business
A-6 Outside Storage
A-11 Temporary Structure and Vehicles
A-12 Nonresidential Storage Buildings
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
A-20 Wind Energy System [Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No.
16-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the LI District provided that
all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional use
approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public notice
and hearing and further provided that all applicable requirements
for the use and district have also been satisfied: [Amended
4-24-2002 by Ord. No. 02-3; 4-22-2009 by Ord. No. 09-07;
12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-10]
Ag-2 Accessory Agriculture Sales/Farm Stands
Ag-4 Intensive Agriculture
Ag-7 Riding Academy/Boarding Stable
§ 153-414 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-414
1:798
B-1 Medical Office1
C-3 Automotive Body Repair, Vehicle Repair and Paint Shop
C-21 Billboard
E-3 Day-Care Center/Nursery School
E-13 Industrial Trade School
I-1 Automotive Salvage Recycling
I-5 Manufacturing
I-6 Recycling Facility
I-7 Research
I-8 Truck Terminal
I-11 Quarry
I-12 Equipment Sales and Rentals
A-16 Accessory Limited Retail Sales
U-4 Solar Energy Facility [Added 2-26-2015 by Ord. No.
15-03]
NOTES:
1If no land development is required, the applicant must agree to
pay the Towamencin Township impact fees (Chapter 76, Article
II), with the fee to be calculated as the difference between the
preexisting permitted trips and the trips to be generated by the
proposed B-1 Medical Office. This calculation is to be performed
by the Township Traffic Engineer and the fee is to be payable at
the time of the application for the use and occupancy permit(s).
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the LI District provided that all of the
standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
[Amended 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
A-18 Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted
(4) Uses specifically prohibited. The following uses shall be specifically
prohibited:
(a) Acetylene gas manufacture and/or storage.
(b) Acid manufacture including, but not limited to, hydrochloric,
nitric, picric, sulfuric, sulfanous, and carbolic acids.
(c) Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture.
(d) Ammunition manufacture and/or storage.
§ 153-414 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-414
1:799
(e) Animal stock yards.
(f) Arsenal.
(g) Asphalt manufacture or refining.
(h) Blast furnace.
(i) Bone distillation.
(j) Celluloid manufacture.
(k) Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture.
(l) Coal distillation.
(m) Coke ovens.
(n) Creosote treatment or manufacture.
(o) Dead animal and offal reduction.
(p) Distillation of refuse grain or wood.
(q) Explosives, fireworks and gunpowder manufacture or storage.
(r) Fat rendering.
(s) Fertilizer manufacture.
(t) Forge plant.
(u) Incineration, reduction, storage, or dumping of slaughterhouse
refuse, rancid fats, garbage, dead animal or offal.
(v) Landfill or hazardous or toxic waste storage, processing or
disposal.
(w) Manufacture or processing of gases.
(x) Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture.
(y) Ore reduction.
(z) Petroleum or kerosene refining, distillation or derivation of byproducts
and/or storage.
(aa) Potash works.
(bb) Power forge (riveting, hammering, punching, chipping,
drawing, rolling or tumbling of iron, steel, brass, or copper,
except as necessary incident of manufacture of which these
processes form a minor part).
(cc) Rolling mill.
(dd) Steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill.
§ 153-414 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-414
1:800
(ee) Tar distillation or manufacture.
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area All uses 3 acres
Minimum lot width All uses 300 feet
C. Setback requirements. [Amended 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15]
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum front yard All uses 75 feet1
Minimum side yards
(each)
All uses 20 feet1
Minimum rear yards All uses 50 feet1
NOTES:
1 Any yard which abuts and is immediately adjacent to a residential
zoning district shall not be less than 200 feet in depth. This note shall
not apply where the adjacent residentially zoned land is owned by a
public utility which is not likely to develop the property residentially,
and which is at least 200 feet in depth.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage All uses 20%1
Impervious coverage All uses 50%2
Floor area ratio All uses 70%
NOTES:
1 For a lot size of three acres. An additional 2 ½% of the lot area may
be occupied by principal and accessory buildings for each full acre or
fraction thereof in excess of three acres, up to a maximum lot coverage
of 35% for an individual lot size of nine acres or more. In no event
shall principal and accessory buildings occupy more than 35% of the
lot area, regardless of the individual lot size.
2 Impervious coverage may be increased by the same corresponding
percentage as permitted for increased building coverage but in no
case shall that coverage exceed 65% of the lot area, regardless of the
individual lot size.
E. Maximum height regulations.
Use Type Requirement
Principal structures 40 feet1
§ 153-414 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-414
1:801
§ 153-415. IN Institutional District.
In all IN Districts the following regulations shall apply unless otherwise
specified in Article V of this chapter:
NOTES:
1 May be increased to a maximum of 65 feet or such increased height
as may be warranted when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board
for such structures as water towers, chimneys, stacks, radio antennae
and transmission towers provided that for every foot of height in
excess of 40 feet there shall be added to each yard requirement one
corresponding foot of width or depth.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: There shall be no parking in the front or side yards, and
there shall be no parking area or driveway located closer than 10
feet to any property line, except the portion of the driveway
required for normal ingress and egress. Where a lot abuts and is
immediately adjacent to a residential district, there shall be no
parking within 50 feet of that property line.
G. Compressors. All compressors shall be enclosed with a solid wall or
fence with a height at least three feet in excess of the height of the
compressor.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply
with such regulations as yard, lot sizes, lot width, building area and
heights, impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street
parking and other provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no others shall be
permitted by right within the IN District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
B-1 Medical Office
C-10 Funeral Home
E-1 Cemetery
E-4 Hospital
E-5 Library or Museum
E-6 Municipal Facility
E-7 Nursing Home
E-8 Personal Care Facility
E-9 Place of Worship
§ 153-414 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-415
1:802
E-12 School
R-8 Housing for the Elderly
R-9 Community/Group Home
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
A-12 Nonresidential Storage Buildings
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the IN District provided that
all of the conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional use
approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public notice
and hearing and further provided that all applicable requirements
for the use and district have also been satisfied:
E-3 Day-Care Center/Nursery School
E-13 Industrial Trade School
U-2 Emergency Service
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the IN District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
[Amended 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
A-18 Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted
A-20 Wind Energy System [Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No.
16-03]
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area All uses 2 acres
Minimum lot width All uses 175 feet
C. Setback requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum front yard All uses 75 feet
Minimum side yards
(each)
All uses 35 feet
Minimum rear yards All uses 50 feet
§ 153-415 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-415
1:803
§ 153-416. Towamencin Village Overlay District.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage All uses 20%
Impervious coverage All uses 50%
E. Maximum height regulations.
Use Type Requirement
All structures 35 feet1
NOTES:
1 May be increased to a maximum of 65 feet or such increased height
as may be warranted when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board for
such structures as water towers, chimneys, stacks, steeples, silos and
antennae, provided that for every one foot of height in excess of 35 feet
there shall be added to each yard requirement one corresponding foot
of width or depth.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use type.
(2) Setbacks: No parking area or driveway shall be located closer than
20 feet to any property line, except the portion of the driveway
required for normal ingress and egress.
G. Compressors. All compressors shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence
of a height of at least three feet in excess of the height of the
compressor.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected, altered, or used in
whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes and no other, provided that such uses and location
shall comply with the Towamencin Village Master Plan, as delineated by
the Towamencin Village Land Use and Design Manual, as may be
amended and appended to the Zoning Ordinance.
(1) Uses by conditional use. [Amended 2-26-2015 by Ord. No.
15-01; 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03; 9-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-12]
B Business
B-1 Medical Office
B-2 Office
§ 153-415 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-416
1:804
B-8 Medical Laboratory or Medical Office with Surgical
Center
C Commercial
C-5 Convenience Store
C-6 Eating Place
C-7 Eating Place – Drive-Through and Fast Food
C-8 Entertainment
C-9 Financial Establishment
C-13 Hotel/Motel
C-16 Retail Trade and Retail Services
C-22 Health Club
E Educational and Institutional
E-3 Day-Care Center/Nursery School
E-7 Nursing Home
E-8 Personal Care Facility
R Residential
R-5 Townhouse
R-6 Multiplex
R-8 Housing for the Elderly
R-12 Garden Apartment
A Accessory uses permitted only accessory to authorized
conditional uses
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted
B. Uses permitted by land use sector. The Towamencin Village Overlay
District shall be divided into eight sectors as designated in the
Towamencin Village Land Use and Design Manual. Uses shall be
permitted by individual sector as designated on the Table of Permitted
Land Uses.
(1) Uses permitted in all sectors in accordance with the Land Use and
Design Manual.
(a) Public open space, plazas, and recreation areas;
(b) Bicycle and walking trails;
(c) Bus lanes, bus stops;
(d) Directional signs;
(e) Structured parking facilities (except in Sectors 6 and 8).
§ 153-416 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-416
1:805
(2) Unless specified to the contrary, sectors shall be designated to the
center lines of existing and proposed roads.
C. Setback and frontage requirements.
(1) Minimum and maximum setbacks from streets and perimeter
boundary of the Towamencin Village Overlay District shall be in
accordance with the Towamencin Village Land Use and Design
Manual. Open and unenclosed fire escapes, steps, bay windows,
balconies, and planters may not project more than three feet into a
required setback. Buttresses, cornices, piers, pilasters, columns,
column covers, and eves of a building may project not more than 18
inches into a required setback. Signs shall not be permitted to
intrude into required setbacks.
(2) Minimum and maximum setbacks between buildings shall be in
accordance with the Towamencin Village Land Use and Design
Manual.
(3) Frontage limitations for uses permitted in Sector 1 and Sector 2.
With the exception of hotel/motel Use C-13, no use shall exceed 40
feet of frontage along a street or pedestrian easement, except
where the same retail user and use is provided on at least 50% of
the second floor square foot area in which case frontage shall be
limited to 60 feet.
D. Maximum building coverage, impervious surface coverage218 and
building/structure height.
Sector
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Maximum building coverage
(percent)
100 100 100 100 50 20 50 5
Maximum impervious surface
(percent)
100 100 100 100 90 50 90 10
Maximum building and
structure height (feet)
402 503 503 503 503 354 503 16
NOTES:
1 For the purposes of this district, building coverage and impervious surface cover shall be
calculated as a percent of the building envelope established for each sector. See Building
Envelope Plan of the Towamencin Village Land Use and Design Manual.
2 But in no event greater than three stories above ground level.
3 But in no event greater than four stories above ground level.
4 But in no event greater than 2 1/2 stories above ground level.
218. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-416 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-416
1:806
NOTES:
5 Sloped portions of the roof perimeter intended as screenings, architectural details (in
accordance with the architectural guidelines), and similar projections may, in the discretion
of the Board of Supervisors exceed height limitations provided no such elements in excess of
the maximum height restrictions shall be used for occupancy, parking, or storage of any type.
E. Residential densities: not to exceed a density of eight dwelling units per
acre.
F. Parking requirements: all uses shall be regulated by type.
(1) Reserve parking. Due to mixing of uses, reserve parking up to 25%
of that required may be allowed in order to create open space
without unnecessarily requiring more paving than required.
Reserve parking shall be designed and engineered but need not be
constructed unless directed by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Credit. Up to 30% of total required parking shall be permitted offsite
when associated with an approved common parking facility or
within the transportation center complex.
(3) Structured parking facilities shall be utilized for required parking
in accordance with the standards in the Towamencin Village Land
Use and Design Manual,219 except as shall be modified by the Board
of Supervisors as part of the conditional use approval. [Amended
10-8-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06]
(a) For all sectors, structured parking on the first floor (street
level) of any building or structure shall not exceed 50% of the
square foot areas of the first floor. Permitted uses other than
parking shall be located adjacent and parallel to streets and
pedestrian easements; provided, however, that these
requirements shall not apply where the top parking level of a
structured parking facility is at the same level as the nearest
public street or pedestrian easement, and no other portion of
the structure is within 200 feet of any other public street or
pedestrian easement.
(4) The Board of Supervisors, as part of the conditional use approval,
may permit a reduction in the sum total of the required parking for
all of the uses based on the following:
(a) In the case of a development plan in which there are
efficiencies derived by shared parking for uses which have
complementary peak demands. The applicant shall submit
parking generation data, based upon standard methodology
(such as that published by the Urban Land Institute or from
actual parking studies within the region) sufficient for the
Township to determine the appropriate reduction.
219. Editor's Note: The Manual is on file in the Township offices.
§ 153-416 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-416
1:807
(b) In the case of a development consisting solely of two or more
contiguous uses, the Board of Supervisors may permit a
reduction of the aggregate amount of required parking based
upon a determination that greater efficiency is effected by joint
use of a common parking area, but in such case the required
number of off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced by
more than 25%.
(c) This reduction may occur in conjunction with or in lieu of
Subsection F(1), Reserve parking.
(5) Common Parking District. Common parking shall be permitted
without limitation for uses located within the Common Parking
District as defined in the Towamencin Village Land Use and Design
Manual. In the Common Parking District 100% of the required
parking spaces may be permitted on another site located within the
Common Parking District. However, a common parking facility shall
not be permitted as a principal use on a lot within the Common
Parking District.
G. Mix of residential and nonresidential uses.
(1) In those sectors permitted by this chapter, a mix of residential and
nonresidential uses is encouraged, particularly when integrated
within the same building complex.
(2) Provision of residential use above the first floor in commercial and
business settings when authorized by § 153-416I of the Zoning
Ordinance is permitted without requirement for any additional
open space.
H. Conditional use criteria. In addition to the provisions of Article X of the
Zoning Ordinance, the following additional criteria shall apply in
considering the approval or denial of conditional use applications in this
district:
(1) Streets and circulation. The location of new streets, sight access,
driveways and pedestrian networks shall comply with the specific
requirements identified within this chapter and the Towamencin
Village Land Use and Design Manual,220 except as may be modified
by the Board of Supervisors as part of the conditional use approval.
[Amended 10-8-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06]
(2) Existing streets abutting a parcel of land proposed for development
shall be improved in accordance with the requirements of the
Towamencin Village Land Use and Design Manual, a Townshipwide
traffic study, or the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,221 whichever shall control as determined
by the Board of Supervisors.
220. Editor's Note: The Manual is on file in the Township offices.
221. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-416 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-416
1:808
(3) Parking, service, loading, and refuse areas; pedestrian circulation;
outdoor lighting, street, parking lot and sidewalk lighting, and
lighting fixtures and poles; mass transit stops, plazas and open
space; landscaping; and planted buffer requirements shall be in
accordance with requirements established by the Towamencin
Village Land Use and Design Manual.
(4) Design guidelines. In order to ensure all design elements within the
Towamencin Village Overlay District (which may develop in
different areas over a period of years) will be uniform, the following
design elements shall specifically be in accordance with the
Towamencin Village Land Use and Design Manual:
(a) Each applicant shall submit architectural drawings showing
concepts for facades, roof design, and materials for buildings
and structured parking facilities, and incorporate specific
design standards in order to qualify for conditional use
approval.
(b) These design standards shall include, but may not necessarily
be limited to, building and streetscape elements such as the
type of lighting, sidewalk design, street furniture, street signs,
and architectural details and facade materials.
(c) In addition, the applicant shall incorporate architectural
performance standards such as screening of parking facilities,
loading areas, and all mechanical equipment; the continuity of
store fronts and entrance doorways on specific streets; the
massing of buildings to reinforce the design of an urban space;
and sign control.
(5) The Board of Supervisors may at its discretion waive or modify
requirements contained within the Towamencin Village Land Use
and Design Manual222 upon determination that strict compliance
would not further the purpose and intent of the chapter. However,
waivers shall not apply to sector uses, parking requirements
(except structured parking, which may be waived or modified), and
height requirements. [Amended 10-8-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06]
I. Table of permitted land uses. [Amended 12-19-2001 by Ord. No.
01-10; 12-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-10]; 10-8-2008 by Ord. No.
08-06; 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-01; 9-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-12]
Sectors
Uses Permitted 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
B-1 Medical Office4 C1 C C N C N C
B-2 Office C1 C C C C N C
222. Editor's Note: The Manual is on file in the Township offices.
§ 153-416 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-416
1:809
Sectors
Uses Permitted 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
B-8 Medical Laboratory
or Medical Office
with Surgical
Center
N N N N C N N
C-5 Convenience Store C C C3 C3 C3 N N
C-6 Eating Place C C C N C N N
C-7 Eating Place - Drive
Through and Fast
Food
N N N C5 N N N
C-8 Entertainment N C N N N N N
C-9 Financial
Establishment
C C C C C N N
C-13 Hotel/Motel N C2 C2 N N N N
C-16 Retail Trade C C C3 C3 C3 N N
C-22 Health Club C1 C1 N C1 N N N
E-3 Day-Care N C C C C N N
E-7 Nursing Home N N C N N N N
E-8 Personal Care
Facility
N N C N N N N
R-5 Townhouse C1 N N N N C C
R-6 Multiplex C1 N N N N C C
R-8 Housing for Elderly C1 N C N N C C
R-12 Apartment C1 N N N N C C
Sector 8: Township Open Space
LEGEND:
C = Conditional Use
N = Not Permitted
NOTES:
1 Second story or above.
2 Maximum one per sector.
3 Located on first floor only, not to exceed 2% of total floor area of building but in no event shall the
sum of all Footnote 3 uses exceed 4,000 square feet per building except as approved by the Board
of Supervisors as part of conditional use approval.
4 Use limited to a maximum of 10% of the total floor area of the office buildings on a lot.
§ 153-416 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-416
1:810
§ 153-417. IN-A Institutional District.
In all IN-A Districts the following regulations shall apply unless otherwise
specified in Article V of this chapter:
NOTES:
5 Use permitted only when access to drive-through lane restricted to internal site parking lot drives/
aisles and proposed use is adjacent to a Use C-13 - Hotel/Motel with only one Use C-7 per sector.
Since Use C-7 added after the Stipulation Agreement dated May 26, 2006, the restriction to allow
only in Sector 4 applies to all properties within the Towamencin Village Overlay District.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected or altered, to be used
either in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following uses and no other, provided that such uses comply with
such regulations as yard, lot sizes, lot width, building area and heights,
impervious surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street parking and
other provisions specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses and no other shall be
permitted by right within the IN-A District provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
E-5 Library or Museum
E-6 Municipal Facility
R-13 Age-Qualified Independent Residential Community
A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03]
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no other shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the IN-A District provided
that all of the conditions for said uses are satisfied and a
conditional use approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors
after public notice and hearing and further provided that all
applicable requirements for the use and the district have been
satisfied: none.
(3) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
a special exception use within the IN-A District provided that all of
the standards and criteria for said uses are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
none.
B. Lot area and width requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot area All uses 9 acres
Maximum lot area All uses 20 acres
§ 153-416 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-417
1:811
§ 153-418. RBP Residential Business and Professional Overlay
District. [Added 7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-09]
In the RBP Overlay District, the following regulations shall apply unless
otherwise specified in Article V of this chapter:
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum lot width All uses 600 feet
C. Setback requirements.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Minimum front yard All uses 50 feet
Minimum side yard All uses 50 feet
Minimum rear yard All uses 50 feet
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Use Type Requirement
Building coverage All uses 25%
Impervious coverage All uses 50%
E. Maximum height regulations.
(1) All structures: 35 feet.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) All uses: regulated by use or type.
(2) Setbacks: No parking or area or driveway shall be located closer
than 35 feet to any property line, except the portion of the driveway
required for normal or emergency ingress and egress.
A. Permitted land uses. A building may be erected, altered or used either
in whole or in part and a lot may be occupied for any of the following
uses and no other, provided that such uses shall comply with such
dimensional requirements, off-street parking, buffering and other
provisions as specified herein.
(1) Uses by right. Any of the following uses shall be permitted by right
within the RBP Overlay District provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district are satisfied:
R-1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
A-7 Recreational Vehicles
A-8 Residential Accessory Structures
A-9 Spa/Hot Tubs
A-10 Swimming Pools
§ 153-417 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-418
1:812
A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles
(2) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the RBP Overlay District on a
minimum lot size of 25,000 square feet provided that all of the
conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional use approval
is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public notice and
hearing and further provided that all applicable requirements for
the use and district have also been satisfied:
B-1 Medical Office
B-2 Office
A-3 Family Day-Care
A-4 Home Occupation
A-6 Outside Storage
(3) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the RBP Overlay District on a
minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet provided that all of the
conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional use approval
is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public notice and
hearing and further provided that all applicable requirements for
the use and district have also been satisfied:
B-3 Veterinary Office or Clinic
C-10 Funeral Home
C-11 Bed-and-Breakfast Inn
E-3 Day-Care Center/Nursery School
(4) Uses by condition. The following uses and no others shall be
permitted as a conditional use within the RBP Overlay District on a
minimum lot size of 80,000 square feet provided that all of the
conditions for said use are satisfied and a conditional use approval
is granted by the Board of Supervisors after public notice and
hearing and further provided that all applicable requirements for
the use and district have also been satisfied:
E-8 Personal Care Facility
E-9 Place of Worship
R-5 Townhouse Dwelling
(5) Uses by special exception. The following uses and no others shall
be permitted as a special exception within the RBP Overlay District
on a minimum lot size of 80,000 square feet provided that all of the
standards and criteria for said use are satisfied and a special
exception approval is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board after
public notice and hearing and further provided that all applicable
requirements for the use and district have also been satisfied:
§ 153-418 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-418
1:813
A-1 Accessory Apartment
B. Dimensional standards. Proposed uses shall meet the following
dimensional requirements:
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
25,000 40,000 80,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100 150 200
Minimum front yard
setback (feet)
35 45 50
Minimum side yard setback
(feet)
15 15 25
Aggregate side yard
setback (feet)
30 40 60
Minimum rear yard setback
(feet)
30 30 40
Minimum setback from
abutting residential zoning
(feet)
25 30 45
Minimum setback -
residential accessory
structure (feet)
10 10 10
Maximum building
coverage (percent)
10 15* 20*
*Refer § 153-418.C.2 for additional
requirements related to building
coverage.
Maximum impervious
coverage (percent)
60 60 60
Maximum building height
(feet)
35
(2 1/2
stories)
35
(2 1/2
stories)
35
(2 1/2
stories)
Maximum density for R-5,
Townhouse Use
0 0 3 dwelling
units per
acre of lot
area
C. Special requirements.
(1) All uses shall be served by public water and public sanitary sewer
service.
(2) No individual building shall exceed 10,000 square feet of ground
floor area nor exceed a single dimension of 150 feet.
§ 153-418 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-418
1:814
(3) All new conditional use buildings and additions must have a
residential character and must include the following features:
(a) A pitched roof, covering at least 80% of the building or
addition, with a pitch of at least six vertical inches to every 12
horizontal inches.
(b) Residential building materials consistent with the type of
building materials used throughout the RBP Overlay District.
(c) Residentially scaled windows and doors, with a proportion of
windows and doors to solid wall that is similar to proportions
commonly found on residential structures in the RBP Overlay
District.
(4) Parking location.
(a) No parking other than that associated with required driveway
access shall be permitted within the minimum required front
yard setback established for the RBP Overlay District or
between the buildings and the street.
(b) No parking shall be located closer than five feet to the side or
rear property lines. Where a side or rear property line
constitutes the RBP Overlay District boundary with a
residential district, no parking shall be permitted with the
required setback.
(c) For parking lots with a total of four or more spaces, the lots
shall be provided with driveways to permit the vehicles to exit
facing forward.
(5) Buffer yards. For all uses other than R-1, a Class B buffer as defined
by Towamencin Township Code Chapter 136, § A119, shall be
provided along the boundaries of all residential districts or uses.
(6) Driveway requirements. Access regulations shall be in accordance
with § 153-410F of the VC, Village Commercial District, except as
follows:
(a) Corner lots which front on two streets of different classification
shall take access from the street of lesser classification and
shall have no access from the street of higher classification,
unless it is physically infeasible to provide access to the street
of lesser classification. Any existing driveway to the street of
higher classification shall be eliminated when a driveway is
provided to the street of lesser classification.
(b) Shared driveways are encouraged.
(c) For existing driveways to be reused for a permitted use:
§ 153-418 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-418
1:815
[1] When the nearest edge of an existing driveway on an
adjacent nonresidential property having frontage on the
same street is within 30 feet of the applicant's tract, the
applicant's tract shall utilize the driveway on the adjacent
tract as a shared access, provided that an easement
granting access to the applicant's tract has been recorded.
[2] Shared access shall not be required when all possible
interconnections between the two abutting lots would
cross wetlands, floodplains, and/or slopes of 15% or more.
[3] Shared access may be located entirely on one lot or may be
divided along a common lot line.
[4] The shared access shall be the sole access to the site
unless a minimum separation distance of 200 feet between
driveways, centerline of driveway to centerline of
driveway. Existing driveways on the applicant's site not
meeting the requirements in this section shall be
eliminated.
(d) For new driveways:
[1] When shared access cannot be provided via an existing
driveway consistent with § 153-418C(6)(c), a maximum of
one new driveway intersection shall be permitted per
street, per development site with the exception that a
second driveway shall be permitted for a development site
if each driveway is separated by a minimum distance of
200 feet, from centerline of driveway to centerline of
driveway.
[2] The driveway shall be located on a side lot line bordering a
property within the RBP Overlay District. In order to
accommodate required sight distances, or preserve
environmental features, this driveway may be set back
from the side lot line no more than 30 feet. Shared access
shall not be required when all possible interconnections
between the two abutting lots would cross 20 linear feet or
more of wetlands, floodplains, and/or slopes of 15% or
more.
[3] Each nonresidential use shall provide an access easement
for the shared driveway guaranteeing access to all
abutting lots zoned RBP.
[4] In addition, an access easement guaranteeing access from
the closest adjacent nonresidential property to the shared
driveway shall be recorded. This easement shall have a
minimum width of 35 feet and the portion of the easement
between the driveway and the adjacent property shall be
§ 153-418 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-418
1:816
§ 153-419. ELO Entertainment Lifestyle Overlay District. [Added
7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-10; 2-27-2019 by Ord. No. 19-02]
Overlay district boundary. The Entertainment Lifestyle Overlay District
Boundary primarily is comprised of the area of land that is bordered by
Forty Foot Road to the east, Tomlinson Road to the south and Allentown
Road to the north. The area extends in depth to the R175 Zoning District
boundary that is along the western border of the overlay area. The total
overlay area is approximately 52 acres and is currently zoned LI-Limited
Industrial, SC - Shopping Center and C - Commercial.
located no closer than 50 feet from the street ultimate
right-of-way line.
[5] Parking shall not be permitted along shared driveways
between the street ultimate right-of-way line and the rear
edge of the easement granting access to the abutting lot.
(7) All signs must meet the requirements of Chapter 153, Article VII,
except that:
(a) Signs may only be lit externally.
(b) All lighted signs must be extinguished between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(8) All site lighting must comply with Chapter 136, Appendix 136A,
§ A127 of the Towamencin Township Code, except that:
(a) Individual poles shall not exceed 15 feet in height to the top of
the luminaire.
(b) Seventy-five percent of all parking area lighting shall be
extinguished at 11:00 p.m. unless required for security
reasons.
(9) Trash and waste collection facilities must be completely screened
from the view of public streets and adjoining residential properties
or uses. Screening shall conform to the requirements of
Towamencin Township Code, Chapter 136, Appendix 136A, § A130,
with the additional provision that plantings must be at least six feet
tall at time of installation and that no portion of trash collection
container(s) may be visible above the required screening from
public streets or adjoining residential properties or uses.
A. Permitted land uses. A building, or group of buildings, may be erected,
altered, or used in whole or in part, and a lot may be used or occupied
for any of the following purposes and no other, provided that such uses
and location shall comply with the Entertainment Lifestyle Overlay Map
as may be amended and appended to the Zoning Ordinance.223
223. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 153-418 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-419
1:817
Uses by Conditional Use
B Business
B-1 Medical Office
B-2 Office
B-7 Medical Equipment Offices and
Distribution
B-8 Medical Laboratory or Medical
Office with Surgical Center
C Commercial
C-5 Convenience Store
C-6 Eating Place
C-7 Eating Place- Drive-Through and
Fast Food
C-8 Entertainment
C-9 Financial Establishment
C-16 Retail Trade and Retail Services
C-18 Shopping Center
C-22 Health Club
E Educational and Institutional
Uses
If there is an approved land development plan for Use R-8 or Use
R-13 in the Residential Sector, the following uses will not be
permitted elsewhere in the district:
E-2 Commercial School
E-3 Day-Care Center/Nursery School
E-7 Nursing Home
E-8 Personal Care Facility
R Residential
The following uses are permitted in the Residential Sector only:
R-8 Housing For the Elderly
R-13 Age-Qualified Independent
Residential Community
A Accessory Uses
Accessory uses are permitted only to allowed by right and conditional
uses.
B. Lot area and frontage requirements.
§ 153-419 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-419
1:818
Regulation Requirement
Minimum tract area 52 acres
Minimum tract frontage at street
line
1,700 feet
C. Setback requirements.
Regulation
Requirement
(feet)
Minimum front yard 501
Minimum side yard 252
503
Minimum rear yard 25
503
NOTES:
1 To the ultimate right-of-way of any public street, road or alley.
2 From any property line.
3 For a side or rear property line adjacent to an agricultural or
residential use or district.
D. Maximum coverage regulations.
Regulation Requirement
Building coverage 65%
Impervious coverage 85%
E. Maximum height regulations.
Regulation
Requirement
(feet)
Principal structure 401
NOTES:
1 May be increased to a maximum 65 feet or such increased height
as may be warranted when approved by the Board of Supervisors,
provided that for every foot of height in excess of 40 feet there
shall be added to each yard requirement one corresponding foot
of width or depth.
F. Parking requirements.
§ 153-419 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-419
1:819
(1) All uses: regulated by use type, except as indicated in § 153-419L.
(2) Setbacks. No parking area or driveway shall be located closer than
10 feet to any property line, except the portion of driveway
required for normal ingress and egress. Parking spaces shall be
permitted in the front yard, between the building and the street
right-of-way.
(3) Reserve parking. Due to mixing of uses, reserve parking up to 25%
of that required may be allowed in order to create open space
without unnecessarily requiring more paving than required.
Reserve parking shall be designed and engineered but need not be
constructed unless directed by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) The Board of Supervisors, as part of the conditional use approval,
may permit a reduction in the sum total of the required parking for
all of the uses based on the following:
(a) In the case of a development plan in which there are
efficiencies derived by shared parking for uses which have
complementary peak demands, the applicant shall submit
parking generation data, based upon standard methodology
(such as that published by the Urban Land Institute or from
actual parking studies within the region) sufficient for the
Township to determine the appropriate reduction.
(b) In the case of a development consisting solely of two or more
contiguous uses, the Board of Supervisors may permit a
reduction of the aggregate amount of required parking based
upon a determination that greater efficiency is effected by joint
use of a common parking area, but in such case the required
number of off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced by
more than 25%.
G. Conditional use criteria. In addition to the provisions of Article X of the
Zoning Ordinance, the following additional criteria shall apply in
considering the approval or denial of conditional use applications in this
district:
(1) Plans including the entire development must be submitted to show
the overall vehicular and pedestrian circulation, cohesive
landscape design, architectural renderings of the building facades
and an overall signage plan.
(2) Streets and circulation. The location of new streets, sight access,
driveways and pedestrian networks shall comply with the specific
requirements identified within this chapter except as may be
modified by the Board of Supervisors as part of the conditional use
approval.
(3) The applicant shall incorporate architectural performance
standards such as screening of parking facilities, loading areas,
§ 153-419 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-419
1:820
and all mechanical equipment; the continuity of storefronts and
entrance doorways on specific streets; the massing of buildings to
reinforce the design of an urban space; and sign control.
(4) Architecture. Preliminary architectural drawings/renderings shall
be provided for review and approval by the Board of Supervisors.
The architecture throughout the ELO District shall be developed
with architectural styles and materials that are compatible
throughout the sector whether or not the district is developed as a
part of one or more phases.
(5) Parking. The plan should include parking calculations for the
overall property including existing uses and any proposed change
of use or new construction.
(6) The Board of Supervisors may at its discretion waive or modify
requirements regarding signage, landscaping and parking
requirements in the Zoning Ordinance upon determination that
strict compliance would not further the purpose and intent of this
chapter.
H. Signage. All signage proposed within the Entertainment Lifestyle
Overlay District shall comply with Article VIII of the Towamencin
Township Code224 unless otherwise waived by the Board of Supervisors
through the conditional use process per § 153-419G(6). Sign design
shall be integral to the architectural design within the District.
I. Architectural development guidelines. The Entertainment Lifestyle
Overlay shall allow for independent branding within the development,
but a cohesive architectural theme or style should be implemented to
provide its own marketing brand for a successful development.
J. Landscaping. Landscaping will be in accordance with "Landscaping of
off-Street parking areas" and "Buffer yard requirements" sections of the
"Towamencin Township Engineering Standards" of Chapter 136 ("Land
Development and Subdivision Ordinance") of the Township Code.225
K. Pedestrian access guidelines. The design shall focus on the impact of
building and site design on the public realm, particularly streets,
sidewalks, trails and access to public open space. The design shall
include curbside management, internal parking circulation, and
vehicular and pedestrian access points that contribute to the
walkability of adjacent streets and trail systems. The design shall
provide a comprehensive landscape scheme that integrates the current
landscaping requirements within §§ 153-710, 136-510 and Appendix
136A with the need to provide a current approach to sustainability,
viewshed management, and mature vegetation maintenance within the
development.
224. Editor's Note: See Art. VIII in this Ch. 153.
225. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Appendix 136A, §§ A117 and A119, respectively.
§ 153-419 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-419
1:821
L. Residential sector.
(1) The Residential Sector designation within the Entertainment
Lifestyle Overlay District shall allow the following uses; EEducational
and Institutional Uses, E-7 - Nursing Home, and E-8 -
Personal Care; and/or R-Residential Uses, R-8 - Housing for the
Elderly, and R-13 - Age Qualified Independent Residential
Community, to provide a transition between the commercial
shopping center and the office/warehouses uses. The following
requirements supersede the requirements in § 153-502F when the
requirements are inconsistent or in conflict. If there is no conflict or
inconsistency, the requirements in § 153-502 should still apply.
(a) Maximum residential density: 12 dwelling units per acre of the
Residential Sector.
(b) Minimum lot area: none.
(c) Minimum open space: 20% of the Residential Sector. Open
space shall be required to be distributed throughout the sector.
(d) Setbacks: Setbacks for the residential and institutional uses
within the Residential Sector shall be as defined in § 153-419C,
except along Forty Foot Road where the minimum front yard
setback shall be no closer than the adjacent office building
(264.9 feet +/-).
(e) Building height: The maximum building height in the
Residential Sector shall be 45.5 feet.
(f) Parking requirements: The following minimum parking
standards shall be required:
[1] Not less than 1.5 off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling unit. All other uses shall be
regulated by use type. These parking spaces may be
located either on a driveway, within a garage parking area,
or combination thereof.
[2] There shall be one off-street parking space per employee
provided.
[3] Reserved and shared parking shall be permitted as
indicated in § 153-419F(3) and (4). A parking analysis,
acceptable to the Township, should be provided to support
the parking reduction.
(2) Use C-16 - Retail Trade and Retail Services is permitted along the
Forty Foot Road frontage in the Residential Sector as a conditional
use with the following requirements:
§ 153-419 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-419
1:822
(a) Setbacks: Setbacks for Use C-16 in the Residential Sector shall
be as defined in § 153-419C, except along Forty Foot Road
where the minimum front yard setback shall be 75 feet.
(b) Building height: The maximum building height for a C-16 use in
the Residential Sector shall be 25 feet.
§ 153-419 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-419
1:823

ARTICLE V
Use Definitions and Regulations
§ 153-500. Applicability of regulations.
Except as provided by law or this chapter, no building, structure, or land
shall be used or occupied except for the purposes permitted in the zoning
districts as indicated in Article IV herein.
§ 153-501. Uses subject to other regulations.
§ 153-502. Use definitions and regulations.
A. All uses permitted by right, condition, or special exception shall be
subject, in addition to the following use regulations, to such regulations
of setbacks, lot size, lot width, building area and height, impervious
surfaces, easements, buffer yards, off-street parking and such other
provisions as are specified in other articles of this chapter.
B. In particular, the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
local regulations regarding waste disposal shall be adhered to. Further,
no permit shall be issued until approval is obtained from the necessary
regulatory bodies regarding sewage disposal.
A. Ag Agricultural Uses.
(1) Ag-1 Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes
including farming, dairying, pasturage agriculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry subject
to the following provisions:
(a) Feedlots, pens and livestock confinement areas shall not be
situated less than 50 feet from any stream, swale, or body of
water.
(b) Such use may include a single-family detached dwelling for the
sole use of individuals and their immediate families which are
engaged in agricultural employment on the same site or for the
immediate family of the landowner.
(c) Minimum lot area shall be five acres with, and two acres
without, a dwelling unit on the lot.
(d) Parking: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(2) Ag-2 Accessory Agricultural Sales/Farm Stands. Sales of farm
products may be conducted as an accessory use to an agricultural
use from a temporary structure under the following conditions:
(a) Minimum lot size shall be five acres.
(b) Farm products shall be limited to plant material, crops
harvested from plants, dairy products, poultry products, meat
§ 153-500 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:825
products, and such things as honey, and preserves and jellies
made from fruit products of the farm.
(c) At least 50% of the farm products for sale shall be grown,
produced or raised on the subject property.
(d) A temporary sales building or stand may be located within the
yard setback areas as required by the zoning district in which
it is located provided that the stand or building is a minimum of
25 feet from all lot lines and from the ultimate street right-ofway.
For the purpose of this section, the term "temporary" shall
mean "during the season of harvest."
(e) Parking. Sufficient on-site parking area shall be devoted to
servicing customers. The use shall provide an adequate mudfree
parking surface. The designated parking area shall be a
minimum of 10 feet from the ultimate right-of-way and shall be
located on the same side of the street as the farm stand.
(3) Ag-3 Greenhouse. The indoor raising of plants, shrubs and trees for
sale and transplantation under the following conditions:
(a) Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(b) Maximum building coverage shall be 20%.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage shall be 30%.
(d) No retail sales from the premises shall be permitted.
(e) Parking: one space per employee shall be provided with a mudfree
surface.
(4) Ag-4 Intensive Agriculture. Intensive agriculture including
feedlots, confinement livestock or poultry operations taking place
in structures or closed pens subject to the following provisions:
(a) Minimum lot area shall be 50 acres.
(b) Maximum building coverage shall be 5%.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage shall be 10%.
(d) All buildings, pens, and other structures shall be located at
least 100 feet from any street right-of-way or property line.
(e) All applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources shall apply.
(f) No retail sales from the premises shall be permitted.
(g) Parking: one space per employee.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:826
(5) Ag-5 Kennel. A facility housing dogs, cats, or other household pets
where grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or selling of animals
is conducted as a business subject to the following provisions:
(a) Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(b) No animal shelter or runway shall be located closer than 200
feet from any property line.
(c) The kennel shall be constructed so that the animals cannot
stray therefrom.
(d) The permanent capacity of the kennel shall not exceed 10 dogs
or other animals per acre.
(e) A buffer yard of 20 feet in width comprised of a dense
evergreen planting screen shall be provided along all property
and street lines.
(f) Any building or structure associated with this use including a
dwelling shall meet all of the requirements for single-family
detached dwellings for the district in which the use is located.
One single-family detached dwelling in accordance with Use
Type R-1 shall be permitted on the property provided that a
resident of the property is engaged in the operation of the
business.
(g) Parking: one space per employee, plus one space per four of
the total number of runs and crates. The use shall provide an
adequate mud-free parking surface. The designated parking
area shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the ultimate right-ofway
and shall be located on the same side of the street as the
kennel. Two additional off-street parking spaces shall also be
provided for each dwelling unit.
(6) Ag-6 Nursery. The outdoor raising of plants, shrubs and trees for
sale and transplantation subject to the following provisions:
(a) Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(b) No retail sales shall be permitted.
(c) Any building or structure associated with this use including a
dwelling shall meet all of the requirements for single-family
detached dwellings for the district in which the use is located.
One single-family detached dwelling in accordance with Use
Type R-1 shall be permitted on the property provided that a
resident of the property is engaged in the operation of the
business.
(d) Parking: one space per employee, plus two spaces for the
dwelling unit if applicable. In addition, sufficient on-site
parking area, as determined by the Board of Supervisors, shall
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:827
be devoted to servicing customers. The use shall provide an
adequate mud-free parking surface. The designated parking
area shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the ultimate right-ofway
and shall be located on the same side of the street as the
nursery.
(7) Ag-7 Riding Academy and Boarding Stable. Riding academy, livery
or boarding stable, subject to the following provisions:
(a) Minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
(b) The total number of horses shall not exceed four horses per
acre.
(c) Any building or structure associated with this use including a
dwelling shall meet all of the requirements for single-family
detached dwellings for the district in which the use is located.
One single-family detached dwelling in accordance with Use
Type R-1 shall be permitted on the property provided that a
resident of the property is engaged in the operation of the
business.
(d) Feedlots, pens and livestock confinement areas shall not be
situated less than 50 feet from any stream, swale or body of
water.
(e) Parking. Sufficient on-site parking, as determined by the Board
of Supervisors, shall be devoted to servicing customers, which
shall include a minimum of one mud-free off-street parking
space for each livery or boarding stable, plus one space per
employee. The designated parking area shall be a minimum of
20 feet from the ultimate right-of-way and shall be located on
the same side of the street as the principal use. Two additional
off-street parking spaces shall also be provided for each
dwelling unit.
(8) Ag-8 Agricultural Support Services and Retail. Establishments for
the sale and services of farm equipment and the sale and supply of
farm supplies such as feed, grain, fertilizer and related accessory
products subject to the following provisions:
(a) Minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(b) Parking: one space per 200 square feet of retail area, plus one
space per 1,000 square feet of outdoor display area.
B. B Business Uses.
(1) B-1 Medical Office. A building or group of buildings with multiple
offices for one or more physicians or dentists for examination or
treatment of persons as outpatients, and with laboratories
incidental thereto.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:828
(a) Parking: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
(2) B-2 Office. A building or portion of a building wherein services are
performed involving predominantly administrative, professional, or
clerical operations.
(a) Parking: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) B-3 Veterinary Office or Clinic. The office of a veterinarian for the
care of small domestic animals that are normally and customarily
considered to be household pets. If a kennel is part of the office or
clinic, the use shall meet the regulations of use Ag-5 Kennel. A
veterinarian clinic shall be operated during regular business hours,
except in the case of emergencies.
(a) Parking: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
(4) B-4 Planned Business Park.
(a) A planned business park is designed to make special provisions
for the requirements of modern, well-planned, integrated office
developments. The following regulations require that a
planned business park use be developed as a group of properly
related business offices and compatible facilities comprising a
single architectural design including appropriate landscaping
and open space areas.
(b) A planned business park development is intended to be
primarily comprised of office uses with limited nonoffice
support uses as may be deemed appropriate to service the
needs of the Business Park development.
[1] The following uses are permitted by-right within a planned
business park development:
[a] B-2 Office.
[b] C-6 Eating Place.
[c] C-9 Financial Establishment.
[d] A-14 Accessory Business Park Uses.
[2] The following uses are permitted as a conditional use
when authorized in accordance with the standards and
criteria as set forth in this section:
[a] C-13 Hotel, provided that each room for lodging shall
gain direct access only through the interior of the
building by means of a main or secondary lobby. For
the purpose of this use type, a conference center
including business training and/or education facilities
wherein the activity directly involves the training and/
or education of a business work force or clientele
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:829
which may include temporary lodging and meal
accommodations for attendees is also permitted.
[3] Planned business park developments located in the LI
Limited Industrial District shall comply with the provisions
of the Planned Business Campus District.
[4] Parking and loading.
[a] One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area shall
be required.
[b] One off-street loading space shall be provided for the
first 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one
space for each additional 25,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
(5) B-5 Business Center.
(a) A center consisting of a combination of business uses,
including offices, display and sales areas, and uses for the
designing, assembling, remodeling or repairing of electro/
mechanical components on office desk or table top. No
objectionable dust, fumes, noise, odors, smoke, glare and
vibration shall be permitted. The uses set forth in the Village
Commercial District of this chapter and no other shall be
permitted. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
(b) The following development requirements shall apply to an
application for a conditional use to the Board of Supervisors to
convert an existing residential building to a business/
commercial use or mixed business/commercial and residential
use as permitted in § 153-410A:
[1] The minimum lot size for a business center use shall be
120,000 square feet.
[2] No additions to an existing building or new construction
will be permitted that exceed the required setbacks or
coverage requirements in § 153-410C and D of this
chapter.
[3] The minimum number of parking spaces shall be regulated
by the individual use type.
[4] No parking shall be permitted in the front yard.
[5] A planted strip of at least five feet shall be maintained
along all side and rear property lines unless a shared
driveway crosses a side property line.
[6] Section 153-410F and G of this district shall be adhered to
whenever possible.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:830
[7] The Towamencin Township Planning Commission shall
review the conditional use application for compliance with
the terms of this chapter, and the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of Towamencin Township,226 as
last amended, and shall submit its recommendations
thereon to the Board of Supervisors.
[8] Parking: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) B-6 Conversions. The conversion of an existing residential building
to a business/commercial use or mixed business/commercial and
residential use shall be in accordance with § 153-410F of this
chapter.
(a) Parking: shall be in accordance with the applicable use types
proposed for the conversion.
(7) B-7 Medical Equipment Offices and Distribution. A business
consisting of a combination of uses overseen by the FDA Quality
System (QS) regulation and Medical Device Amendments of 1976,
as amended, including offices, display and sales areas, and uses for
the designing, assembling, remodeling or repairing, and
distribution of medical and biotechnical components, dental and
optical equipment, hardware, small parts, and similar products. At
least 60% of the gross floor area of the business must be allocated
to office use. No outdoor storage shall be permitted. [Added
1-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
(8) B-8 Medical Laboratory or Medical Office with Surgical Center. A
building or group of buildings used for a medical laboratory or for
medical office purposes in accordance with § 153-502B(1) (B-1
Medical Office) with a diagnostic center, wellness center, and
surgical center, including up to 20 beds for one- or two-night
recovery or rehabilitation after surgery, subject to the approval of
the Pennsylvania Department of Health. [Added 2-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-01]
(a) Parking: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
C. C Commercial Uses.
(1) C-1 Adult Entertainment.
(a) An establishment devoted to the display, rental and/or selling
of materials such as pictures, drawings, photographs, videos,
or other depictions or printed material and paraphernalia of
explicit sexual materials which, if sold knowingly to a child
under 18 years of age, would violate the criminal laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in effect at the same time
thereof. The following provisions shall also apply.
226. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:831
(b) All proposed C-1 Adult Entertainment uses shall comply with
the following development standards and criteria when
applying for a special exception use:
[1] Minimum lot area shall be two acres.
[2] Minimum lot width shall be 250 feet.
[3] Minimum setbacks from each front, rear and side lot line
shall be 50 feet.
[4] Maximum building coverage shall be 40%.
[5] Maximum impervious coverage shall be 65%.
[6] All lots containing C-1 uses shall have side and rear yards
enclosed with a six-foot-high fence which shall be located
within a dense planting buffer with a minimum width of 25
feet. The planted buffer shall consist of evergreens planted
10 feet on center in a staggered pattern and each planting
shall be a minimum of four feet in height at the time of
planting. No fences shall be permitted in front of the front
building line.
[7] No parking shall be permitted in the front yard.
[8] A building or structure for such use shall be located no less
than 1,000 feet from any residential use or residential
district, public or private school, church, recreation
facility or park, or any other religious, educational, or
institutional use.
[9] No materials sold within the building shall be visible from
any window, door, or exterior of the building.
[10]No persons under the age of 18 years of age shall be
permitted within an adult entertainment establishment.
[11] Parking: one space per 150 square feet of gross floor area.
(2) C-2 Vehicle Sales. The sale and/or lease of new or used automobiles
by a duly franchised, licensed or registered car, boat, or motorcycle
dealer; the sale of used cars, boats, or motorcycles; the rental of
cars, pickup trucks not exceeding a maximum gross vehicle weight
of 3/4 of one ton, trailers associated with boats, motorcycles and/or
boats; or the sale of travel campers and all terrain vehicles,
provided that all uses shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania when required.
(a) All facilities shall be located and all services shall be conducted
within the confines of the lot.
(b) All preparation, lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be
accessory to the principal use and shall be conducted within a
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:832
building. Auto body repair and painting shall comply with Use
Type C-3.
(c) Accessways shall be provided for the safe and convenient
egress and ingress of motor vehicles. No accessway shall
exceed 35 feet in width nor be less than 15 feet in width.
(d) Access to the street shall be physically controlled by concrete
curbing and separated from the street by a minimum ten-footwide
planted strip.
(e) All automobile parts and similar articles shall be stored within
a building.
(f) Storage or display of automobiles, trucks, boats, and other
vehicles for sale shall not be allowed in any front yard.
(g) There shall be no more than one access point into the facility
from each street on which the facility has frontage.
(h) Parking: one space per 500 square feet of showroom area. If no
interior showroom exists, there shall be one space per 1,000
square feet of outdoor display area.
(3) C-3 Automotive Body Repair and Paint Shop. Establishments doing
paint spraying, body and fender work, and custom body work shall
comply with the following: [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No.
11-10]
(a) All such work shall be performed within a building.
(b) All related automotive parts, refuse, and similar articles shall
be stored within a building or enclosed area.
(c) No vehicle shall be stored in the open awaiting repairs unless
screened from all adjacent roads and properties by a fence,
wall or evergreen hedge of at least six feet in height.
(d) Parking shall not be located closer than 100 feet from any
adjacent residential district.
(e) Parking: two spaces for every service bay, plus one space per
employee.
(4) C-4 Car Wash. An area of land and/or a structure with machine or
hand-operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing,
polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.
(a) Car washes shall be designed with a stacking area adequate
for a minimum of two cars per bay for do-it-yourself facilities
and a minimum of nine cars per bay for an automatic facility,
including a stacking area adequate for two vehicles for each
vacuuming island and detailing area so that waiting cars do not
interfere with traffic flow onto or through the facility.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:833
(b) The facility shall have a drainage system which ensures that
water will not collect on driveways, sidewalks or flow out onto
the street.
(c) The facility shall provide a six-foot-high fence and a dense
evergreen planting buffer at least four feet in height along all
side and rear lot lines.
(d) Parking: one space per employee
(5) C-5 Convenience Store. A store with less than 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area, that sells a limited variety of food, nonprescription
drugs, and household items and whose design or principal method
of operation shall include the following characteristics:
(a) Intended for convenient pickup of a few items at a time and not
for long-term or comprehensive shopping.
(b) Can accommodate only a few customers at a time.
(c) Parking: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) C-6 Eating Place. An establishment that services food and
beverages primarily to persons seated within the building. This
includes cafes, outdoor cafes and banquet facilities. Drive-in
service is prohibited.
(a) Parking: one space per 50 square feet of net floor area, plus
one space per employee.
(7) C-7 Eating Place - Drive-Through and Fast-Food. An establishment
located on a single and separate pad whose principal business is
the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages in ready-toconsume
individual servings, for consumption either within the
eating place building or for carry-out and where either: foods,
frozen desserts, or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic,
or other disposable containers and where customers are not served
their food, frozen desserts, or beverages by an eating place
employee at the same table or counter where the items are
consumed, or the establishment includes a drive-up or drivethrough
service facility or offers curb service.
(a) The drive-through service area shall be an integral part of the
interior circulation pattern. No direct access to a public road
shall be permitted from the drive through aisle.
(b) Where a drive-in window is proposed, a stacking lane shall be
provided to serve a minimum of nine cars. The stacking lane
shall not be used for parking lot circulation aisles, nor shall it
in any way conflict with through circulation or parking.
(c) All such eating places shall provide a trash storage area which
shall be screened from the street and adjacent properties by an
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:834
enclosed fence at least six feet in height to prevent trash from
blowing from the area and to serve as a visual screen for the
trash area.
(d) Trash receptacles shall be provided outside the eating place
for patron use.
(e) Parking: one space per 30 square feet of public use area or one
space per two seats, whichever is greater, plus one space per
employee.
(8) C-8 Entertainment. An entertainment facility shall include a
bowling alley, skating rink, billiard hall, indoor movie theater, and
other similar uses, but shall not include a use which meets the
definition of Adult Entertainment Use C-1.
(a) Parking.
[1] Theater: one space per every three auditorium seats.
[2] Bowling alley: five spaces for every bowling lane, plus one
space per employee.
[3] Other uses: one space per 120 square feet of gross floor
area, plus one space per employee.
(b) All parking shall be screened from public streets by a dense
evergreen planting with a minimum height of four feet at
planting.
(9) C-9 Financial Establishment. A financial establishment shall
include a bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or other
financial establishment providing:.
(a) If a drive-in window is provided, a stacking area to
accommodate at least nine vehicles shall be provided for each
drive-in window which will not interfere with the vehicular or
pedestrian circulation plan for the site or the required parking
for the use.
(b) Where automated teller machines are provided, such facilities
shall be adequately lighted for security and safety and shall be
ancillary to the main building.
(c) Parking: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(10) C-10 Funeral Home. A building or part thereof used for human
funeral services. Such building may contain space and facilities for:
embalming and the performance of other services used in
preparation of the dead for burial; the performance of autopsies
and other surgical procedures; the storage of caskets, funeral urns
and other related funeral supplies; and the storage of funeral
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:835
vehicles, but shall not include facilities for cremation. Where a
funeral home is permitted, a funeral chapel shall also be permitted.
(a) Parking: one space per 30 square feet of floor area for public
use, plus one space per employee, plus one space per each
vehicle normally stored on the premises.
(11) C-11 Bed-and-Breakfast Inn. A house or portion thereof, where
short-term lodging rooms and meals are provided. The operator of
the inn shall live on the premises or in adjacent premises providing:
(a) There shall be no separate kitchen or cooking facilities in any
guest room.
(b) The use of any amenities provided by the guest house such as
swimming pool or tennis courts shall be restricted in use to
guests of the establishment. The serving of meals shall be
restricted to the guests of the establishment.
(c) There shall be no use of show windows or display or
advertising visible outside the premises to attract guests other
than a single, nonilluminating sign which meets the
regulations set forth in this chapter.
(d) Minimum lot area shall be one acre.
(e) Parking: two spaces for the primary dwelling, plus one space
per each rental room, plus one space for each employee.
(12) C-12 Self-Service Storage Facility. A building consisting of
relatively small individual, self-contained units that are leased for
the storage of business and household goods or contractors
supplies. Such use shall be surrounded by a physical barrier
including a fence and dense evergreen buffer strip, measuring at
least six feet in height. The buffer strip shall be planted outside of
the fence or other barrier and shall consist of plants which will hide
the fence from view from the street and adjoining properties and
further providing:
(a) The minimum driveway width shall be 25 feet.
(b) No business activity other than leasing of storage units shall be
permitted.
(c) All storage shall be within enclosed buildings, except that no
more than 10% of the total storage area as determined by the
building footprints may be devoted to outdoor parking spaces
for boats, cars, recreational vehicles, or other noncommercial
vehicles provided said outdoor storage area is within the
fenced-in portion of the facility and generally screened from
the street.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:836
(d) Explosive, radioactive, or highly flammable materials and
chemicals such as fuels and gasoline shall be prohibited.
(e) Parking: three spaces for customer parking at the rental office,
plus one space per employee.
(13) C-13 Motel or Hotel. An establishment offering transient lodging
accommodations at a daily rate to the general public, which may
also provide additional services or accommodations, such as eating
places, meeting rooms, recreation facilities and shops. Room for
lodging shall not have direct access to the exterior of the building.
Each lodging room access shall be obtained only through the
interior of the building as in through a main or secondary lobby.
(a) Parking: 1 1/4 spaces per room, plus one space per 150 square
foot of office space, plus the parking requirement for any other
permitted use of the property including but not limited to a C-6
Use.
(14) C-14 Recreational Campsites.
(a) Campsites. A lot on which two or more campsites are located,
established or maintained for occupancy as temporary living
quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. A campsite shall
be a plot of ground intended for the accommodation of either a
recreational vehicle, tent, or other individual camping unit on a
temporary basis. Such campsites shall be rented by the day,
week or month only and no person can reside in any campsite
anywhere in the camp for more than 120 days per year
providing:
[1] Minimum lot area shall be 20 acres.
[2] Maximum density shall be 10 campsites per acre.
[3] A minimum of 40% of the site shall be kept as open space,
exclusive of buffer yards. Buffer yards shall be 100 feet
from all street and property lines.
[4] A commissary and related facility may be permitted as a
conditional use providing that said facility will only serve
the inhabitants of the campsite facility.
[5] Parking: four spaces located near and convenient to the
retail/management office. Each space shall be adequate in
size to accommodate the parking of an automobile/camper
combination, plus four visitor automobile spaces for the
commissary use, plus one space per employee.
(b) Cottages. A planned development intended for seasonal
recreational use comprised of two or more cottages and other
related buildings, including camps for boys and girls using two
or more cottages for shelter or sleeping purposes:
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:837
[1] The main use of the proposed development shall be
seasonal, and no occupant shall be permitted to remain for
a total period exceeding 180 days during any one calendar
year except for an owner-occupant or caretaker of the
facility.
[2] Minimum lot area shall be 25 acres.
[3] Maximum density shall be one cottage per two acres of
gross lot area.
[4] No mobile home, camper, or recreational vehicles shall be
permitted as part of a cottage development or private
camp.
[5] Cottages shall be clustered so that a minimum of 75% of
the site shall be left as undisturbed open space.
[6] Parking: one space per counselor or employee, plus
adequate loading/unloading areas for buses, shall be
provided.
(15) C-15 Repair Shop. Any business for the repair of consumer goods,
but not including repair of automobiles, boats, campers, vehicles or
motorcycles and not including the repair of other items which as
part of the repair process, cause noise, fumes, or other
disturbances to emanate beyond the property line of the
establishment.
(a) Parking: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
(16) C-16 Retail Trade and Retail Services. Establishments engaged in
selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or
household consumption and rendering services incidental to the
sale of such goods, or establishments primarily engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person or his or her
apparel. Such use does not include an eating place or other use
specifically designated in this chapter as a separate use.
(a) All products produced on the premises shall be sold on the
premises.
(b) A retail facility may have associated with it as an accessory use
a warehouse for the storage of goods and supplies which are
sold or used at the retail facility. Approval for a warehouse as
an accessory structure shall be by special exception to be
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. The amount of
warehouse space to be permitted shall be in accordance with
the needs of the retail use and shall not detract from the retail
nature of the use or from the area in which it is located.
(c) Parking: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:838
(17) C-17 Vehicular Repair and Service Station. Any premises where
gasoline and other petroleum products are sold and/or vehicular
maintenance activities are conducted, provided that automobile
painting, and body fender work are excluded. All premises shall
meet the following requirements:
(a) Minimum lot width of 200 feet shall be provided along each
street on which the lot abuts.
(b) Minimum lot area shall be one acre.
(c) Access to roads shall be at least 50 feet from the intersection of
any streets.
(d) Such use may only be located on a controlled access road or
collector road as identified in the Comprehensive Plan of the
Township.
(e) All pumps, lifts, and other service facilities shall be located not
closer than 35 feet to any property or ultimate right-of-way
line.
(f) No vehicle shall be stored in the open, except those awaiting
repairs, for a period exceeding seven consecutive days unless
screened from all adjacent roads and properties by a fence,
wall or evergreen hedge of at least six feet in height.
(g) All lubricating, making of repairs, or similar activities shall be
performed in an enclosed building.
(h) Separate accessways shall be provided for the safe and
convenient egress and ingress of motor vehicles. No accessway
shall exceed 35 feet in width nor be less than 15 feet in width.
(i) Access to the street shall be physically separated by concrete
curbing and a ten-foot-wide landscaped strip separating the
street from the service station parking area.
(j) All automobile parts and similar articles shall be stored within
a building.
(k) Unregistered or junk vehicles shall not be stored in the open at
any time.
(l) The sale of automobiles, trucks, or other motor vehicles shall
be prohibited.
(m) A small shopping facility of no greater than 1,500 square feet
for the fast service sale of a limited line of high volume grocery
and beverage items shall be permitted as an accessory use to
the sale of gasoline and other petroleum products. However,
such a facility shall not be permitted together with the
provision of automobile service/repair.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:839
(n) Service stations designed to offer to the public self-service
facilities for dispensing of gasoline and other motor vehicle
fuels shall meet all state regulations.
(o) Parking: two spaces for each service bay, plus one space per
employee. If there is a convenience store in place of service
bays, there shall be one space per 150 square feet of floor area
devoted to sales.
(18) C-18 Shopping Center. A shopping center use is a building or
combination of buildings which are designed as a planned complex
of related structures, parking areas, circulation systems and
related facilities which may include a combination of the following
permitted uses and is subject to the following additional criteria:
(a) Permitted shopping center uses:
[1] All uses listed in § 153-412A herein.
[2] Theater, not including outdoor motion-picture
establishment.
[3] Bakery, confectionery, or custom shop for the production
of articles to be sold at retail on the premises.
[4] Passenger bus station, telephone and telegraph office.
[5] Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above
uses.
[6] Any use of the same general character as any of the above
permitted uses, when authorized as a special exception by
the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that such use shall be
permitted subject to such reasonable restrictions as the
Zoning Hearing Board may determine, and further
provided that no trade or business shall be permitted
which is either noxious or hazardous.
[7] Freestanding satellite buildings shall be permitted under
the following conditions:
[a] The total area of all satellite buildings shall not exceed
10% of the total gross floor area of the main building
or buildings.
[b] All satellite buildings shall be located a minimum of
200 feet from main buildings.
[c] The location of a satellite building shall be
harmoniously planned into the circulation system of
the shopping center to avoid vehicular and pedestrian
conflicts. Access to the satellite building shall be
restricted to locations from within the shopping
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:840
center. Direct access to the satellite building from
abutting streets shall be prohibited.
[d] All satellite buildings shall be located within the
primary building envelope of the main parcel.
[e] Satellite building pads shall be leaseholds of the main
use and shall not be a fee-simple lot.
[f] The parking requirement for the individual satellite
use shall be used to determine the buildings' parking
requirement.
[g] The area of all satellite buildings shall be included in
calculating the maximum building coverage and
impervious coverage on the parcel.
[h] Signage shall be in accordance with the signage
requirements for individual stores within a shopping
center use.
(b) Development requirements. The general plan for a shopping
center use shall include specific evidence and facts showing
that it has considered and made provisions for, and the
development shall be executed in accordance with, the
following essential conditions:
[1] The proposed development shall be constructed in
accordance with an overall plan, shall be unified in terms
of architectural design, scale, circulation and landscaping,
and shall provide initially for the construction of a
minimum of 7,500 square feet of floor area, and not less
than three of the uses listed in Subsection C(18)(a) above.
[2] All buildings shall be arranged in a group or in groups.
[3] The distance, at the closest point, between any two
separate, freestanding buildings, shall be not less than 12
feet.
[4] Adequate areas shall be provided for loading and
unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles; for the
provision of trash receptacles for servicing of shops by
refuse collection; for servicing of shops by fuel, fire and
other service vehicles; for automobile accessways; and for
pedestrian walks. All areas provided for use by vehicles
and all pedestrian walks shall be constructed in
accordance with Township specifications.
[5] Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from public streets and highways serving the
center without undue congestion to or interference with
normal traffic flow. All points of vehicular access to and
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:841
from public streets shall be located not less than 200 feet
from the intersection of any public street lines with each
other.
[6] Parking: five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
[7] Parking, loading, and service areas used by motor vehicles
shall be located entirely within the lot lines of the shopping
center and shall be physically separated from all public
streets.
[8] Landscaping and lighting shall be in accordance with the
Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,227 as last amended.
[9] The proposed shopping center shall be served by adequate
water and sewage disposal facilities, the adequacy of
which shall be demonstrated and guaranteed.
(19) C-19 Golf Course. A golf course shall include a nine-hole or
eighteen-hole golf course and may include a clubhouse, one eating
place, a separate banquet facility, and other accessory uses,
including a pro shop with not greater than 2,000 square feet gross
floor area which may include the sale, rental and fitting of golf
clubs, golf equipment and clothes; this use shall also permit the
installation of golf tees to be used for instruction and practice of
the play of golf, including a driving range but excluding miniature
golf course, batting cage or similar uses, provided said use is
clearly accessory to the golf course and is subject to the following
provisions: [Amended 11-17-2004 by Ord. No. 04-06]
(a) Minimum lot area shall be 50 acres for a nine-hole and 80 acres
for an eighteen-hole course.
(b) Minimum building setback of 100 feet from all lot and ultimate
right-of-way lines.
(c) Minimum buffer yard of 75 feet.
(d) Parking: five spaces per hole. If there is a clubhouse/eating
place, additional parking shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements for the C-6 Eating Place use type. For other
permitted uses, additional parking shall be required in
accordance with the specific use type. [Amended 5-9-2007
by Ord. No. 07-04228]
(20) C-20 Miniature Golf, Driving Range, Batting Cage and Other
Similar Recreation. Golf driving range, miniature golf course, golf
227. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
228. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C(19)(e), which
immediately followed this subsection and contained provisions on banquet facilities.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:842
cage and baseball batting cage, other designated recreation units
and a pro shop with not greater than 2,000 square feet gross floor
area as an accessory use, which may include the sale, rental and
fitting of golf clubs, golf equipment and clothes; this use shall
also permit the installation of golf tees to be used for instruction
and practice of the play of golf, when authorized by the Board of
Supervisors as a conditional use, subject to the following conditions
and in accordance with Article X, Conditional Uses, herein.
Recreation activity involving the operation of motor vehicles,
including go-carts, shall be specifically prohibited. [Amended
11-17-2004 by Ord. No. 04-06]
(a) The parcel devoted to such use shall be not less than 35 acres.
(b) The use and activities associated therewith, other than
parking, shall be set back not less than 150 feet from a
perimeter property line and 75 feet from an ultimate right-ofway
line, with the exception of parking which may be set back
not less than 25 feet from an ultimate right-of-way line, and
must maintain the one-hundred-fifty-foot setback from all
perimeter property lines.
(c) No building associated with the use shall exceed 20 feet in
height.
(d) The parcel devoted to such use shall contain at least 500 feet of
uninterrupted frontage along an arterial road as defined by the
Comprehensive Plan of the Township.
(e) The proposed use may contain Use C-6 Eating Place not
greater than 5,000 square feet gross floor area, which shall
include the sale of convenience items but exclude the sale of
gas.
(f) For the purposes of this chapter, a "miniature golf course" shall
be defined as a course containing 18 miniature golf holes, the
play on which would require the use of a putter only.
(g) Additional recreation units shall include but are not limited to
golf pro shop, rock climbing wall, skating facility, soccer cages,
and party/picnic pavilion either open or enclosed.
(h) Parking - One and one-half spaces per each recreation unit:
which includes: each golf practice tee, miniature golf hole,
batting cage, golf cage or soccer cage, or similar recreation
unit and one parking space for each three persons of capacity
of each indoor and outdoor principal use not listed above; and
parking as required for Use C-6 in Article VII, Off-Street
Parking and Loading.
(i) Temporary parking may be used to accommodate up to 25% of
the required parking. Areas having slopes of 5% or less may be
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:843
used no more frequently than four consecutive days and not
greater than 20 days per calendar year. The locations of
temporary parking shall be shown on plans, and be subject to
the same locational requirements applicable to paved parking.
Such areas need not be paved. Such surface material(s)
required by the intended use shall be determined by the
Township. [Added 11-17-2004 by Ord. No. 04-06]
(j) Activities associated with this use shall be open to the public
not greater than between 6:30 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. daily.
Activities associated with the use of the picnic pavilion or any
banquet facilities shall be limited to events associated with the
golf or recreation facilities provided on site. [Added
11-17-2004 by Ord. No. 04-06]
(21) C-21 Billboards. An off-premises advertising sign directing patrons
to a service or business located outside of the lot on which the sign
is located and subject to the following regulations in any zoning
district in which the use is permitted:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
(b) The minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
(c) The minimum front yard setback shall be 100 feet.
(d) The minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be 75 feet.
(e) Billboards shall have a maximum sign area of 360 square feet.
(f) Billboards shall not be closer than 1,000 feet apart.
(g) The bottom of the sign area of a billboard shall be located a
minimum of 10 feet above the ground and the top of the sign
structure and shall comply with the maximum height
requirements within the district in which it is located.
(h) Billboards shall not be illuminated between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(i) Billboards shall comply with all of the other requirements for a
principal use within the district in which it is located except as
otherwise stated herein.
(j) Billboards must comply with the applicable requirements of
Article VIII (Signs) of this code.229 [Added 1-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-01]
(22) C-22 Health Club. An establishment that provides facilities, classes
and instruction for aerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise
229. Editor's Note: See Art. VIII, Signs, in this chapter.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:844
equipment, game courts such as for squash and racquetball,
swimming facilities, and saunas, showers, and locker rooms.
(a) A pro shop selling sports equipment and clothing related only
to facilities provided on the premises shall be permitted.
(b) Parking: one space per 400 square feet of gross floor area.
(c) No separate facilities for eating or sleeping shall be permitted.
D. E Educational and Institutional Uses.
(1) E-1 Cemetery. A cemetery shall be limited to a graveyard, including
a mausoleum, for the interment of humans.
(a) The minimum lot size shall be 10 acres.
(b) No more than 10% of the entire area may be devoted to
aboveground buildings not serving as burial markers or
memorials, such as business and administration offices,
chapels, maintenance facilities, greenhouses, or repair shops.
This restriction includes parking facilities.
(c) One dwelling to be used for custodial personal may be
permitted in accordance with the requirements for singlefamily
detached dwellings in the district in which the use is
permitted.
(d) The entrance features shall be located no closer to the nearest
right-of-way line of any public street than a distance equal to
the building setback line required in the district in which the
cemetery is located.
(e) No such entrance features shall exceed 12 feet in height.
(2) E-2 Commercial School. A professional, business, cosmetology,
music, gymnastics, art, dancing, or other similar school, excluding
the industrial trades which include but are not necessarily limited
to welding, heating, ventilation air conditioning, and auto body
repair.
(a) One space per two students of the maximum total student
design capacity of the facility, plus one space per faculty
member and employee.
(3) E-3 Day-Care Center/Nursery School.
(a) Child day-care center/nursery school. A state licensed facility
providing day-care and/or educational service for more than
six children, providing out-of-home care for part of a twentyfour-
hour day to children under 16 years of age, excluding care
provided by relatives and care provided by places of worship
during religious services. Said use shall include the term
"nursery school."
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:845
[1] In permitted residential districts the minimum lot size and
side and rear setback requirements shall be 1 1/2 times
the minimum lot size and setbacks for a single-family
detached dwelling within the district.
[2] Buffer yards with a minimum width of 25 feet planted with
a dense evergreen screen with a height of four feet upon
planting shall be provided if the use is located within a
residential district or said use is adjacent to an existing
residential use.
[3] The outside play area shall be completely enclosed with a
fence with a minimum height of four feet and maximum
height of six feet. Said fence shall be comprised of
substantial wire mesh or solid wood which shall contain no
vertical interspace of more than two inches nor have any
horizontal rail or component or ornament on the outside or
inside which could be available as a footstep, except as
hereinafter set forth:
[a] Wood pickets comprised of three-quarter-inch stock,
with a vertical interspace of three inches.
[b] Iron pickets comprised of one-half-inch bar stock with
a vertical interspace of four inches.
[c] Chain link comprised of vertical chains with a
minimum of an 11 gauge wire and a maximum clear
opening of two inches.
[d] Woven or other solid fence with a strength equivalent
to one of the foregoing as approved by the Code
Enforcement Department of the Township.
[e] All gates in required fencing shall be secured by a selfclosing,
self-locking safety latch at all times.
[f] A dwelling or accessory building may be used as a part
of the required enclosure.
[4] Parking: one space for every employee, plus one space for
each 100 square feet of classroom area.
(b) Senior day-care facility. A day-care facility for senior adults.
[1] Parking: one space for every employee, plus one space for
every 200 square feet of classroom area.
(4) E-4 Hospital. A state-licensed institution providing health services
primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick
or injured which may include departments, training facilities,
central services facilities, and staff offices that are an integral part
of the facilities subject to the following provisions:
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:846
(a) Minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width shall be 500 feet.
(c) A hospital shall have direct access from a collector or arterial
road as defined in the Comprehensive Plan for the Township.
(d) Parking: 1 1/2 spaces per patient bed, plus one space per
employee on the shift having the largest number of employees.
(e) Additional parking for outpatient clinics shall provide one
space per 100 square feet of gross floor area in addition to the
parking required in Subsection D(4)(d) above.
(5) E-5 Library or Museum. Such use shall be open to the public or
connected with a permitted educational use in which literary,
musical, artistic or reference materials are kept for use, but not for
sale, or devoted to the procurement, care, study, including the
display or exhibition, of objects of lasting value and not conducted
as a private, gainful business.
(a) Parking: one space per 220 square feet of gross floor area, plus
one space per employee.
(6) E-6 Municipal Facility. Any use created or facility utilized by
Towamencin Township, any authority created by Towamencin
Township under the Municipality Authorities Act230 or any other
authority in which the Township participates, for the provisions of
governmental functions or public services or the maintenance of
the public health, safety, or welfare including, but not limited to,
public administration, police, fire, ambulance, recreation,
transportation, traffic control and/or management, and public work
uses.
(7) E-7 Nursing Home. A nursing facility or convalescent home
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which is set up to
provide long-term health care primarily to senior residents and/or
disabled persons with chronic diseases or disability. The use does
not include senior citizen housing or personal care facilities, but it
can be part of such an establishment in accordance with the
standards set herein.
(a) Minimum lot area shall be three acres.
(b) Parking: one space per three beds, plus one space per full-time
employee on the largest shift.
(8) E-8 Personal Care Facility. A state licensed personal care facility is
an establishment in which food, shelter, personal assistance or
supervision are provided for three or more residents who are not
relatives of the operator and who require assistance or supervision
230. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:847
in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, or medication prescribed
for self-administration but who do not require hospitalization or
care in a skilled nursing or intermediate care facility such as would
be provided by an E-7 Nursing Home use.
(a) Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(b) Maximum density permitted shall be 20 beds per acre.
(c) Retail facilities for the exclusive use of residents and their
guests only shall be permitted. No outside advertising shall be
permitted. The retail facility shall be limited to the following
uses:
[1] Barber or beauty shop;
[2] Commissary, newsstand and gift shop; and
[3] Snack bar and/or coffee shop.
(d) Open space requirement shall be 20% of the gross site area
which shall be suitably landscaped for its intended use.
(e) Parking: one space per three beds, plus one space per each
full-time employee on largest shift.
(9) E-9 Place of Worship. Any structure or structures used for worship
or religious instruction, including social and administrative rooms
accessory thereto, but not including any commercial activity.
(a) The minimum lot area for a church or other place of worship
shall be not less than two acres.
(b) The minimum lot width shall be not less than 300 feet.
(c) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet, except that the
height of any such church, synagogue, tabernacle or other
place of worship may be increased to a maximum of 65 feet to
allow for a steeple or tower structure incidental to such
church, synagogue, tabernacle or other place of worship,
provided that for every one foot of height in excess of 35 feet,
there shall be added to each yard requirement one
corresponding foot of width or depth.
(d) Yard requirements.
[1] Front yard. There shall be a front yard which shall be not
less than 75 feet in depth from the ultimate right-of-way.
[2] Side yards. There shall be two side yards on every lot with
an aggregate width of not less than 150 feet, neither side
yard having a width of less than 50 feet.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:848
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall have a
depth of not less than 75 feet.
(e) Building coverage. A maximum building coverage not greater
than 25%.
(f) Impervious coverage. A maximum impervious coverage of not
greater than 45% shall be permitted.
(g) Accessory use. Accessory uses shall be limited to those
customarily incidental and subordinate to churches,
synagogues, tabernacles or other places of worship which may
include a day-care center, parish center or similar use. A daycare
center shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(h) A dwelling shall be permitted in accordance with the
requirements for single-family detached dwellings in the
district in which it is located.
(i) Parking: one space per every 20 square feet of assembly area
or one space per two seats of capacity of the assembly area,
whichever is greater, plus two spaces per dwelling.
(10) E-10 Private Organization. Any facility serving as a meeting place
of an association of persons for some common object or purpose
whose membership is limited. Such facilities shall be subject to the
following conditions:
(a) Minimum lot size of two acres.
(b) The use shall be for members and their authorized guests only.
(c) Such facility shall not serve or make available for consumption
alcoholic beverages of any type.
(d) Eating and dining accommodations shall be incidental to the
purpose of the club and shall be restricted to use by members
and their authorized guests only.
(e) Parking: one space per 50 square feet of gross floor area of all
buildings used or intended to be used to service members and
guests, plus one space per employee.
(11) E-11 Recreational Facility/Community Center. A privately owned or
operated outdoor or indoor recreational facility including a tennis
club, skating rink, swimming pool, racquetball, handball, squash,
basketball and volleyball courts or other similar recreational
facilities, other than a municipal park or golf course.
(a) A minimum lot area of three acres.
(b) No outdoor active recreational area shall be located nearer to
any lot line than 100 feet.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:849
(c) The use shall not permit amusement parks or animal parks.
(d) Outdoor play areas shall be screened and buffered so as to
protect the neighborhood from noise and other disturbances. A
buffer yard with a minimum width of 30 feet comprised of a
dense evergreen screen with a minimum height of four feet
upon planting shall be provided if the outdoor play area is
located adjacent to a residential use.
(e) Parking: one space per each three persons of total design
capacity of the facility or at least one space for each 50 square
feet of floor area used or intended to be used for the service of
customers, patrons, clients, guests, or members, whichever
requires the greater number of parking spaces, plus one space
per employee.
(12) E-12 School. A private school, public school or a nonprofit school,
college or junior college which is licensed under the proper
governmental authority.
(a) Minimum yards shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard: 200 feet.
[2] Side yard: 100 feet each.
[3] Rear yard: 200 feet.
(b) Parking: one space per two students of the maximum total
student design capacity of the facility, plus one space per
faculty member and employee.
(13) E-13 Industrial Trade School. A public or privately owned or
operated educational facility for the training of the trades including
but not necessarily limited to metal and machinery works, welding,
automotive service and repair, carpentry, plumbing, electrical, and
similar trades.
(a) Outdoor activity areas for the conduct of any trade related
instruction that would produce noise, fumes, dust, and/or
odors shall be prohibited.
(b) The use shall utilize best management practices for the use,
storage and disposal of all supplies, materials, and waste
products.
(c) All outdoor storage of equipment and materials shall be
enclosed within a fence or wall adequate to screen the contents
of the storage area, and in accordance with § 153-502H(6) (A-6
Outside Storage) herein.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:850
(d) Parking: one space per two students of the maximum total
student design capacity of the facility, plus one space per
faculty member and employee.
(e) Minimum yards shall be as follows:
[1] Front yard: 200 feet.
[2] Side yard: 100 feet each.
[3] Rear yard: 200 feet.
E. I Industrial Uses.
(1) I-1 Automobile Salvage Recycling Facility. An area of land, with or
without buildings, that is used for the storage of used or recyclable
vehicles and parts thereof.
(a) Minimum lot area shall be seven acres.
(b) Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet at street line.
(c) Minimum setback from all property lines shall be 100 feet.
(d) Such uses shall be entirely enclosed by a solid fence or wall, at
least eight feet high set back at least 15 feet from all property
boundaries and constructed of plank boards, brick, cinder
block, or concrete, with access only through solid gates. Such
fence or wall shall be kept in good repair and neatly
maintained.
(e) A dense evergreen buffer shall be provided on the outside
perimeter of the fenced area. Evergreens shall be a minimum
of eight feet in height and planted on eight foot staggered
centers.
(f) The contents of such use shall not be placed or deposited to a
height greater than the height of the fence or wall therein
prescribed.
(g) Dumping of trash or land fill operations and burning of any
material is specifically prohibited.
(h) All such uses shall be sealed from groundwater contamination.
(i) Parking: one space per employee, plus five additional spaces.
(2) I-2 Building Materials Sale and Storage Yard. Wholesale
establishments such as lumber yards and those offering for sale
finished products used in the building construction trades.
[Amended 6-8-2005 by Ord. No. 05-01]
(a) Millworking is permitted as an accessory use.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:851
(b) Storage yards shall be fully enclosed by fencing and
landscaping in accordance with Subsection E(1)(d), (e) and (f)
of Use I-1 Automobile Salvage Recycling Facility.
(c) The storage of flammable or toxic gases and liquids and the
production and mixing of asphalt and concrete is prohibited.
(d) Parking: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus
one space per employee, plus one space per company vehicle
normally stored on the premises.
(3) I-3 Contractor Services. Offices and shops for contractors such as
builders, electricians, plumbers, masons, painters, landscapers,
roofers, or similar contractors.
(a) A showroom may be permitted as an accessory use provided
that an additional one parking space per each 300 square feet
of showroom area is provided.
(b) All outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed with a six-foot-high
solid fenced and shall include a planted evergreen screen to
the outside of the fencing in accordance with Subsection
E(1)(e) and (f) of Use I-1 Automobile Salvage Recycling Facility.
(c) Parking: one space per each employee or one space per each
500 square feet of gross floor area whichever is greater, plus
one space per company vehicle normally stored on the
premises.
(4) I-4 Food Processing. Establishments engaged in food processing,
packing, canning of meat, fish, dairy and other food products as
well as the manufacture and packaging of nonalcoholic beverages.
Said uses shall comply with all appropriate federal, state and local
guidelines and regulation. [Amended 4-24-2002 by Ord. No.
02-3; 8-23-2017 by Ord. No. 17-04]
(a) Except as provided in Subsection E(4)(c) below, no retail sales
are permitted from the premises except when the A-16
Accessory Limited Retail Sales use is permitted in the
underlying zoning district and approved by the Township as a
conditional use.
(b) Parking: one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area, plus
one space for each company vehicle normally stored on the
premises.
(c) Brewery with retail sales is permitted in the Limited Industrial,
LI, Zoning District when approved by the Township as a
conditional use, subject to the following additional
requirements: [Amended 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 18-04]
[1] Retail sales are limited to:
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:852
[a] Those items processed, manufactured, or packaged on
site or distributed on a wholesale basis;
[b] Prepackaged food items prepared offpremises; and
[c] Wine and spirits as permitted to be sold in connection
with a brewer's license by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
[2] The retail sales area must be physically separated and
segregated from the brewery manufacturing use in the
same building and shall have a maximum allowable area of
35% of the gross floor area, or 3,000 square feet,
whichever is less.
[3] Retail sales customers shall be permitted to consume the
items permitted by Subsection E(4)(c)[1] above only in the
retail sales area or the outdoor seating area permitted in
Subsection E(4)(c)[7] below, subject to first obtaining
approval from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board if required.
[4] The hours of operation for retail sales shall be limited to
the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through
Thursday, 12:00 noon to 11:00 p.m., Friday and Saturday,
and 12:00 noon to 6:00 p.m. on Sunday.
[5] The retail sales area must have an entrance separate from
the entrance for the brewery manufacturing use.
[6] Retail sales within the building shall be conducted only by
the same ownership as the brewery manufacturing use;
however, the use of a food truck shall be permitted if the
property owner/applicant establishes to the satisfaction of
the Township that sufficient parking spaces remain
available and the food truck use does not adversely affect
or impair the use of the neighboring properties.
[7] The use of a seasonal outdoor seating area for patrons of
the brewery shall be permitted if the property owner/
applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the Township
that the use of such outdoor seating area does not
adversely affect or impair the use of neighboring
properties.
[8] One additional parking space shall be provided for each
300 square feet of retail sales area and for any outdoor
seating area; provided, however, that shared parking may
be approved by the Board of Supervisors for the retail
sales area and any outdoor seating area along with other
uses on a property if it is demonstrated at the conditional
use hearing that such shared parking is feasible given the
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:853
peak hours of all of the uses. All required parking for
use by retail customers should be conveniently located
adjacent to the entrance for the retail sales area.
[9] Community events, including, but not limited to, physical
fitness activities, book clubs, guest speakers/presentations
and other similar uses shall be permitted within the retail
sales area; all subject to maximum occupancy
requirements for the retail sales area.
[10] Any special events proposed by the brewery operator at
the premises shall be subject to the requirements of
§§ 56-1, 56-2 and 56-3 of the Towamencin Township Code.
(5) I-5 Manufacturing. Establishments engaged in the mechanical or
chemical transformation of materials or substances into new
products including the assembling of component parts, the
manufacturing of products, and the blending of materials such as
lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors.
(a) No retail sales are permitted from the premises except when
the A-16 Accessory Limited Retail Sales use is permitted in the
underlying zoning district and approved by the Township as a
conditional use. [Amended 4-24-2002 by Ord. No. 02-3]
(b) Parking: one space per 500 square feet of floor area.
(6) I-6 Recycling Facility. A facility in which recoverable resources as
defined by the Towamencin Township Recycling Ordinance,231 as
amended, and including but not necessarily limited to, newspapers,
glassware, plastics, and metal cans are collected, stored, flattened,
crushed, or bundled, essentially by hand or semiautomatic
equipment within a completely enclosed building.
(a) The proposed use of an area shall not be detrimental to
adjacent land use.
(b) Maximum lot size shall be five acres.
(c) Such use shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any public road
as measured from the ultimate right-of-way line.
(d) The land area used for such purposes shall be screened from
public view in accordance with Subsection E(1)(d), (e) and (f)
of Use I-1 Automobile Salvage Recycling Facility.
(e) The storage of paper shall be within a building or a closed
container.
(f) Dumping of trash or land fill operations and burning of any
materials shall specifically be prohibited.
231. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Article II, Recycling.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:854
(g) All such uses shall be sealed from groundwater contamination.
(h) Parking: one space per employee, plus five additional spaces.
(7) I-7 Research. A research use shall include a research or testing
facility, and an experimental laboratory, provided:
(a) No research facility shall be a commercial production facility.
(b) No research facility shall be permitted which constitutes a
danger to the community.
(c) Parking: one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area, plus
one space for each company vehicle normally stored on the
premises.
(8) I-8 Truck Terminal. Land and buildings used as a relay station for
the transfer of a load other than solid waste, from one vehicle to
another or one party to another. The terminal cannot be used for
permanent or long-term accessory storage for principal land uses
at other locations. The terminal facility may include storage areas
for trucks and buildings or areas for the repair of trucks associated
with the terminal.
(a) The principal building for the use shall be located 500 feet
from any residential district.
(b) Parking: one space per each employee of the shift having the
largest number of employees, plus one space per vehicle
normally stored on the premises.
(9) I-9 Wholesale. Establishments engaged in the selling of
merchandise to retailers and to industrial, commercial, and
institutional users, or other wholesalers. [Amended 4-24-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-3]
(a) Parking: one space per each 500 square feet of gross floor
area, plus one space for each vehicle normally stored on the
premises.
(10) I-10 Warehouse. A building primarily used for the storage of goods
and materials.
(a) Parking: one space per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area, plus one space for each vehicle normally stored on the
premises.
(11) I-11 Quarry. Such use shall include extractive operations for sand,
clay, shale, gravel, topsoil, stone, and similar operations including
borrow pits (excavations for removing material for filling
operations) subject to the following provisions:
(a) There shall be a berm of average height of 15 feet and a
maximum height of 50 feet. The slope of the sides of the berm
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:855
shall not exceed a one to one ratio. Berms shall be planted
and dusted, and erosion control measures shall be taken as
may be approved by the Montgomery County Soil Conservation
Service. Plantings and berms shall begin at a point no closer
to a street than the ultimate right-of-way. No berm shall be
constructed closer than 50 feet to a district in which extraction
is not permitted. The Township may require landscaping as
required to screen the quarry from public view as deemed
appropriate by the Board of Supervisors.
(b) A chain-link fence at least six feet in height, surmounted by
three strands of barbed wire, shall be required within the
setback area at a point no closer than the ultimate right-of-way
line to be maintained in a constant state of good repair.
Appropriate warning signs shall be mounted or posted along
the fence at intervals of not more than 100 feet.
(c) An adequate internal circulation pattern of streets shall be
maintained between the excavation sites and processing areas.
Use of public streets shall not be permitted for hauling
between extractive and processing areas except where
required in connection with such pattern or for access of
vehicular traffic originating from or destined to points beyond
the limits of such excavation sites and processing areas.
(d) No slope shall be maintained exceeding the normal limiting
angle of slippage of the material in which the excavation or
extraction is being made. No undercutting shall be permitted
within the setback area except for tunnels to provide
transportation of materials between extractive and processing
areas.
(e) All operations shall be conducted with sufficient lateral
support to be safe with respect to:
[1] Hazard to persons;
[2] Physical damage to adjacent lands or improvements; or
[3] Damage to any street, sidewalk, parking area, or utility by
reason of slide, sinking, or collapse.
(f) Stockpiles shall not exceed 100 feet in height and shall not be
located closer than 200 feet from any district boundary line nor
closer than 300 feet from the center line of any street except
where a railroad is the district boundary line or where the
contiguous district is a district in which extraction is
permitted. All reasonable precautions shall be taken to prevent
any materials or wastes deposited upon any stockpile from
being washed, blown, or otherwise transferred off the site by
normal causes or forces.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:856
(g) All drainage from the site of extractive operations shall be
controlled by dikes, barriers, or drainage structures sufficient
to prevent any silt, debris, or other loose materials from filling
any existing drainage course or encroaching on streets and
adjacent properties.
(h) No ground vibration caused by blasting or machinery shall
exceed the limits established by this chapter with the
exception that no blasting shall cause a peak particle velocity
greater than one inch per second, measured at any property
line or at the center line of any street.
(i) The operation shall not include mixing of rock materials with
asphaltic oils or other binders for road-building and
construction purposes.
(j) Hours of operation shall be between 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
(k) Parking. A minimum of 10 off-street parking spaces shall be
provided. The Board of Supervisors may require additional
parking as necessary to adequately serve customers,
employees, visitors, and vehicles normally parked on the
premises.
(12) I-12 Equipment Sales and Rental. Such use shall include the sale
and rental of farm and construction equipment and machinery, and
the sale and rental of tables, chairs, tents and associated party
equipment and supplies.
(a) A showroom may be permitted as an accessory use.
(b) All outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed with a six-foot-high
solid fenced and shall include a planted evergreen screen to
the outside of the fencing in accordance with Subsection
E(1)(e) and (f) of Use I-1 Automobile Salvage Recycling Facility.
(c) Parking: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus
one space per employee, plus one space per company vehicle
normally stored on the premises.
F. R Residential Uses.
(1) R-1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling. A single-family detached
dwelling is a residential building designed for and used exclusively
as a residence for only one family and which is not attached to any
other dwelling.
(a) Parking: two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(2) R-2 Small Lot Single. A single-family detached dwelling that is
located on smaller lots than are normally provided for single-family
dwellings in the zoning district in which this use type is permitted.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:857
(a) Parking: two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(3) R-3 Twin Dwelling. A twin dwelling is a single-family semidetached
dwelling unit. A twin dwelling is one of a pair of dwelling units each
of which is designed for, and used exclusively as, a single residence
and each of which is joined to the other dwelling unit by a common
party wall and which has yard space on all remaining sides and is a
single dwelling from ground to roof. Where a private garage is
structurally attached to such a building, it shall be considered a
part thereof.
(a) Parking: two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(b) Any attached addition, deck, porch, patio, or similar type
structure may extend to the common property lines to match
the existing common party walls, so long as the structure
conforms to all requirements of the adopted building codes and
there is consent of owner of common property line or party
wall. [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
(4) R-4 Duplex Dwelling. A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a residence for two families living independently of
each other with one dwelling unit being wholly or partly over the
other and having no party wall in common with an adjacent unit. A
duplex dwelling, while providing for two families, shall be under
single ownership.
(a) Parking: two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(5) R-5 Townhouse Dwelling. A group of single-family attached
dwellings each of which shall be attached by at least one and no
more than two walls. Each dwelling unit shall have individual
outside access, shall be used exclusively as a residence for a single
family, and shall be a single dwelling unit from ground to roof.
Townhouse dwellings shall not include less than three nor more
than five dwelling units in a continual row.
(a) Parking: three off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
Where a garage of more than one bay is provided, each bay
additional to the first shall reduce the parking requirement by
one space. Each bay shall be a minimum of 12 feet by 22 feet. If
the dwelling units have basements and a minimum of 50% of
the dwelling units have side entry garages, the minimum size
of each garage bay shall be nine feet by 18 feet. [Amended
1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-01]
(b) Any attached addition, deck, porch, patio, or similar type
structure may extend to the common property lines to match
the existing common party walls, so long as the structure
conforms to all requirements of the adopted building codes and
there is consent of owner of common property line or party
wall. [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:858
(6) R-6 Multiplex. A multiplex is an attached multifamily dwelling with
a minimum of three and maximum of five dwelling units per
building. Each multiplex building has yards on all four sides and
may have shared and common elements among the units including
but not necessarily limited to hallways and entranceways.
(a) Parking: three off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
Where a garage of more than one bay is provided, each bay
additional to the first shall reduce the parking requirement by
one space. Each bay shall be a minimum of 12 feet by 22 feet.
(7) R-7 Mobile or Modular Home.
(a) Mobile home. A transportable single-family dwelling intended
for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or
more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable
of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at
a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and
constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
(b) Modular home. A single-family dwelling, intended for
permanent occupancy, made by assembling one or more
factory produced three-dimensional sections into an integral
living unit whose construction materials and specifications
conform to those of conventionally built units.
(c) Parking: three off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
Where a garage of more than one bay is provided, each bay
additional to the first shall reduce the parking requirement by
one space. Each bay shall be a minimum of 12 feet by 22 feet.
(8) R-8 Housing for the Elderly. Elderly housing shall include a form of
residential use that is designed and operated for senior adults and
any applicant proposing to operate such housing shall submit to the
Township Supervisors for its approval a proposed set of regulations
to control such operation, including definition of age and income
limitations of residents, any other restrictions to be placed upon
the residents or their activities, admission procedures and security
provisions, and setting forth the policy to be used in determining
the amount of rental and other charges to the residents in
accordance with all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations. The applicant shall indicate that single prospective
residents of housing have attained the age of at least 55 years or
that families to occupy said units are elderly families (i.e., families
whose heads or their spouses are at least 55 years of age) or are
under a disability as defined in the Social Security Act.
(a) Use regulations. Permitted uses, in conjunction with a Housing
for the Elderly complex, shall be as follows:
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:859
[1] Single-family attached dwellings for elderly persons.
[2] Apartment buildings for elderly persons.
[3] Health care facility for elderly persons who require
nursing or convalescent care for extended periods of time.
[4] Accessory uses exclusively to meet the needs of the
occupants of the complex.
(b) Development regulations. The following density, area, width
and yard regulations shall apply to Housing for the Elderly
complexes:
[1] Maximum density. A maximum density of eight dwelling
units per acre shall be permitted.
[2] Minimum area. An area of not less than 10 acres shall be
provided for every Housing for the Elderly complex.
[3] Permanent open space. For purposes of this section, the
term "open space" shall mean land required under the
terms of this article to be permanently preserved for
recreation, environmental and aesthetic purposes.
Required setbacks from lot lines or street rights-of-way
shall not be used in calculating the required open space.
Not less than 40% of the area of a tract developed as a
Housing for the Elderly complex shall be retained as
permanent open space for use by the residents of the
facility for recreational and leisure activities.
[4] Distance between buildings.
[a] For any two exterior facing walls, (the building of
which is oriented front-to-front, front-to-rear, or rearto-
rear) the minimum distance apart shall be equal to
1 1/2 times the height of the tallest building.
[b] For any combination of exterior facing walls not
qualified under Subsection F(8)(b)[4][a] above, the
total distance apart shall be equal to the height of the
tallest facing building.
[5] Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks shall be
observed:
[a] Apartment buildings and health care facilities shall be
100 feet from any property line.
[b] Single-family attached dwellings shall be 75 feet from
any property line.
[c] All buildings shall be 75 feet from the ultimate rightof-
way of any public street.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:860
[6] Parking. The following minimum parking standards shall
be required.
[a] Not less than one parking space shall be provided for
each apartment dwelling unit.
[b] Not less than 1 1/2 parking spaces shall be provided
for each single-family attached dwelling unit.
[c] At least one parking space shall be provided for each
employee working on the largest shift.
[d] Whenever a health care facility is proposed which is
intended to accommodate patients other than
occupants of the residential portion of the
development, one parking space per two beds shall be
required.
(c) General requirements.
[1] Utilities. All buildings within a Housing for the Elderly
complex shall be serviced by a public sewage and water
system.
[2] Common areas and facilities. Provision shall be made for
the perpetual maintenance and care of all common areas
including streets, driveways, parking areas, walkways,
landscaped planting areas, open space and recreational
facilities.
[3] Other facilities. Such other improvements including roads,
curbs and stormwater collection and control facilities as
required by the Towamencin Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,232 as last amended, shall be
provided.
(9) R-9 Community/Group Home. A residential facility which is
licensed by an appropriate state agency which provides twentyfour-
hour professional resident supervision and which is intended
to provide a homelike environment within a community for no more
than five occupants (including house parents and/or supervisors).
The residents of a community/group home shall have a common
social characteristic and/or disability in which the home is intended
to provide and foster societal normalization rather than
institutionalization. If the house parents and/or supervisors serve
on a rotating basis only that number at the dwelling at any one time
shall be counted as occupants.
(a) Parking: two off-street parking spaces per home, plus one per
employee.
232. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:861
(10) R-10 Residential Conversion. The conversion of a single-family
dwelling into a dwelling for a greater number of families may be
permitted by special exception subject to the following
requirements:
(a) A petition in favor of such exception shall be filed with the
Zoning Hearing Board signed by the owners of 60% or more of
the lots which require notification per this chapter.
(b) Each dwelling unit shall not have less than 500 square feet of
habitable floor area.
(c) The lot area per family is not reduced to an amount less than
75% of the minimum lot area required by this chapter for the
district in which the designated lot is located.
(d) The use shall comply with all setback and building area
requirements for the district in which the use is located.
(e) There shall be no external alteration of the building except as
may be necessary for reasons of safety. Fire escapes and
outside stairways shall, where practicable, be located to the
rear of the building.
(f) The Zoning Hearing Board may prescribe such further
conditions and restrictions as the Board may consider
appropriate.
(g) A residential conversion shall be authorized only for an
existing dwelling which, due to size and arrangement, has little
economic usefulness as a conforming use, or for any other
arrangement within the intent and purpose of this chapter,
which is deemed appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(h) Parking: two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(11) R-11 Boardinghouse. A building that is the primary residence of the
owner and in which rooms are provided by the owner for
compensation, with or without meals, to two or more adult persons
with a maximum of six inhabitants not related by blood, marriage,
or adoption to the owner and is available for permanent occupancy
and which makes no provision for cooking within any of the rooms
occupied by paying guests. Boarding facilities shall be subject to
the following provisions:
(a) A boardinghouse shall comply with the area and dimensional
requirements for single-family detached dwellings within the
district in which the use is located.
(b) Conversion of an existing building for rooming or boarding
purposes shall meet the applicable provisions of Use Type R-10
Residential Conversions of this article and all applicable
Township building codes.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:862
(c) Parking: two spaces for the primary dwelling, plus one space
for each rental room, plus one space for each employee.
(12) R-12 Garden Apartment. A detached residential building designed
for, and used as a residence for, six or more families, each living
and cooking independently of the others with all units sharing the
same lot, and/or common facilities, and containing dwelling units
placed side-by-side and/or one above another. The units of this
residential building are oriented toward open yard areas or green
spaces which surround this type of structure on all sides.
(a) A garden apartment shall include a group of residential units
constituting a single operating or proprietary unit included in a
single "declaration" recorded pursuant to the provisions of the
Unit Property Act233 of Pennsylvania.
(b) Parking: not less than three off-street parking spaces per
dwelling unit. Where a garage of more than one bay is
provided, each bay additional to the first shall reduce the
parking requirement by one space. Each bay shall be a
minimum of 12 feet by 22 feet.
(13) R-13 Age-Qualified Independent Residential Community. Agequalified
independent residential community shall consist of a form
of residential use that is designed for and owned by senior adults
and any applicant proposing to develop such housing shall submit
to the Township Supervisors for its approval a proposed set of
regulations to control such operation, including definition of age
and any other restrictions to be placed upon the residents. The
units shall be occupied by at least one permanent resident who
shall be 55 years of age or older. In the event of the death of the
primary resident age 55 and older, the widow, widower, under age
55 and child between the ages of 18 to 54 or stepchild between the
ages of 18 to 54, may continue to reside within the home. A child or
children of the principal occupant is permitted to reside within the
unit, provided that such child shall be 18 years of age or older.
Children under 18 may temporarily reside in a unit for no more
than a total of 120 days per year.
(a) Use regulations. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
[1] Single-family attached dwellings limited exclusively to
senior adults and their families.
[2] Clubhouse, dining facility, pool, fitness center, limited to
residents of the community and their invited guests.
[3] A walking/biking trail shall be installed within the open
space, and where appropriate, within the site for the use of
233. Editor's Note: The former Unit Property Act was repealed 7-2-1980 by P.L. 286, No. 82. See
now 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:863
residents of the community and their invited guests. The
following regulations shall apply:
[a] Benches and trash receptacles shall be installed per
the following ratio: one bench and trash receptacle
per every 0.5 mile of trail
[b] The trail shall interconnect where possible with the
Towamencin Township-Wide Trail System
[c] The trail shall be landscaped in accordance with the
following provisions: The trail shall be landscaped in
accordance with the provisions of Option 1 of the
Class A Buffer as defined in the Towamencin Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
Section A119, Buffer Yard Requirements.234
(b) Development regulations.
[1] Maximum density. A maximum density of five dwelling
units per acre shall be permitted.
[2] Minimum area. An area of not less than nine acres shall be
provided for every age-qualified independent residential
community.
[3] A maximum of five dwelling units may be attached in a
single building. Gate houses and/or security gates shall be
permitted provided they are set back a minimum of five
feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of a street from
which access is taken.
[4] Permanent open space. For the purpose of this section the
term "open space" shall mean land required under the
terms of this article to be permanently preserved for
recreation, environmental, and aesthetic purposes.
Required setbacks from street rights-of-way shall not be
used in calculating the required open space. Not less than
15% of the area of the tract developed as age-qualified
independent residential community shall be retained as
permanent open space for use by residents of the
community for recreational and leisure activities. The
open space must be accessible and usable by residents.
(c) General requirements.
[1] Distance between buildings.
[a] For any two exterior facing walls, (the building of
which is oriented front-to-front, front-to-rear, or rearto-
rear) the minimum distance apart shall be 20 feet.
234. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:864
[b] For any combination of exterior facing walls not
qualified under Subsection G(1)(c)[1][a] above, the
total distance apart shall be 20 feet.
[2] Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks shall be
observed:
[a] Single-family attached dwellings and all accessory
buildings (with the exception of gatehouses) shall be
50 feet from all perimeter lines or ultimate rights-ofway
for existing streets.
[3] Parking requirements. The following minimum parking
standards shall be required:
[a] Not less than two off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each single-family attached dwelling unit.
These parking spaces may be located either on a
driveway, within a garage parking area, or
combination thereof.
[b] There shall be one off-street parking space per
employee provided.
[c] On-street parking of maintenance vehicles shall be
permitted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, except in cases of
emergencies.
[4] Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed 35
feet.
(d) General requirements.
[1] Utilities. All buildings within an age-qualified independent
residential community shall be serviced by a public
sewage and water system.
[2] Common areas and facilities. Provision shall be made for
the perpetual maintenance and care of all common areas
including streets, driveways, parking areas, walkways,
landscaped planting areas, and recreational facilities
either by contracted services and/or homeowners'
association.
[3] Other facilities. Such other improvements including,
roads, curbs, and stormwater collection, control facilities
and buffering as required by the Towamencin Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, as last amended, shall
be provided.
G. U Utility Uses.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:865
(1) U-1 Utility Operating Facility. Such use shall be limited to a sewage
pumping station, electrical substation, telephone substation,
sewage treatment plant, and any public service or utility, not
including a public incinerator, public or private landfill, or a
wireless communications facility. [Amended 8-26-2016 by Ord.
No. 15-12]
(2) U-2 Emergency Services. Emergency services such as fire,
ambulance, rescue, and other emergency services of a municipal or
volunteer nature.
(a) Parking: one space per 350 square feet of gross floor area, or
one space per vehicle personnel capacity plus five spaces,
whichever is greater.
(3) U-3 Railway and Bus Terminal. A railway station, bus station or
terminal in accordance with all appropriate federal, state, and local
guidelines and standards.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres
(b) Parking. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors that the amount of parking provided
for said use will be adequate to serve the intended use of the
facility. The applicant shall provide the Township, at a
minimum, with documentation from similarly sized and
configured railway and bus terminals to the one proposed and
shall provide evidence in support of the amount, type,
orientation and location of parking on the site.
(4) U-4 Solar Energy Facility. An alternative energy facility that
consists of one or more ground-mounted, free-standing, or
building-mounted or integrated solar collection devices, solar
energy related equipment and other associated infrastructure with
the primary intention of generating electricity or otherwise
converting solar energy to a different form of energy for primary
commercial or other offsite use in accordance with applicable law
and regulation. [Added 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03; amended
5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-07]
(a) Minimum lot size: 10 acres.
(b) Solar energy facilities must meet primary use setbacks for the
zoning district in which the facility is located.
(c) Solar energy facilities shall not encroach upon any stormwater
management facility, right-of-way or easement.
(d) Building-mounted facilities on a pitched roof shall meet the
following requirements:
[1] The design must meet the requirements contained within
the most recent version of the International Fire Code
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:866
(IFC) for setbacks, access and pathways related to
emergency access and response procedures.
[2] The highest point of the facility shall not exceed the
highest point of the roof to which it is attached.
(e) Building-mounted facilities on a flat roof shall meet the
following requirements:
[1] The design of the modules must meet the requirements as
contained within the most recent version of the
International Fire Code (IFC) for setbacks, access and
pathways related to emergency access and response
procedures.
[2] The highest point of the facility shall not exceed six feet
above the rooftop and shall not exceed the maximum
building height for the district in which it is located.
(f) Ground-mounted facilities shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
(g) For ground-mounted facilities, a thirty-foot buffer yard shall be
provided along all property lines which shall include adequate
means for visual screening. The buffer plantings shall be
provided using a Class B Buffer as defined in Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance excluding Option Five.235
(h) All equipment for solar energy facilities including any
structure for batteries or storage cells shall be in a fenced area
with a self-locking gate.
(i) Solar energy facilities and systems shall be constructed and
operated in accordance with all applicable local, state and
federal building, construction and fire laws and regulations,
including but not limited to requirements regarding
stormwater management and impervious coverage.
(j) Solar energy facilities and systems shall conform to applicable
industry codes and standards, including but not limited to
those of the International Code Council (ICC), American
National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters
Laboratories (UL), the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM), the International Fire Code (IFC), National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and other certifying and
professional organizations.
(k) All exterior electrical and/or plumbing shall be buried below
the surface of the ground and be placed in a conduit.
(l) All solar energy facility or system components shall be clearly
labeled with warning concerning voltage and other important
235. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:867
electrical safety information. The universal isolation switch, or
equivalent device, shall be easily accessible by first responders
and clearly labeled.
(m) Solar energy facilities or systems shall not be used for
advertising. Manufacturers and equipment information, safety
warnings and ownership information may be displayed
provided such information complies with applicable sign
regulations.
(n) Owners of solar energy facilities are encouraged, but not
required, to obtain solar easements from neighboring
properties to ensure solar access. The Township does not
guarantee and will not protect any individual property rights
with respect to solar access.
(o) Solar modules shall be positioned to prevent solar glare upon
any neighboring properties or any public or private street, and
to prevent additional heat load upon neighboring properties.
The latest version of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool
(SGHAT) shall be used per its user's manual to evaluate solar
glare. The full report shall be sent to the municipality at least
30 days before the first public meeting that will discuss the
project.
(p) Decommissioning requirements. If a solar energy facility
remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of
two years, the facility shall be deemed abandoned and shall
constitute a public nuisance, unless the owner demonstrates
good faith intent to sell the facility. Within six months of
abandonment, the owner shall remove the system after a
demolition permit has been obtained in accordance with the
following:
[1] Any aboveground mechanical equipment, wiring, and
structural components shall be removed.
[2] Underground wiring and structural components shall be
removed and the resulting void space filled.
[3] When a solar energy facility is removed, any disturbed
earth as a result of the removal shall be restored, graded
and reseeded.
H. A Accessory Uses.
(1) A-1 Accessory Apartments for Family Members. One apartment
accessory to a single-family detached dwelling shall be permitted
provided the following conditions are met. The intent of these
provisions is to allow for immediate family members to reside on
the premises, but to prohibit the creation of for-profit apartments
in districts where multifamily housing is not otherwise permitted.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:868
(a) The accessory apartment shall occupy no more than 800
square feet in floor area.
(b) The accessory apartment may contain separate cooking,
sleeping, living and bathroom facilities.
(c) The accessory apartment shall be part of the principal
residence and shall not be located in a basement or in an
accessory building.
(d) The accessory apartment shall be occupied only by related
family members such as elderly parents or dependent adult
children.
(e) There shall be no changes to the exterior of the residence
which suggest that the dwelling unit is other than a singlefamily
detached dwelling or which would otherwise detract
from the single-family character of the neighborhood.
(f) No more than one accessory apartment shall be permitted per
single-family detached dwelling.
(g) Each accessory apartment shall be registered with the
Township Zoning Officer who shall keep a record of its use to
insure that the intent of this chapter is being met and shall
comply with all applicable Township ordinances and
regulations.
(h) Parking. One additional off-street parking space is required for
the accessory apartment use.
(2) A-2 Dwelling in Combination With a Business. One dwelling unit
accessory to an existing or permitted business, commercial or
industrial use is permitted provided said unit is occupied by owner
or employee employed on the premises, or the immediate family of
such owner or such employee, and is located to the rear of or over
said nonresidential use.
(a) All zoning requirements for the primary nonresidential use
shall be met.
(b) Parking. Two additional off-street parking spaces are required
for the accessory apartment use.
(3) A-3 Family Day-Care. Day-care service provided on a regular basis
for compensation is permitted as a residential accessory use in a
single-family detached dwelling only and provided that:
(a) The use shall be limited to a maximum of six children.
(b) No outdoor advertising is permitted.
(c) No more than one nonresident employee shall be permitted.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:869
(d) Hours of operations shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(e) A family day-care use shall be registered with the Township
Zoning Officer who shall keep a record of its use to insure that
the intent of this chapter is being met and shall comply with all
applicable Township ordinances and regulations.
(f) A fenced play area shall be located in the rear yard only and
shall be not less than 50 square feet per child.
(g) Fencing shall be in accordance with the pool fencing standards
of this chapter.
(h) Parking: one additional off-street parking space for each three
children, plus one space for the nonresident employee if
applicable.
(4) A-4 Home Occupation. A home occupation shall be accessory to a
residence and shall be located and carried on entirely indoors and
within a dwelling in which the practitioner resides, or other
structure accessory thereto, and shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants and
shall be limited to the following uses or uses of the same general
nature and character and shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Professional office or studio of a doctor, dentist, tutor, artist,
architect, musician, lawyer, engineer, planner, or practitioner
of a similar professional character.
(b) All home occupation uses shall be registered with the Township
Zoning Officer who shall keep a record of its use to insure that
the intent of this chapter is being met and shall comply with all
applicable Township ordinances and regulations.
(c) Uses authorized by this section as accessory to a dwelling shall
comply with the following provisions:
[1] Accessory home occupation uses shall not include a
business; clinic or hospital; animal hospital; commercial
stable; kennel; funeral parlor; undertaking establishment;
eating place; rooming, boarding, and lodging house;
barbershop; beauty parlor; other personal service shop, or
other similar use.
[2] The home occupation shall be carried on only by
inhabitants of the dwelling and not more than one
additional employee.
[3] There shall be no use of show windows, display, or
advertising visible outside the premises, except signs as
provided for herein.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:870
[4] There shall be no exterior storage of materials or parking
of commercial vehicles other than one vehicle with a
maximum gross vehicle weight not to exceed 3/4 of one ton
provided said vehicle is parked on the subject lot.
[5] In no way shall the appearance of the residential structure
be altered or the occupation within the residence be
conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to
differ from the residential character by the use of colors,
materials, construction, lighting, show windows or
advertising visible outside the premises to attract
customers or clients, other than an identification sign as
provided for herein.
[6] No articles shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises
or routinely sold as part of the services provided by the
home occupation.
[7] Servicing by large commercial vehicles in excess of one
truck per week shall not be permitted.
[8] The floor area devoted exclusively to a home occupation
shall not be more than 25% of the gross habitable floor
area of the principal residential structure or 600 square
feet, whichever is less.
(d) No equipment or process shall be used in such employment or
occupation which creates discernible noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors or electrical interference at the property line, and
no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receiver off the
lot or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the lot.
(e) Parking: one additional off-street parking space per each 150
square feet of gross floor area of the home occupation use, plus
the required parking for the principal residential use of the
property, with a maximum of six off-street parking spaces per
lot.
(f) Any accessory structure being utilized, in whole or in part, for
a home occupation shall conform to the residential use setback
requirements of the underlying district, without regard for any
alternative setbacks for accessory structures. [Added
12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
(5) A-5 Livestock in Residential Areas. Livestock and accessory
buildings for livestock use is permitted as accessory to a singlefamily
detached dwelling on a minimum lot size of five acres
provided:
(a) The number of livestock permitted per acre shall be in
accordance with the following:
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:871
[1] Horses, ponies: one per acre.
[2] Swine, goats, cows, and sheep: two per acre.
[3] Domestic poultry: no more than 25 per acre.
(b) All livestock shall be kept a minimum of 25 feet from all
property lines.
(c) No persons owning or keeping livestock shall maintain such so
as to create any health, odor, or safety hazard.
(d) Any buildings used for the shelter or housing of livestock shall
be located not less than 100 feet from any lot lines.
(6) A-6 Outside Storage. Outside storage necessary and incidental to
the normal operation of a primary nonresidential use, including
agriculture, shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
(a) No part of the street right-of-way, no sidewalks or other areas
intended or designed for pedestrian use, no required parking
areas, and no part of the required front yard shall be occupied
or used for outside storage.
(b) Agriculture, nursery, automotive sales, truck terminal and
lumber yards shall have no more than 25% of the lot area used
for outside storage.
(c) Outside storage areas for all other uses shall be not more than
25% of the existing building coverage.
(d) The storage of tractor trailers, panel trucks, vans, and similar
vehicles which supply or service establishments in commercial
or industrial districts shall be permitted provided that such
vehicles shall be used by the establishment in the normal
conduct of their business.
(e) No outdoor storage of hazardous materials shall be permitted.
(f) All outdoor storage areas shall be a minimum of 50 feet from
all side and rear property lines and shall be fenced and
screened in accordance with Subsection E(1)(d), (e) and (f) of
Use I-1 Automobile Salvage Recycling Facility.
(7) A-7 Recreational Vehicles. Campers, recreational vehicles and
boats may be stored on the premises by the occupants of the
premises only provided that:
(a) Storage shall be in the side and rear yard only and must be
within the building setback line provided for said premises.
(b) No such equipment or vehicles shall be used for living,
sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on
a residential lot.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:872
(8) A-8 Residential Accessory Structure or Use.
(a) Parking spaces for the parking of passenger automobiles;
parking of one commercial vehicle not exceeding 3/4 of one ton
in maximum gross vehicle weight, or the parking of one school
bus on a temporary daytime basis only.
(b) Fences and walls as provided for in § 153-604 herein.
(c) The following residential accessory structures shall be
permitted in conjunction with single-family detached and
single-family semidetached dwellings only:
[1] Buildings such as storage sheds, private greenhouses and
gazebos.
[2] Detached garages for personal vehicles.
[3] Private swimming pools.
[4] Accessory structure detached from, but located on the
same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is
incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
[5] Sports courts. [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
[6] Any accessory structure permitted under this section shall
comply with the setbacks established for accessory
buildings in the district in which the accessory structure is
to be located. [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
(d) The following residential structures shall be permitted in
conjunction with a residential dwelling unit in the
Manufactured Housing District:
[1] Storage shed.
(9) A-9 Spa/Hot Tubs.
(a) Permitted on all private lots except for multifamily dwellings.
(b) Shall be located either entirely within the house or, if located
outside, shall be located within an enclosed area.
(c) This use shall comply with all regulations of Use A-10
Swimming Pool below.
(10) A-10 Swimming Pool. The following regulations shall apply to
private swimming pools which are accessory to single-family
detached and single-family semidetached dwellings. Private
swimming pools shall not be permitted as an accessory use to an
individual unit of a multifamily dwelling. Common quasi-public
pools shall be permitted for single-family attached or multifamily
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:873
developments when owned, maintained and operated by any
individual, firm, corporation, club, or association of persons.
(a) No person, owner or occupant of land shall install or maintain a
swimming pool or other artificial body of water capable of
being filled to a depth exceeding 24 inches at the deepest or
lowest point unless a building permit is first obtained from the
Township and the required plans and information are filed,
together with required permit fees. Ornamental pools and
wading pools which do not exceed 24 inches in depth are
exempt from these provisions. Swimming pools shall include
any pool, regardless of design or construction materials or the
permanency of its location both above and below ground level,
which is built, erected or used for the purpose of bathing or
swimming and all buildings, equipment and appurtenances
thereto. This chapter shall apply to public swimming pools
used and maintained by any individual, firm, corporation, club
or association of persons for use by the public or members and
their invitees or guests. In the case of public swimming pools,
this use need not be accessory to a residential use.
(b) All pools for single-family detached and semidetached
dwellings shall be located in the rear yard only.
(c) Each pool area and the paving, coping surrounding same, and
all equipment associated therewith shall be located not less
than the distance permitted for accessory structures within the
subject district.
(d) Any pool or area subject thereto shall be suitably designed,
located and maintained so as not to become a nuisance or
hazard either to adjoining property owners or the public
generally. All detachable or foldable ladders shall be removed
or locked in its folded upright position when the pool is not in
use.
(e) Outdoor lighting, if used, shall be installed in such a way as to
be shielded and not to reflect toward or into the interior of
adjacent residential properties.
(f) A minimum horizontal isolation distance of 10 feet shall be
required between a swimming pool apron and the perimeter of
a tank, absorption area and/or any lines or equipment of a
private on-site sewage disposal system.
(g) All pool installations shall conform to all applicable building
codes.
(h) It shall be a violation of this chapter to cause or allow drainage
onto adjoining land.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:874
(i) No pool shall be located under any electric power lines
(including service lines), and the pool must be located at least
10 feet (measured horizontally) from such power lines.
(j) Fencing of pools. All pool fencing must comply with the
requirements of that section of the Code of Towamencin
Township applicable to swimming pools. [Amended
10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 14-11]
(11) A-11 Temporary Structures and Vehicles. Structures or vehicles
necessary during construction or other special circumstances of a
nonrecurring nature. Said use shall be registered with the
Township Zoning Officer who shall keep a record of its use to insure
that the intent of this chapter is being met and shall comply with all
applicable Township ordinances and regulations.
(12) A-12 Nonresidential accessory buildings. Accessory buildings to
nonresidential uses shall be permitted, provided: [Amended
12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
(a) The yard requirements for the primary use are met.
(b) The maximum height of said structures shall be 24 feet or the
height of the primary building, whichever is less.
(c) No outdoor storage of vehicles or equipment is permitted.
(d) The buildings must be placed within the side or rear portion of
the building envelope so to not be visible from the street(s).
Any visual impact to the street(s) must be screened with a
minimum Class B buffer as defined by the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.236
(e) Storage of hazardous or flammable materials is prohibited.
(f) The hours of operation shall be consistent with those of the
primary building.
(g) Exterior lighting shall be placed not higher than 25 feet above
grade and shall be screened so to not permit the source of
illumination to be seen from off the premises. Only
incandescent or color-corrected types of illumination shall be
used. The hours of illumination of such lights shall be limited to
the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(h) The nonresidential accessory building and primary building(s)
must be under common ownership.
(i) The nonresidential storage building shall not exceed 9,000
square feet.
236. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:875
(j) Private community pools, pool houses, and pool equipment
buildings shall fall under the requirements of this section.
(k) All subdivision and land development requirements must be
met prior to issuance of permits.
(13) A-13 Accessory Business Park or Business Center Uses. The
following accessory uses shall be permitted as part of a planned
business park or business center provided that they are clearly
incidental to the B-4 Planned Business Park or B-5 Business Center
use types, and said uses are designed and primarily intended to
serve the employees of the business park development:
(a) Warehousing and storage as an accessory use to a permitted
use provided one or more of these accessory uses shall not
exceed 10% of the total floor area of the permitted use in each
building.
(b) Adult or child day-care center that is primarily intended to
serve the relatives of persons working within the planned
business park or business center, provided it is accommodated
within the same building as the permitted use.
(c) Cafeteria, exercise or recreation facilities intended for
employees and their occasional guests within the planned
business park or business center, provided it is accommodated
within the same building as the permitted use.
(d) Hair cutting/styling, ticket agency, tailoring, shoe shining and
repair, dry cleaning pickup and dropoff, travel agencies and
closely similar personal service uses within a hotel and limited
to a maximum of 5% of the total floor area of such building.
(e) Related, incidental and appropriate retail sales within a hotel
or office building and limited to a maximum of 5% of the total
floor area of such building.
(f) Education or training center, provided it is accommodated
within the same building as the permitted use.
(g) Any building permitted as an accessory use shall be
architecturally compatible with the permitted use building.
(h) The following accessory uses may be permitted by special
exception subject to compliance with the requirements of
Subsection H(13)(h)[4] below:
[1] Food preparation facility. A building for the preparation of
food products for sale and consumption off-site provided
that said preparation shall not include the use of high
temperature oils such as deep frying and the slaughtering
or butchering of animals.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:876
[2] Dental or optical lab which shall not include on-site sales.
[3] Photo lab which shall not include on-site sales.
[4] The accessory uses that may be permitted by special
exception shall also:
[a] Be consistent with the intent of the planned business
park or business center use, as set forth herein;
[b] Be ancillary to a permitted use;
[c] Be in a separate building from such permitted use;
[d] Be limited in square footage to a maximum of 15% of
the total floor area of the district (per final plan
approval);
[e] Have buffering, as required by the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance,237 as last amended,
increased to double in distance (width size) and tree
and shrub content;
[f] Have separate and restricted access for commercial
vehicles only from internal roadways and parking for
the balance of the site.
(14) A-14 Home Office. A home office shall be accessory to a residence
and shall be located and carried on entirely indoors and within a
dwelling in which the practitioner resides, or other structure
accessory thereto, and shall be clearly incidental and subordinate
to its use for residential purposes by its occupants and shall be
limited to the following uses or uses of the same general nature and
character and shall be subject to the following regulations: [Added
12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
(a) All home office uses shall be registered with the Township
Zoning Officer who shall keep a record of its use to insure that
the intent of this chapter is being met and shall comply with all
applicable Township ordinances and regulations.
(b) Uses authorized by this section as accessory to a dwelling shall
comply with the following provisions:
[1] Accessory home office uses shall not include a clinic or
hospital; animal hospital; commercial stable; kennel;
funeral parlor; undertaking establishment; eating place;
rooming, boarding, and lodging house; barbershop; beauty
parlor; other personal service shop, or other similar use.
237. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:877
[2] The home office shall be carried on only by inhabitants of
the dwelling.
[3] There shall be no use of show windows, display, or
advertising visible outside the premises.
[4] There shall be no exterior storage of materials or parking
of commercial vehicles.
[5] In no way shall the appearance of the residential structure
be altered or the office within the residence be conducted
in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from
the residential character by the use of colors, materials,
construction, lighting, show windows or advertising visible
outside the premises to attract customers or clients.
[6] No articles shall be sold or offered for sale on the
premises. Orders for items may be taken as a part of the
home office use only when the items are not located on the
subject property and are shipped directly from an off-site
warehouse or other facility to the customer.
[7] Servicing by large commercial vehicles shall not be
permitted.
[8] No services shall be provided at the property for
customers or clients. Customer/client utilization of the
home office shall be limited to access via telephone,
Internet, or such other similar off-site access.
[9] The floor area devoted exclusively to a home occupation
shall not be more than 25% of the gross habitable floor
area of the principal residential structure or 400 square
feet, whichever is less.
(c) No equipment or process shall be used in such employment or
occupation which creates discernible noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors or electrical interference at the property line and
no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receiver off the
lot or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the lot.
(d) Any accessory structure being utilized, in whole or in part, for
a home office shall conform to the residential use setback
requirements of the underlying district, without regard for any
alternative setbacks for accessory structures (e.g., if a district
has a residential use side yard setback of 30 feet, and an
accessory structure setback of 10 feet, the accessory structure
may only be utilized for a home office use when it complies
with the thirty-foot residential use setback requirement).
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:878
(15) A-15 Convenience Window. A convenience window, which is a
drive-up window for the purpose of paying for and receiving
previously ordered products, which is accessory to a permitted use
shall be permitted provided it meets all of the following: [Added
12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
(a) The convenience window/service area shall be an integral part
of the interior circulation pattern. No direct access to a public
road shall be permitted from the convenience window aisle.
(b) The stacking lanes shall be provided to serve a minimum of
four cars. The stacking lane shall not be used for parking lot
circulation aisles, nor shall it in any way conflict with through
circulation or parking.
(c) No ordering of services or products may take place at the
convenience window. The convenience window is solely for the
picking up and payment for products previously ordered.
(d) No alcoholic beverages, cigarettes, or pornographic materials,
or any other services or products that require the verification
of identification and age, may be served at a convenience
window.
(e) The primary permitted use and the accessory convenience
window use shall comply with all of the regulations therefore
as set forth in the Towamencin Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.238
(16) A-16 Accessory Limited Retail Sales. Limited retail sales as an
accessory use are permitted by conditional use within
manufacturing, fabricating, processing, and wholesale warehouse
buildings in accordance with the following standards and those
contained within Article X, Conditional Uses, of the Zoning
Ordinance: [Added 4-24-2002 by Ord. No. 02-3]
(a) Retail sales are limited to those items manufactured,
fabricated or processed on site or distributed on a wholesale
basis from the site.
(b) Retail sales area. Retail sales will be permitted only in a
physically separate and segregated sales area in the same
building as the primary use and shall have a maximum
allowable area of 10% of the gross floor area or 3,000 square
feet, whichever is less.
(c) Retail sales customers shall shop only in the retail sales area.
(d) Retail sales shall be conducted only during the hours of
operation for the principal use. The hours of operation for the
238. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:879
retail sale use shall be limited, however, to 8:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, and 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on
Saturday.
(e) There must be a separate entrance for retail sales area from
the building's primary entrance.
(f) Retail sales shall be conducted only by the same ownership and
under the same lease as the primary use.
(g) One additional parking space shall be provided for each 300
square feet of retail gross floor area. All required parking must
be reserved exclusively for use of retail customers and
employees and located adjacent to the entrance for the retail
sales area.
(17) A-17 Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted. An alternative energy
system that consists of one or more building-mounted or integrated
solar collection devices, solar energy related equipment and
associated infrastructure with the primary intention of generating
electricity or otherwise converting solar energy to a different form
of energy to reduce onsite consumption of purchased power, when
a property upon which the system is installed also receives
electricity supplied by a utility company. The solar energy system
shall be designed to supply no more power than required by the
principal use on the property and shall not be used for the
generation of power for the sale of energy to other users, although
this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess
power generated from time to time to the local utility company in
accordance with applicable law and regulation. [Added 2-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-03; amended 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-07]
(a) Roof-mounted systems shall conform to the height regulations
of the underlying zoning district.
(b) Building-mounted systems on a pitched roof shall meet the
following requirements:
[1] The design must meet the requirements as contained
within the most recent version of the International Fire
Code (IFC) for setbacks, access and pathways related to
emergency access and response procedures.
[2] The highest point of the system shall not exceed the
highest point of the roof to which it is attached.
(c) Building-mounted systems on a flat roof shall meet the
following requirements:
[1] On a flat roof, the design must meet the requirements as
contained within the most recent version of the
International Fire Code (IFC) for setbacks, access and
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:880
pathways related to emergency access and response
procedures.
[2] The highest point of the system shall not exceed three feet
above the rooftop and shall not exceed the maximum
building height for the district in which it is located.
(d) Solar energy systems shall conform to the requirements in
§ 153-502G(4)(i) through (o).
(e) Decommissioning requirements. If a solar energy system
remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of
one year, the system shall be deemed abandoned and shall
constitute a public nuisance. Within six months of
abandonment, the owner shall remove the system after a
demolition permit has been obtained in accordance with the
following:
[1] Any aboveground mechanical equipment, wiring, and
structural components shall be removed.
[2] Underground wiring and structural components shall be
removed and the resulting void space filled.
[3] When a solar energy system is removed, any disturbed
earth as a result of the removal shall be restored, graded
and reseeded.
(18) A-18 Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted. An alternative energy
system that consists of one or more ground-mounted or
freestanding solar collection devices, solar-energy-related
equipment and associated infrastructure with the primary intention
of generating electricity or otherwise converting solar energy to a
different form of energy to reduce on-site consumption of
purchased power, when a property upon which the system is
installed also receives electricity supplied by a utility company. The
solar energy system shall be designed to supply no more power
than required by the principal use on the property and shall not be
used for the generation of power for the sale of energy to other
users, although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit
the sale of excess power generated from time to time to the local
utility company in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations. [Added 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
(a) Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall meet all of the
building setback requirements for a principal building, or 20
feet, whichever is greater.
(b) Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be located in
the front yard.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:881
(c) Ground-mounted systems shall not be located in the side yard
for lots less than two acres in size.
(d) Ground-mounted systems shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
(e) For ground-mounted systems, the system must be adequately
screened from adjacent properties and the street. The buffer
plantings shall be provided using a Class B buffer as defined in
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, excluding
option five.239
(f) Solar energy systems shall conform to the requirements in
§ 153-502G(4)(i) through (o).
(g) Decommissioning requirements shall be as outlined in
§ 153-502H(17)(e).
(19) A-19 Attached Exterior Refrigeration Units. An attached exterior
refrigeration unit shall be attached to the rear of an eating place
and shall be incidental and subordinate to, and used solely in
connection with, the eating place for the storage of raw materials,
food products, beverages and consumer products sold within the
eating place. This shall not include facilities with drive-through
windows. [Added 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-04]
(a) Attached exterior refrigeration units shall not exceed 100
square feet in size.
(b) Attached exterior refrigeration units shall only be accessible
from within the primary structure and have no exterior doors.
(c) Attached exterior refrigeration units' access doors shall not
have a locking feature.
(d) Attached exterior refrigeration units shall be placed on an
approved concrete pad.
(e) Attached exterior refrigeration units shall have the same
likeness and character of the building to which they are
attached. This shall be approved by the Zoning Officer through
the zoning permit process.
(f) Attached exterior refrigeration units may be installed and
continue along the side of a conforming or nonconforming
building, as long as the attached exterior refrigeration unit
does not encroach further into any required yard than the
existing building. Attached exterior refrigeration units shall
have concrete or steel bollards to protect the unit from damage
if it is located within five feet of a parking area.
239. Editor's Note: See Chapter 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:882
(g) Attached exterior refrigeration units shall comply with the
current Mechanical Code standards adopted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Towamencin Township.
(h) Suitable buffer landscaping shall be installed along the side of
the attached exterior refrigeration unit that is adjacent to the
cartway of a street, such landscaping to be approved by the
Zoning Officer through the zoning permit process.
(20) A-20 Wind Energy System. An alternative energy system that
consists of a pole-mounted wind turbine, wind energy related
equipment and associated infrastructure with the primary intention
of generating electricity or otherwise converting wind energy to a
different form of energy to reduce onsite consumption of purchased
power, when a property upon which the system is installed also
receives electricity supplied by a utility company. The wind energy
system shall be designed to supply no more power than required by
the principal use on the property and shall not be used for the
generation of power for the sale of energy to other users, although
this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess
power generated from time to time to the local utility company in
accordance with applicable law and regulation. In no case shall the
wind energy system have a rated capacity greater than 100 kW.
[Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
(a) A wind energy system shall be permitted as an accessory use
only.
(b) No wind energy system shall be permitted in any required open
space area that has been set aside as part of an approved
development.
(c) All wind energy systems shall be freestanding pole or selfsupporting
lattice structures with no guy wires. Roof-mounted
windmills are not permitted.
(d) Every proposed wind energy system shall be designed and
engineered to provide for safe operation. Detailed engineering
plans, prepared by a licensed professional engineer, for all
proposed wind energy systems shall be submitted with
applications for review and approval of the Township Engineer.
(e) All wind energy systems, including the supporting structure,
shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal
construction and electrical codes.
(f) All electrical wiring leading to or from a wind energy system
shall be located underground.
(g) Dimensional requirements:
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:883
[1] Wind energy systems must be located no closer to any
street than the principal structure on the property. No
wind energy systems may be placed in the front yard.
[2] All wind energy systems shall be set back a minimum of
1.2 times the height of the structure, including the blade
as extended to its highest position, from any lot line,
aboveground utility line or pole and from any occupied
structure on the same lot.
[3] The maximum height of a wind energy system shall be 55
feet from finished grade including the pole or mounting
structure and the blade when extended to its highest
position.
[4] The minimum lot size on which a wind energy system is
permitted is one acre.
[5] There shall be a maximum of one wind turbine per one
acre of property on a single parcel or multiple parcels in
single ownership.
[6] The minimum distance between the finished grade to the
wind energy system blade at its lowest point shall be no
less than 15 feet.
(h) All surfaces of the wind energy systems shall be a
nonobtrusive, nonreflective color such as white, off-white or
gray.
(i) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. The
ground level equipment and structures shall be provided with a
buffer screen along the sides facing adjacent property owners
and street rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer.
(j) The wind energy system shall not be artificially lighted unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(k) The wind energy system shall not display advertising except
for reasonable identification of the manufacturer.
(l) A minimum of one hazard warning sign shall be posted near
ground level at the base of the wind energy system.
(m) The ambient noise level, under normal operating conditions,
measured at the property line shall not exceed the limits in the
Noise Ordinance (Chapter 103).
(n) Wind energy systems shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above
grade level.
§ 153-502 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-502
1:884
(o) The owner of the wind energy system shall take reasonable
steps to minimize or eliminate shadow flicker on any regularly
occupied adjacent structure.
(p) Abandonment. Any wind energy system that has not been in
active and continuous service for a period of one year shall be
removed from the property to a place of safe and legal
disposal. All structures or enclosures accessory to the wind
energy systems shall be completely removed from the property.
The former wind energy system site shall be restored to a
natural condition as soon as possible, but no later than six
months after removal of the system.
§ 153-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-502
1:885

ARTICLE VI
General Provisions Applicable to All Districts
§ 153-600. Access to public street.
Each and every lot shall abut a public street for at least 50 feet at the rightof-
way line except for flag lots wherein there shall be a minimum of 25 feet
at the right-of-way line.
§ 153-601. Reduction of lot area.
No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot, or the dimensions of the
required open spaces, shall be less than herein prescribed by this chapter.
§ 153-602. Modification of front yard requirements.
§ 153-603. Projections into required yards.
No portion of a building or structure shall be located within the minimum
required front, side or rear yard area specified by this chapter except for
driveways and those other projections as provided herein.
A. Where a minimum depth of front yard is specified, an open space of at
least the specified depth shall be provided between the ultimate street
right-of-way line and the nearest point of any building or structure,
except as may be reduced as specified herein.
B. Where an unimproved lot of record is situated on the same street
frontage with two improved lots or one unimproved and one improved
lot, the front yard requirement for that district may be modified so that
the front yard shall be an average of the existing and as required front
yard.
A. An unenclosed porch, not more than 14 feet in height, may be erected
to extend into a required front or rear yard a distance of not more than
10 feet, provided that in no case shall it extend into such front or rear
year more than 1/2 the required depth of said yard.
B. A terrace, platform, stoop or landing, not covered by a roof, canopy or
trellis, which does not extend above the level of the first floor of the
building, may be erected to extend into a required yard a distance of
not more than 12 feet provided that it shall not extend into such yard
more than 40% of the required depth or width of the yard.
C. A porte-cochere or carport may be erected over a driveway in a
required side yard, provided that such structure is:
(1) Not more than 14 feet in height, and does not extend in length
beyond the portion of the building or structure to which it is
attached.
§ 153-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-603
1:887
§ 153-604. Fences and walls.
§ 153-605. Corner lots and through lots. [Amended 5-22-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-04]
(2) Entirely open on at least three sides, exclusive of the necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features.
(3) At least three feet from the side lot line in Zoning Districts R-50 and
R-125, 20 feet in Zoning Districts R-175 and R-180, 35 feet in the
R-200 Zoning District. [Amended 6-8-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
D. A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier, or pilaster of a building may project
not more than 18 inches into a required yard.
E. Open and unenclosed fire escapes, steps, bay windows and balconies
may project not more than three feet into a required yard.
A. Fences and walls shall not be higher than three feet in front yard areas
or higher than six feet in side or rear yard areas unless as otherwise
specified by this chapter. For lots located within residential districts, a
fence not exceeding four feet in height, with a minimum open area to
solid area ratio of 2.5:1 shall be permitted in front yard areas
contingent upon the fence not interfering with or obstructing vehicular
or pedestrian vision at any intersection or along an abutting street and/
or crosswalk. Chain-link fence with wire (or other durable material)
which is interwoven or welded in such a way as to create a rectangular
or “diamond” pattern shall not be permitted in front yard areas. Welded
wire fabric shall be permitted in front yard areas when installed against
a post and rail or split rail fence. [Amended 1-22-2014 by Ord. No.
14-01]
B. No fence or wall, except a retaining wall, or a wall of a building
permitted under the terms of this chapter, over six feet in height, shall
be erected within any of the open spaces required by this chapter
unless that portion of the fence or wall which exceeds six feet in height
has a ratio of open area to solid area of at least 4:1. The Zoning Hearing
Board may authorize the erection of walls or fences of greater height in
such cases as may be necessary to provide adequate protection,
shielding, or screening of open storage or equipment areas, when said
use is permitted within a specific zoning district.
C. No fence or wall shall be placed within an easement, retention or
detention basin facility or within the ultimate right-of-way of any street.
D. All fences in MRC Mixed Residential Cluster Districts shall comply with
§ 136-518 of the Towamencin Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. [Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
A. In the case of a corner lot as defined herein, all yards abutting a street
shall be treated as front yards with respect to all regulations contained
in this chapter, and one of any remaining yards on such lots shall be
§ 153-603 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-605
1:888
§ 153-606. Flag lots. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09;
8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
treated as a rear yard, with any other yard or yards being treated as
side yards.
B. In the case of a through lot as defined herein, any yard that abuts a
street classified as a local access street as defined within the
Towamencin Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance240 shall be treated as a front yard with respect to all
regulations contained in this chapter. The remaining yard abutting a
street classified as a feeder street, collector street, controlled access
street or arterial highway as defined within the Towamencin Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be treated as a rear
yard with respect to all regulations pertaining to residential accessory
structures contained in this chapter. Any remaining yards on such lots
shall be treated as side yards with respect to all regulations contained
in this chapter.
A. Flag lots are those which have access to a public or private road by
means of a strip of property connecting the flag portion of the lot with
the road.
B. The following regulations shall apply to flag lots:
(1) The pole of the flag which provides access to the roadway shall be a
minimum of 25 feet wide and shall be owned as part of the lot.
(2) The pole of the flag shall not exceed 300 feet in length for its entire
length and shall be owned as part of the lot.
(3) The said strip or pole connecting such lot to the road shall be
reasonably suited for the construction and use as a private lane and
emergency vehicle access, no building shall hereafter either be
erected within said lane nor altered therein so as to obstruct or
encroach into same and the lane shall have a vertical clearance of
14 feet above grade extending five feet from the edge of the paving.
(4) The body of the lot, excluding the pole or strip which is owned by
the applicant and which connects the body of the lot to the
roadway, shall have an area of not less than the minimum lot area
for a single-family dwelling within the subject district as follows.
District Lot Area
R-50 24,000 square feet (single-family detached dwellings
only)
R-125 50,000 square feet
R-175 90,000 square feet (a)
240. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-606
1:889
§ 153-607. Obstructions to vision at intersections. [Amended
1-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-01]
On any lot, no wall, fence, or other structure shall be erected, altered or
maintained and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be planted or
maintained which will interfere with or obstruct vehicular or pedestrian
vision at any intersection of streets or any street and crosswalk.
§ 153-608. Effect of private covenants.
Nothing herein shall be construed to render inoperative any enforceable
restrictions established by covenants running with the land, and which
restrictions are not prohibited by or are not contrary to the regulations
herein established.
§ 153-609. Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
approval.
All nonresidential and multifamily uses shall require, to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Officer, documented Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
District Lot Area
R-175 45,000 square feet (b)
R-180 90,000 square feet (a)
R-180 60,000 square feet (b)
R-200 2 acres
NOTES:
(a) Lots where neither public water nor public sewer are provided,
or where only public water or public sewer, but not both is
provided.
(b) For lots where public water and sewer are provided.
(5) Only one such flag lot shall be permitted in a subdivision of up to 10
lots; two flag lots shall be permitted in a subdivision of 11 to 20
lots; and up to 10% of the lots for any subdivision over 20.
(6) No more than one tier of flag lots shall be permitted on a tract.
(7) Poles of flag lots shall be located side-by-side. Each pole shall share
a common access point and driveway.
(8) Such subdivision approval shall not in any way obligate or require
the Township to pave, repair, replace or maintain, improve or
acquire such access lane or pole for public road purposes or to
provide snow removal therefrom.
(9) The front yard shall be considered the yard line closest to the street
of access.
§ 153-606 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-609
1:890
Industry approval of all buildings to include, but not necessarily be limited
to, written documentation.
§ 153-610. Public utilities.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to limit or
interfere with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of
public utility structures, or facilities in existence at the time of passage
of this chapter, or which may hereafter be located with public easements
or rights-of-way designated for such purposes. The location of any such
construction not within a public easement or right-of-way, however, unless
specifically provided for in this chapter, shall be subject to approval of the
Zoning Hearing Board, which shall give consideration to the effect of such
constructions or installations upon the public safety and the character of
the adjacent neighborhood.
§ 153-611. Outdoor illumination.
Outdoor illumination in all districts shall be diffused or shielded in such
a manner as not to create any hazardous situations for passing vehicular
traffic or a nuisance to persons in the area. Lighting plans shall provide for
nonglare lights focused downward.
§ 153-612. Nuisance standards.
The following general nuisance standards shall apply to all existing and
proposed nonresidential uses and activities in the Township. The applicant
shall be required to prepare and submit a written statement and proper
analysis documenting compliance with all of the provisions of this section.
Said statement shall be prepared by a qualified professional. The Township
may retain, at the applicant's expense, expert and technical consultants
to review and comment on said statement, and if required, the applicant
shall address all issues and concerns raised as part of that review to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer and his technical advisors. All expense
associated with the preparation and review of said statement shall be borne
exclusively by the applicant at no cost to the Township.
A. Smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors, odors and gases.
(1) There shall be no emission of smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors, or
gases which violate the Pennsylvania Air Pollution Control Laws or
other regulation of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
(2) There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other noxious or
odorous material in such quantities as to be detectable by the
unaided human senses beyond the subject lot. All industrial and
commercial processes that involve the creation or emission of any
odorous gases shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system, so that control will be maintained in the event that the
primary safeguard system should fail.
§ 153-609 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-612
1:891
(3) The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors, gases or smoke
which can cause damage to the health of animals or vegetation, or
cause damage or cause soiling to persons or property beyond the
lot creating said emission is herein prohibited.
B. Noise. [Amended 2-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-03]
(1) At no point on the boundary of a residential zoning district shall
noise/sound levels exceed 65 dB(A) during the daytime and 55
dB(A) during the nighttime hours. These standards do not apply to
the operation of agricultural equipment or motor vehicles or other
transportation facilities, operations involved in the construction or
demolition of structures, or emergency alarm signals.
(2) No nonemergency noise from recording, loudspeakers, or public
address systems which interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of
adjacent or nearby residential properties shall be allowed, and no
such noise discernible beyond the subject property shall be
permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3) No construction activity shall take place on any lot except between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., weekdays, and 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., Saturdays and holidays. No construction activity shall
take place on a Sunday.
C. Vibration. No vibration which is discernible to the unaided sense of
feeling shall be permitted at any point beyond the subject property.
Normal and customary vibration from permitted construction activities
are not regulated under this section.
D. Glare and heat. Any operation producing intense or harmful glare or
heat shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid
fence or wall adequate to completely shield, and make such activity
completely imperceptible, beyond the subject property.
E. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. There shall be no activities
which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity at any point. There shall
be no electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any
point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such
disturbance. If any use is proposed which incorporates the use of
radioactive material, equipment, or supplies, such use shall be in strict
conformity with Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources Rules and Regulations.
F. Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
(1) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products,
and all fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors where
permitted by this chapter shall be enclosed by a fence or wall
required for adequate security and screening from adjacent
properties. Storage of flammable materials and fuels shall meet the
standards of the National Fire Protection Association and, if stored
§ 153-612 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-612
1:892
§ 153-613. Industrial waste and sewage and water supply.
below ground, the standards of the Department of Environmental
Resources for underground storage tanks. All underground storage
tanks shall be registered with the state pursuant to Pennsylvania
state statutes. Outdoor storage facilities shall be made
aesthetically pleasing to the community. All such facilities shall be
landscaped. These standards do not apply to farm or residential
tanks of 1,100 gallons or less capacity used for noncommercial
purposes.
(2) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces. Dikes must be constructed around above ground liquid
storage facilities to preclude such transference in the event of
failure of the facility.
(3) All materials or wastes which might cause flames or dust, or which
constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored outdoors only in
enclosed containers adequate to eliminate such hazards and in
accordance with all state and federal regulations.
G. Power supply. Every use requiring an on-site power supply shall be so
constructed and operated that the power supply and all appurtenance
thereto shall conform to the most acceptable safety requirements
recognized by the Pennsylvania Bureau of Labor and Industry, and shall
be so designed and located to be an integral part of the architectural
features of the associated land use, and if visible from abutting
residential properties shall be visually concealed by coniferous planting
or other suitable materials approved by the Township.
A. No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any untreated
sewage or industrial waste into any reservoir, lake, or watercourse or
discharge any untreated sewage or industrial waste into any stream. All
methods of industrial waste treatment and disposal shall be approved
by the Township, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources and/or other regulatory agencies.
B. All water requirements shall be stated in the application. In the event
that water is proposed to be supplied from wells for five or more
residential units or any nonresidential use, the applicant shall:
(1) Furnish, to the satisfaction and approval of the Township, a
hydrogeologic study prepared and certificated by a professional
geologist that the underground water supply and levels will not be
appreciably altered in such a way as to significantly impact the
water level and supply of potentially affected properties.
§ 153-612 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-614
1:893
§ 153-614. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
All earthmoving activities must be in compliance with the regulations of
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and the Soil
Conservation District regulations and must be undertaken in accordance
with a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan submitted for the
earthmoving activity which meets the standards set forth in the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,241 as last amended, this
chapter, and other regulatory agency requirements.
§ 153-615. Installation of utilities.
All public utility lines and similar facilities servicing any proposed
development shall be installed underground.
§ 153-616. Environmental performance standards.
A. All activities and uses established after the effective date of this chapter
shall comply with the following standards. Any site alterations, grading,
filling or clearing of vegetation shall be done only in accordance with
this section and when necessary in accordance with an approved
subdivision or land development plan in accordance with the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as last amended, and an
approved building permit.
B. All applications for subdivisions and land developments shall include
maps delineating the following natural resources and said development
shall be subject to the protection standards for said resources as
defined herein:
(1) Floodplain protection standards are provided in Chapter 82,
Floodplain Management, of the Towamencin Township Code.
[Amended 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
(2) Lakes and ponds protection standards. No development, filling, or
diverting shall be permitted in lakes or ponds or within lake/pond
margins except where used for farm irrigation purposes.
(a) A margin area shall extend to a depth of 50 feet around the
shoreline of a pond or lake as defined by this chapter.
(3) Wetlands protection standards. Wetlands shall not be altered,
regraded, developed, filled, piped, diverted, or built upon except
that roads may cross wetlands where approval is obtained from the
township by special exception of the Zoning Hearing Board and the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or, as applicable, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, and where no other
access to the property is available. The property owner/applicant
shall identify wetlands and where encroachment is anticipated
241. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-614 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-616
1:894
shall obtain the applicable state and federal permits. One hundred
percent of these wetland areas shall be protected.
(a) Wetlands shall have a transitional area extending from the
outer limit of the wetland boundary for 50 feet. The wetland
margin shall not be altered, regraded, developed, filled, piped,
diverted, or built upon except that roads may cross wetland
margins where approval is obtained from the township by
special exception of the Zoning Hearing Board and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and
where no other access to the property is available. The
property owner/applicant shall identify wetlands and where
encroachment is anticipated shall obtain the applicable state
and federal permits. One hundred percent of these wetland
margins shall be protected.
(b) Limited value wetlands, as determined by the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers or, as applicable, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources shall be exempt from these
restrictions, subject to permit restrictions of the state and
federal regulatory agencies. Limited value wetlands are those
which are man-made and have been created in drainage
ditches and detention basins and which do not exhibit wetland
values of groundwater recharge, wildlife habitat, or serving
natural biological functions.
(4) Streams and watercourses.
(a) Streams and watercourses (any lake, pond, perennial or
intermittent stream shown on the U.S.G.S. map and/or
identified by field survey) shall be 100% protected and shall
remain as open space.
(b) The stream and watercourse margin shall be that area which
extends from the edge of the stream or watercourse to a
distance of 50 feet therefrom. The margin shall not be altered,
regraded, developed, filled, piped, diverted, or built upon
except that roads may cross margins where approval is
obtained from the township by special exception of the Zoning
Hearing Board and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources and where no other access to the
property is available. Stream bank stabilization is permitted
when approved by the Township Engineer. The applicant must
obtain all required permits from the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, the Montgomery County
Conservation District, the United States Army Corps of
Engineers and Towamencin Township. [Amended 6-8-2011
by Ord. No. 11-04]
(5) Steep slopes. It is the primary intent of this section to identify and
mitigate certain hazards to the community's health, safety and
§ 153-616 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-616
1:895
welfare caused by development on slopes in excess of 15%, herein
defined as steep slopes. Secondarily, it is intended to protect these
environmentally sensitive areas pursuant to Article I, Section 27,
of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which
states that people have a right to clean air, pure water, and to the
preservation of the natural, scenic, historic and aesthetic values of
the environment.
(a) The section is specifically intended to insure the following:
[1] All structures will be located away from steep slopes on
safe, stable grounds away from possible landslide or
erosion activities.
[2] All roads and driveways will have safe and stable side
slopes or shoulders.
[3] Development activities such as grading and stripping of
vegetation will be minimized on steep slopes to reduce
accelerated stormwater runoff and soil erosion of the
slope, thereby preserving water quality.
[4] Environmentally sensitive native wildlife habitats (such as
woodlands) located on steep slopes will be minimally
affected by development.
[5] The visual integrity of steep slopes areas will be
maintained throughout development.
(b) Application of regulation to all districts. These regulations
shall apply to all districts on lands having any of the following
characteristics:
[1] Slopes greater than 15% as determined by measurements
by registered professional engineers, surveyors, or
landscape architects, using accepted engineering
practices.
[2] Soil types classified as "stony land, steep" by that
document entitled Soil Survey of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, prepared by the United States Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, dated April
1967, a copy of which is on file in the offices of the
Township.
[3] Slopes greater than 15% as delineated on the maps made a
part of the Soil Survey of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, provided, however, that in the event of a
conflict between topographic measurements prepared in
accordance with Subsection B(5)(b)[1] above and the soils
map, the measurements shall control.
§ 153-616 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-616
1:896
(c) No stripping of vegetation, grading, or construction of any kind
shall take place in steep slope areas except in conformance
with the following regulations:
[1] All structures and other impervious surfaces shall be set
back 25 feet from the top of steep slope areas. This twentyfive-
foot setback shall be covered in permanent vegetation
in order to minimize the effect of accelerated stormwater
runoff on the steep slope and to minimize the likelihood of
tectonic action on the structure or surface.
[2] Structures and impervious surfaces shall be set back a
sufficient distance from the bottom of steep slope areas to
insure proper grading and drainage around the structure
or surface without encroachment on the steep slope areas.
[3] Underground utilities may cross steep slope areas given
no other reasonable alternative exists, as determined by
the Township Engineer, and grading and clearing will be
kept to the minimum necessary. Any steep slope areas
disturbed in the construction of underground utilities shall
be regraded and revegetated to match previously existing
conditions immediately after construction.
[4] Roads, driveways, and parking facilities may be permitted
by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use, provided
the following conditions are met:
[a] There is no other reasonable alternative to provide
access or parking outside steep slope areas.
[b] The extent of the disturbance required for the road,
driveway, or parking facility is consistent with the
intent of this chapter.
[c] The disturbance proposed is the minimum necessary
and all possible measures to reduce the amount of
disturbance are employed.
[d] The steep slope area disturbed will be immediately
revegetated to a condition reasonably similar to
previously existing conditions.
[e] No side grades created by the road or driveway shall
be greater than 25%.
(d) Design standards in steep slope areas. Steep slope areas shall
be delineated in the field prior to any clearing or construction.
A temporary physical barrier such as a snow fence shall be
erected around steep slope areas prior to major clearing and
construction. The barrier shall be placed to prevent
encroachment by construction vehicles on the steep slope area
§ 153-616 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-616
1:897
and shall remain in place until construction is completed. The
steep slope area shall not be disturbed in any way including the
use of the area for refuse, fill, or top soil or materials, storage,
or any temporary uses during construction. Any accidentally
disrupted area shall be immediately returned to match the
previously existing condition (i.e., grades and vegetative
cover).
(e) Liability. Neither the approval of any proposed subdivision or
land development by any officer, employee or agency of the
Township of Towamencin, nor the grant of any subdivision
approval by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Towamencin, shall constitute a representation, guarantee or
warranty of any kind of the Township of Towamencin or by any
of its officers, employees, agencies or members of its agencies
of the safety or practicality of the proposed subdivision and
use, and such approval or grant of approval shall not create
any liability on the part of the Township of Towamencin or its
officers, employees, agencies or members of its agencies.
(f) Areas with restrictions due to steep slopes shall be left
undisturbed to the extent specified herein and not occupied by
structures, driveways, on-lot septic systems or other
improvements.
(6) Woodlands. Woodlands as defined by this chapter shall be subject
to the restrictions specified herein.
(a) Mature trees with a circumference of 60 inches or greater
measured 14 inches above ground shall be identified and
preserved, unless the Board of Supervisors agrees to a
different disposition.
(7) Tree protection area. The tree protection area refers to the area
around woodlands which are to be protected under the provisions
of this chapter. The purpose is to ensure that trees which are to be
protected do not suffer damage during the development. The tree
protection area is an area radial to the trunk of a tree and shall be
15 feet from the trunk of the tree to be retained, or the distance
from the trunk to the drip-line (the line marking the outer edge of
the branches of the tree), whichever is greater. Where there is a
group of trees or woodlands, the tree protection area shall be an
area encompassing the protection areas for the individual trees.
(a) A tree protection area shall be designated around the area(s)
of woodlands to be protected, within which no construction
activity or grading shall occur.
(b) The tree protection area shall be fenced during construction
activities to protect the area from unauthorized grading or tree
removal.
§ 153-616 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-617
1:898
§ 153-617. Floodplain Conservation District. [Amended 6-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-11-04; 12-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-08; 3-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-06]
Regulations regarding the FP Floodplain Conservation District are provided
within Chapter 82, Floodplain Management, of the Towamencin Township
Code.
§ 153-618. Antennas and satellite dish antennas.
The following regulations shall apply to all antennas and satellite dish
antennas within all zoning districts in the Township:
A. For the purpose of this section, "antenna" and "satellite dish antenna"
shall have the following meanings:
ANTENNA — An apparatus, external to or attached to the exterior
of a building, together with any supporting structure for sending or
receiving electromagnetic waves.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A device incorporating a reflective
surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape
of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device shall be used
to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between
terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to
include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as
satellite earth stations, TRVO's and microwave antennas.
B. The height of an antenna or satellite dish antenna shall not exceed 15
feet if placed on the ground surface, which shall be the combined height
of the dish itself and any mounting apparatus. If placed on a roof
surface, in accordance with this chapter, the height shall not exceed 10
feet above the peak of the existing roof line.
C. The diameter of the antenna or satellite dish antenna shall not exceed
12 feet.
D. No advertising shall be affixed to the antenna or satellite dish antenna.
E. In no event shall an antenna or satellite dish antenna be placed in the
front yard area, and there shall be only one antenna or satellite dish
antenna per lot, meaning a cumulative number of two of such antennas
and/or satellite dish antennas. Antennas and satellite dish antennas
may only be accessory structures.
F. The antenna or satellite dish antenna shall be placed in a rear yard only
and the setback shall be in accordance with that provided in the
particular zoning district for accessory structures.
G. In order to have an antenna or satellite dish antenna on the roof or in a
side yard, the applicant must demonstrate to the Board of Supervisors
that, due to the topography of the applicant's property, and/or other
reasons for inability to adequately receive or obtain reception, the
§ 153-617 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-618
1:899
§ 153-619. Setbacks from and restrictions within easements.
[Amended 4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
§ 153-620. Forestry activities. [Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
Board of Supervisors shall direct the granting of a permit for such an
installation.
H. A building permit shall be required for the installation of antennas or
satellite dish antennas in any zoning district. The application for such
an installation shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Department
of Towamencin Township and shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, construction drawings showing the method of attachment
and installation, sealed structural engineering analyses regarding the
ability of the antenna to withstand wind shear, and a site plan depicting
structures and required setbacks for the installation of the antenna or
satellite dish antenna. The review of the Code Enforcement Department
shall be in accordance with the then existing building code of
Towamencin Township. In addition to the above, in the event that the
installation of the antenna is to be roof mounted, there shall be an
engineer's sealed certification regarding the safety of a proposed
rooftop mounting. The certification shall demonstrate that the roof has
the appropriate load bearing facilities to sustain the mounting of the
structure.
I. If an antenna or satellite dish antenna is to be greater than 15 feet in
height or greater than 10 feet above the peak of an existing roof line, as
set forth above, said additional height shall only be permitted by special
exception, but in no way should the height exceed 70 feet. In addition to
the above consideration, the Zoning Hearing Board shall require proof
that the additional height is necessary for appropriate reception for the
stated purpose and should be placed in such a manner to limit visual
impact by neighboring properties. Furthermore, in no event shall the
antenna or satellite dish antenna be of such a height and placed in such
a position that, if laid on the ground, said antenna or dish would
encroach within 10 feet of any property line of the subject property.
A. Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put within the
area of any public or private right-of-way or easement including, but not
necessarily limited to, a utility easement, a drainage easement, a
sanitary sewer easement, a stormwater management easement, a snow
storage easement or a pedestrian easement without written consent
from the owner of the easement.
A. Forestry activities shall be a permitted use by right in all zoning
districts in the Township.
B. Forestry activities shall be completed in accordance with any and all
regulations adopted by the Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources, and shall be in accordance with recognized natural resource
§ 153-618 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-620
1:900
§ 153-621. Wireless telecommunications facilities. [Added
12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
conservation practices, but shall not include the construction of any
structures or land development.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines and
regulations for the siting of wireless telecommunications towers
and antennas. The goals of this section are to:
(a) Provide procedures and guidelines for the location, placement,
and construction of wireless communications facilities in the
Township;
(b) Provide clear performance standards and requirements
addressing the siting of wireless communications facilities;
(c) Encourage the location of wireless communications facilities
on existing structures, including telephone poles, utility poles,
signs, water towers, buildings and other wireless
communications facilities to the extent feasible;
(d) Enhance the ability of providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community in a safe,
effective and efficient manner;
(e) To effect collocation and site sharing of new and existing
wireless communications facilities;
(f) To accommodate the need for wireless communications
facilities while regulating their location and number in the
Township;
(g) To minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communications
facilities, attachment structures and equipment facilities
through proper design, siting and vegetative screening;
(h) To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from wireless
communications facilities failure and falling ice through
engineering and proper siting of attachment structures; and
(i) To encourage the joint use of any new wireless
communications facilities to reduce the number of such
attachment structures needed in the future.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meaning set forth below:
ANTENNA ARRAY — One or more rods, panels, disks, or similar devices
used to radiate or capture a transmission or reception of
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequency
signals, wireless telecommunications signals or other communications
§ 153-620 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:901
signals which may include onmidirectional antenna (rod), directional
antenna (panel), and parabolic antenna (disk). The antenna array does
not include the support structure defined below.
APPLICANT — Any person or entity that applies for a wireless
communications facility building permit, zoning approval and/or
conditional use approval.
ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A wireless
communications facility some component of which is attached to an
attachment structure.
ATTACHMENT STRUCTURE — A building or existing structure which
is 35 or more feet in height and is suitable for the support of a wireless
communications facility, but which has been designed and constructed
for another purpose. Such existing structures shall include, but not
be limited to: telephone poles; utility poles; high tension power line
towers, signs; water towers; and municipally-owned towers.
CAMOUFLAGING METHODS — Concealing techniques applied to
wireless communications towers, antennae and other facilities which
render them more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into
the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render
it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but
are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennae,
building-mounted antennae painted to match the existing structure and
facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, flag poles and light
poles.[Added 8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
CO-LOCATION — The placement or installation of new wireless
telecommunications facilities on previously approved and constructed
wireless support structures, including self-supporting or guyed
monopoles and towers, electrical transmission towers, water towers
or any other structure not classified as a wireless support structure
that can support the placement or installation of wireless
telecommunications facilities if approved by the municipality. The term
includes the placement, replacement or modification of accessory
equipment within a previously approved equipment compound.[Added
8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — Network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added
8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
EQUIPMENT FACILITY — Any structure or enclosure used to contain
ancillary equipment as a component of a wireless communications
facility, including a building, cabinet, shelter, a build-out of an existing
structure, or a pedestal.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:902
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel (immediately adjacent
to the tower or structure) to the highest point on the tower or other
structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
MICRO FACILITY — A wireless communications facility consisting of
an equipment facility capable of being mounted onto the attachment or
support structure of an antenna that is either:
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennae and connecting appurtenances.[Added
8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NONTOWER
WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications facilities
including, but not limited to, antennae and related equipment. Nontower
WCF shall not include support structures for antennae and
related equipment.[Added 8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
REPLACEMENT ATTACHMENT STRUCTURE — The replacement of
a telephone pole in a public right-of-way proposed to be used as an
attachment structure which shall be of the same material (i.e., wood or
metal) as the pole it replaces; shall be installed in the same location
as the pole it replaces; and which shall be no more than 10 feet
higher than the pole it replaces, including any attached wireless
communications facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface of and the space above and below any
real property in the Township in which the Township, county or
commonwealth has a regulatory interest, or interest as a trustee for
the public, as such interests now or hereafter exist, including, but
not limited to, all streets, highways, avenues, roads, alleys, sidewalks,
tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other public place, area or
property under the control of the Township, county or commonwealth,
and any unrestricted public or utility easements established, dedicated,
platted, improved or devoted for utility purposes, but excluding lands
other than streets that are owned by the Township, county or
commonwealth. The phrase "in the right(s)-of-way" means in, on, over,
along, above and/or under the right(s)-of-way.[Added 8-26-2016 by
Ord. No. 15-12]
No more than five feet in height with a face area of not more than
580 square inches; or
(1)
If a tubular antenna, no more than four inches in diameter and no
more than seven feet in length.
(2)
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface of, as well as the space
above and below, an area of land required for the widening of
existing streets to accommodate anticipated future traffic or to
provide future access to or through undeveloped land.
(1)
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:903
STEALTH — Any wireless communications facility which is designed
to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including but not
limited to architecturally screened and/or landscaped antenna arrays
and equipment facilities, and support structures designed to look other
than like a support structure such as a light pole, a power pole, a
component of a building or a tree.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure designed and constructed to
support an antenna array or micro facility and may include a utility
pole, a monopole, self-supporting (lattice) or guy-wire support tower,
and other similar structures.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennae, including, but not limited to, selfsupporting
lattice towers, guy towers, monopoles, utility poles, light
poles, and hub facilities for distributed antenna systems.[Added
8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or
radio signals.[Added 8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — Any personal wireless
service as defined by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended,
which includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless telecommunications
services, including cellular, personal communications service (PCS),
specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio
(ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently exist or that may be
developed.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennae,
nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
electronics and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting,
receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless
communications services.[Amended 8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The future or planned width of
highways in the public domain as shown on the official Ultimate
Right-of-Way Map on file at the Township office.
(2)
C. Applicability.
(1) New support structures and wireless communications facilities. All
support structures, attachment structures and wireless
communications facilities in the Township not in existence on the
effective date of this section shall be subject to these regulations,
except as provided in Subsections C(2) and (3) below.
(2) Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This
section shall not govern any support structure, or the installation of
any antenna array, that is under 20 feet in height and is owned and
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:904
operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or
is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.
(3) Preexisting support structures and wireless communications
facilities. Except with regard to additions or substantial
modifications, preexisting support structures and preexisting
wireless communications facilities consisting of those in existence
prior to the effective date of this section, shall not be required to
meet the requirements of this section, other than the requirements
of Subsection E(6), (7), (8), (12), (13), (14), and (15) below.
D. Use regulations. The use regulations for wireless communications
facilities within Towamencin Township shall be as follows:
(1) 242When the antenna array is attached to an existing attachment
structure, support structure, public utility transmission tower,
smokestack, water tower, building or tall structure in the LI
Limited Industrial District, an antenna array with an accompanying
equipment facility is permitted by right.
(2) When the antenna array is attached to an existing attachment
structure, support structure, public utility transmission tower,
smokestack, water tower, building or tall structure in any zoning
district other than the LI Limited Industrial District, an antenna
array with an accompanying equipment facility is permitted by
conditional use.
(3) The erection of a support structure with accompanying antenna
array(s) and equipment facility(ies) is permitted by conditional use
in the following zoning districts:
(a) LI Limited Industrial.
(4) Erection and operation of a support structure with accompanying
antenna array(s) and equipment facility(ies) shall be permitted by
conditional use:
(a) On any municipality owned property, regardless of the zoning
district in which it is located, if prior written approval for said
use shall first be obtained from the governing body of the
Township; and
(b) On any existing high tension public utility power line support
structure, regardless of the zoning district in which it is
located, if prior written approval for said use shall first be
obtained from the property owner and the public utility which
owns the support structure.
242. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(1), regarding permission by right in all zoning
districts, was repealed 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-12. This ordinance also provided for the
redesignation of former Subsection D(2) through (5) as Subsection D(1) through (4),
respectively.
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:905
E. General provisions applicable to all districts. [Amended 8-26-2016 by
Ord. No. 15-12]
(1) Principal or accessory use. Wireless communications facilities and
support structures may be considered either principal or accessory
uses depending upon the existence of other uses on a property. A
different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall
not preclude the installation of a wireless communications facility
or support structure on such lot consistent with the requirements
of this article.
(2) Land development approval. Wireless communications facilities
and support structures shall receive land development approval or
a waiver of same prior to issuance of a building permit.
(3) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
wireless communications facility or support structure complies
with district development regulations, including but not limited to
setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such
dimensional requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall
control, even though the wireless communications facility or
support structure may be located on a leased parcel within such
lot.
(4) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for a wireless
communications facility and/or support structure shall provide to
the Zoning Officer an inventory of its existing support structures,
wireless communications facilities and sites, and applications
pending for its support structures, wireless communications
facilities and sites that are either within the jurisdiction of the
Township or within five miles of the border thereof, including
specific information about the location, height, ownership, and
design of each support structure. The Zoning Officer may share
such information with other applicants applying for approval or
permits under this section or other organizations seeking to locate
wireless communications facilities within the jurisdiction of the
Township; provided, however, that the Zoning Officer is not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting
that such sites are available or suitable for such use.
(5) Appearance criteria. Wireless communications facilities and
support structures shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Support structures shall either maintain a galvanized steel
finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be
painted with a rust-preventive paint in a neutral color or colors
(preapproved by the Township Zoning Officer) so as to reduce
visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At the site of a support structure, the design of the buildings
and related structures shall, to the extent reasonably feasible,
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:906
use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping
that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
(c) At the site of an attached wireless communications facility, the
antenna array, micro facility, and supporting electrical and
mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is
identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
attachment structure so as to make the antenna array, micro
facility and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as
possible.
(6) Lighting. WCF and support structures shall not be artificially
lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable
governmental authority and approved by the Township Zoning
Officer. If lighting is required, and more than one type of lighting is
permitted by the FAA or other applicable governmental authority,
the lighting alternative and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding view.
(7) State and federal requirements. All support structures must meet
or exceed current standards or regulations of the FAA, the FCC,
and any other agency of the state or federal government with the
authority to regulate support structures, antenna arrays and micro
facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the support structures, antenna arrays and micro
facilities governed by this section shall bring such support
structures, antenna arrays and micro facilities into compliance with
such revised standards and regulations within six months of the
effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or
federal agency. Failure to bring support structures, antenna arrays
and micro facilities into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations shall constitute a violation of this section and shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the support structure,
antenna array or micro facility at the owner's expense.
(8) Building codes: safety standard. To ensure structural integrity of
support structures, the owner of a support structure shall ensure
that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in any
applicable federal, state or local building codes and the applicable
standards for support structures that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If,
upon inspection, the Township Zoning Officer concludes that a
support structure fails to comply with such codes and standards
and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon written
notice being provided to the owner of the support structure, the
owner shall have 30 days to bring such support structure into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such support
structure into compliance within said 30 days shall constitute
grounds for requiring the removal of the support structure and
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:907
associated wireless communications facility at the owner's
expense.
(9) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, support structure
setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied
to facilities located in the Township irrespective of municipal and
county jurisdictional boundaries.
(10) Nonessential services. Support structures and wireless
communications facilities shall be regulated and permitted
pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or permitted as
essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
(11) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of support structures,
attachment structures and wireless communications facilities shall
certify that all franchises (if any) required by law for the
construction and/or operation of a wireless communications facility
in the Township have been obtained and shall file a copy of all
required franchises with the Zoning Officer.
(12) Signs. No signs shall be allowed on a support structure, antenna
array or micro facility.
(13) Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with wireless communications facilities shall
comply with all applicable requirements of this code and this
section.
(14) Multiple wireless communications facilities on single site. The
Township encourages the users of support structures and wireless
communications facilities to submit a single application for
approval of multiple antenna array sites and micro facility sites on
a single support structure. Applications for approval of multiple
sites on a single support structure shall be given priority in the
review process.
(15)FCC and FAA approval. All applicants shall submit proof of their
FCC license for the area containing the proposed wireless
communications facility and shall submit approval from the FAA for
any wireless communications facility.
(16) Parking. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each
antenna array, equipment building or support structure, with a
minimum of two spaces being provided for any wireless
communications facility.
(17) Anti-climbing devices. All attachment structures or support
structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by
the Township Zoning Officer.
(18) Access. Access shall be provided to a wireless communications
facility (including any portion thereof) by means of a public street
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:908
or easement to a public street. The easement shall be a minimum
of 20 feet in width and shall be improved to a width of at least 10
feet with a paved driveway for its entire length.
(19) Fencing. A fence shall be required around a wireless
communications facility with support structure and other
equipment unless the wireless communications facility is mounted
on an attachment structure. The fence shall be a maximum of eight
feet in height, shall enclose all wireless communications facility
improvements, and shall conform to any other applicable
provisions of the Towamencin Township Code related to the
erection of fences. The fence shall be landscaped to screen it, any
equipment building, and the base of any support structure from
view.
(20) Landscaping plan. The applicant shall submit a planting plan with
its application, preserving existing vegetation on and around the
site to the greatest extent possible and screening the base of the
tower, guy wire anchor locations, any cabinets or associated
buildings (or equipment facilities) and any fencing.
(21) Co-location. In order to reasonably limit the number of wireless
communications facilities with support structures in the community
in the future, each proposed support structure shall be required,
subject to consideration of overall height, design, cost sharing and
fair market rental, to accommodate other users, including but not
limited to other wireless communications service providers, police,
fire and ambulance companies.
(22) Standard of care. The WCF applicant shall present documentation
that the WCF shall be designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all
current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes
including, but not limited to, the most recent editions of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National
Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the
accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices of the
National Association of Tower Erectors. Any WCF shall at all times
be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by
qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the
same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in
the Township.
(23)Wind. WCF structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of
wind according to the standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of
the Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSFEINTIA-222-E Code, as amended). A
copy of the structural analysis, signed and sealed by a registered
engineer in the State of Pennsylvania, shall be submitted to the
Township as a portion of the original application.
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:909
(24) Public safety communications. No WCF shall interfere with public
safety communications or the reception of broadband, television,
radio or other communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
(25) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) Any WCF shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily
basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency
repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents.
(c) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the
best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(26)Radio frequency emissions. No WCF may, by itself or in conjunction
with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of
the standards and regulations of the FCC including, but not limited
to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled
"Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure
to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(27) Aviation safety. WCFs shall comply with all federal and state laws
and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(28) Removal. In the event that use of a WCF is planned to be
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use
shall be discontinued. Unused, unsafe or abandoned WCFs or
portions of WCFs shall be removed as follows:
(a) All unused, unsafe or abandoned WCFs and accessory facilities
shall be removed within six months for tower-based WCFs and
three months for non-tower WCFs of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by
the Township Zoning Officer.
(b) If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within six
months for tower-based WCFs and three months for non-tower
WCFs of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township Zoning Officer, the
Township Zoning Officer may issue a violations notice and/or
proceed with enforcement remedies as outlined in § 153-621N.
(c) Any unused portions of WCFs, including antennas, shall be
removed within six months for tower-based WCFs and three
months for non-tower WCFs of the time of cessation of
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:910
operations. The Township Zoning Officer must approve all
replacements of portions of a WCF previously removed.
F. General requirements for all tower-based wireless communications
facilities. The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based
Wireless Communications Facilities: [Amended 8-26-2016 by Ord.
No. 15-12]
(1) Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage exists with
respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area and that the
type of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive means by which
to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The existence or non-existence
of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a factor in the Township's
decision on an application for approval of tower-based WCFs.
(2) Co-location. An application for a new tower-based WCF shall not be
approved unless the Township finds that the wireless
communications equipment planned for the proposed tower-based
WCF cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
structure or building. Any application for approval of a tower-based
WCF shall include a comprehensive inventory of all existing towers
and other suitable structures within a two-mile radius from the
point of the proposed tower, unless the applicant can show to the
satisfaction of the Township that a different distance is more
reasonable, and shall demonstrate conclusively why an existing
tower or other suitable structure cannot be utilized.
(3) Design regulations:
(a) The WCF shall employ the most current camouflaging methods
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the camouflaging methods chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Zoning Officer.
(b) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennae for future
users.
(4) Additional antennae. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to co-locate
antennae on tower-based WCFs where technically and
economically feasible. The owner of a tower-based WCF shall not
install any additional antennae without obtaining the prior written
approval of the Township Zoning Officer.
(5) Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of a WCF shall, at
its own cost and expense, obtain a bond from a surety licensed to
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:911
do business in Pennsylvania and maintain said bond, or other form
of security acceptable to the Township Solicitor, in an amount
of $100,000 to assure the faithful performance of the terms and
conditions of this section. The bond shall provide that the Township
may recover from the principal and surety any and all
compensatory damages incurred by the Township for violations of
this section, after reasonable notice and opportunity to cure. The
owner shall file a copy of the bond with the Township.
(6) Historic buildings or districts. No WCF may be located on a
building, structure, or site that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places unless the WCF can be
completely hidden within the structure.
(7) Noise. WCFs shall be operated and maintained so as not to produce
noise in excess of applicable noise standards under state law and
the Township Code, except in emergency situations requiring the
use of a backup generator, where such noise standards may be
exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(8) Identification. All WCFs shall post a notice in a readily visible
location identifying the name and phone number of a party to
contact in the event of an emergency, subject to approval by the
Township Zoning Officer.
(9) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of this section. The applicant and/or
owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Township for all costs of the
Township's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
(10) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a WCF, as
well as related inspection, monitoring and related costs.
G. Tower-based facilities outside the rights-of-way. The following
regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless communications
facilities located outside the rights-of-way: [Amended 8-26-2016 by
Ord. No. 15-12]
(1) Development regulations:
(a) Height. Any tower-based WCF outside of the rights-of-way
shall be designed at the minimum functional height and shall
not exceed a maximum total height of 120 feet, which height
shall include all subsequent additions or alterations. All towerbased
WCF applicants must submit documentation to the
Township justifying the total height of the structure.
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:912
(b) Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF is permitted as a sole use
on a lot subject to the minimum lot area and yards complying
with the requirements for the applicable zoning district.
(c) Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use or on a vacant
parcel in combination with another industrial, commercial,
institutional or municipal use, subject to the following
conditions:
[1] The existing use on the property may be any permitted use
in the applicable district, and need not be affiliated with
the communications facility.
[2] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable district and shall be the
area needed to accommodate the tower-based WCF and
guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and
buffer planting.
[3] Minimum setbacks. The tower-based WCF and
accompanying equipment building shall not be located in
the minimum front, rear, or side yard setbacks for the
applicable zoning district. Further, no tower-based WCF
shall be located within 200 feet of any occupied building.
[4] Vehicular access to the tower-based WCF shall not
interfere with parking or circulation on the site.
(d) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section
and any other provisions found within the Township Code or
state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents shall have
the authority to enter the property upon which a WCF is
located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to
ensure such compliance.
(2) Design regulations:
(a) Where the proposed site abuts a residential zoning district,
tower-based WCFs shall be permitted only where they are
disguised by attaching them to an existing tall structure where
the proposed tower-based WCF does not increase the height of
the existing structure or by disguising the tower-based WCF so
it resembles a tree, a silo, or a church steeple so that it will fit
in with the residential character of the community.
(b) Any height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall
require prior approval of the Township.
(3) Surrounding environs:
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:913
(a) The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the WCF structure
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(b) The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the Township
complying with the standards of Appendix 1: Geotechnical
Investigations, ANSIIEIA 222-E, as amended, to document and
verify the design specifications of the foundation of the towerbased
WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
(4) Fence/screen:
(a) Fencing and landscape screening shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements in § 153-621E.
(b) The WCF applicant shall submit a landscape plan for review
and approval by the Township Planning Commission for all
proposed screening.
(5) Accessory equipment:
(a) Ground-mounted equipment associated with, or connected to,
a tower-based WCF shall be underground. In the event that an
applicant can demonstrate that the equipment cannot be
located underground to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer, then the ground-mounted equipment shall be
screened from public view using camouflaging methods, as
described above.
(b) All utility buildings and accessory structures shall be
architecturally designed to blend into the environment in
which they are situated and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(6) Access road/lease area. An access road, turnaround space and
parking shall be provided to ensure adequate emergency and
service access to tower-based WCFs. Maximum use of existing
roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent
practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground
disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall
closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual
disturbance and minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the WCF
owner shall present documentation to the Township that the
property owner has granted an easement and/or signed a lease
agreement for the proposed facility.
(7) Site plan required. In order to determine whether the requirements
of the conditional use and this section are met, the applicant shall
present a site plan showing, at a minimum, the following items:
(a) Locations of all existing uses and proposed WCFs.
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:914
(b) Elevations and drawings of any existing uses and proposed
tower-based WCFs, showing proposed width, depth, height,
architectural style and structural data for any towers, antenna,
etc., proposed.
(c) Site boundary, lease area boundary, zoning data, setbacks,
yards, and adjacent uses.
(d) Vehicular access, fencing, landscaping, utility and/or access
easements.
H. Tower-based facilities in the rights-of-way. The following regulations
shall apply to tower-based Wireless Communications Facilities located
in the rights-of-way: [Amended 8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
(1) Prohibited in rights-of-way of neighborhood collectors and
residential local access streets and in residential zoning districts.
No tower-based WCF shall be located within the rights-of-way or
future rights-of-way of any neighborhood collector or residential
local access street as designated by the Township; nor will any
tower-based WCF be located within a residential zone or within 500
feet of a lot in residential use or a residential boundary.
(2) Height. Any tower-based WCF in rights-of-way shall be designed at
the minimum functional height and shall not exceed a maximum
total height of 35 feet, which height shall include all subsequent
additions or alterations. All tower-based WCF applicants must
submit documentation to the Township justifying the total height of
the structure.
(3) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW based on public
safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(4) Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and accessory equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by
the Township. In addition:
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
(b) Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features, to
the satisfaction of the Township.
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:915
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(d) Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10
business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
(e) Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township.
(5) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of tower-based WCF in the ROW
shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any WCF when the
Township, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public
Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Township.
(6) Compensation for ROW use. Every tower-based WCF in the ROW is
subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
Township's actual ROW management costs including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all
reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the Township. The owner of each towerbased
WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate
the Township for the Township's costs incurred in connection with
the activities described above. The annual ROW management fee
for tower-based WCFs shall be determined by the Township and
authorized by resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors and
shall be based on the Township's actual ROW management costs as
applied to such tower-based WCFs.
I. General requirements for all non-tower wireless communications
facilities. [Amended 8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:916
(1) Non-tower WCFs are subject to regulations. Non-tower WCFs are
subject to the restrictions and conditions prescribed in this section
and subject to the prior written approval of the Township.
(2) If the application for a non-tower wireless communication facility
(WCF) is a collocation, modification, or a replacement AND meets
all of the criteria listed below in Subsection I(2)(a) through (e), then
the requirements contained in Subsection I(3), herein, will be
applicable. Should the application not be considered a collocation,
modification, or replacement or if all the following criteria are not
met, then the applicant shall be subject to the requirements of
Subsection I(4) contained herein.
(a) The proposed collocation, modification, or replacement of a
non-tower WCF does not further increase the height of a
wireless support structure which had already been extended
by more than 10% of it originally approved height or by the
height of one additional antenna array.
(b) The proposed collocation, modification, or replacement does
not increase the dimensions of the equipment compound
previously approved by the Township.
(c) The proposed collocation, modification, or replacement
complies with the applicable conditions of approval applied to
the initial tower-based WCF, equipment compound, and
wireless support structure.
(d) The proposed collocation, modification, or replacement does
not exceed the applicable wind loading and structural loading
requirements for the wireless support structure.
(3) The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower wireless
communications facilities that are considered a collocation,
modification, or replacement and meet all of the criteria outlined in
Subsection I(2) above:
(a) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval on a non-tower WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
(b) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of that an
application for a WCF is filed with the Township, the Township
shall notify the applicant in writing of any information that may
be required to complete such application. Within 90 calendar
days of receipt of an application, the Township shall make its
final decision on whether to approve the application and shall
advise the applicant in writing of such decision. If additional
information was requested by the Township to complete an
application, the time required by the applicant to provide the
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:917
information shall not be counted toward the Township's ninetyday
review period.
(4) The following regulation shall apply to all non-tower wireless
communications facilities that are not considered collocations,
modifications, or replacements or do not meet all the requirements
of the criteria listed in Subsection I(2):
(a) Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of each
individual non-tower WCF shall, at its own cost and expense,
obtain a bond from a surety licensed to do business in
Pennsylvania and maintain said bond, or other form of security
acceptable to the Township Solicitor, in an amount of $5,000
for each individual non-tower WCF, to assure the faithful
performance of the terms and conditions of this section. The
bond shall provide that the Township may recover from the
principal and surety any and all compensatory damages
incurred by the Township for violations of this section, after
reasonable notice and opportunity to cure. The owner shall file
a copy of the bond with the Township.
(b) Historic buildings or districts. No WCF may be located on a
building, structure, or site that is listed on either the National
or Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places unless the WCF can
be completely hidden within the structure.
(c) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and,
once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of this section. The
applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the
Township for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection
with these activities.
(d) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring
and related costs.
(e) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of that an
application for a WCF is filed with the Township, the Township
shall notify the applicant in writing of any information that may
be required to complete such application. Within 90 calendar
days of receipt of an application, the Township shall make its
final decision on whether to approve the application and shall
advise the applicant in writing of such decision. If additional
information was requested by the Township to complete an
application, the time required by the applicant to provide the
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:918
information shall not be counted toward the Township's ninetyday
review period.
J. Non-tower wireless facilities outside the rights-of-way. The following
additional regulations shall apply to non-tower Wireless
communications facilities located outside the rights-of-way that do not
meet the criteria in § 153-621I(2): [Amended 8-26-2016 by Ord. No.
15-12]
(1) Development regulations. Non-tower WCFs shall be co-located on
existing structures, such as existing buildings or previously
approved wireless support structures, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) Such non-tower WCF does not exceed a maximum height of
120 feet, inclusive of its support structure.
(b) If the non-tower WCF applicant proposes to locate the
communications equipment in a separate building, the building
shall comply with the minimum requirements for the
applicable zoning district.
(c) A six-foot-high security fence shall surround any separate
communications equipment building. Vehicular access to the
communications equipment building shall not interfere with
the parking or vehicular circulations on the site for the
principal use.
(2) Design regulations.
(a) Non-tower WCFs shall employ camouflaging methods and be
treated to match the supporting structure in order to minimize
aesthetic impact. The application of the camouflaging methods
chosen by the non-tower WCF applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Zoning Officer.
(b) Non-tower WCFs which are mounted to a building or similar
structure may not exceed a height of 15 feet above the roof or
parapet, whichever is higher, unless the non-tower WCF
applicant obtains a conditional use permit.
(c) All non-tower WCF applicants must submit documentation to
the Township justifying the total height of the non-tower
structure. Such documentation shall be analyzed in the context
of such justification on an individual basis.
(d) Antennae, and their respective accompanying support
structures, shall be no greater in diameter than any crosssectional
dimension than is reasonably necessary for their
proper functioning.
(3) Removal, replacement, modification.
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:919
(a) The removal and replacement of non-tower WCFs and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing
the non-tower WCF is permitted, so long as such repair or
upgrade does not increase the overall size of the non-tower
WCF or the number of antennae.
(b) Any substantial modification to a wireless telecommunication
facility shall require a prior amendment to the original permit
or authorization.
(4) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any WCF to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this section and any other
provisions found within the Township Code or state or federal law.
The Township and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the
property upon which a WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
K. Non-tower wireless facilities in the rights-of-way. The following
additional regulations shall apply to all non-tower wireless
communications facilities located in the rights-of-way that do not meet
the criteria in § 153-621I(2): [Amended 8-26-2016 by Ord. No.
15-12]
(1) Co-location. Non-tower WCFs in the ROW shall be co-located on
existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles.
(2) Design requirements:
(a) Non-tower WCF installations located above the surface grade
in the public ROW, including, but not limited to, those on
streetlights and joint utility poles, shall be compatible in scale
and proportion to the structures upon which they are mounted.
Non-tower WCFs in the ROW may not exceed a height of six
feet above the structure upon which they are mounted unless
the applicant receives a conditional use permit. All equipment
shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive equipment
feasible.
(b) Antennae and all support equipment shall be treated to match
the supporting structure. Non-tower WCFs and accompanying
equipment shall be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually
compatible with the support structure upon which they are
mounted.
(3) Equipment location. Non-tower WCFs and accessory equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by
the Township. In addition:
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:920
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
(b) Ground-mounted equipment shall be located underground. In
the event an applicant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of
the Township Engineer, that ground-mounted equipment
cannot be placed underground, then all such equipment shall
be screened to the fullest extent possible, through the use of
landscaping or decorative features, to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(d) Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10
business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
(e) Any underground vaults related to non-tower WCFs shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township.
(4) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all non-tower WCFs in the ROW based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(5) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
emergency, an owner of a non-tower WCF in the ROW shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any non-tower WCF when the Township,
consistent with its police powers and applicable Public Utility
Commission regulations, shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Township.
(6) Compensation for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as described
above, every non-tower WCF in the ROW is subject to the
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:921
Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation
to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation
for ROW use shall be directly related to the Township's actual
ROW management costs including, but not limited to, the costs of
the administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting,
permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities by
the Township. The owner of each non-tower WCF shall pay an
annual fee to the Township to compensate the Township for its
costs incurred in connection with the activities described above.
The annual ROW management fee for non-tower WCFs shall be
determined by the Township and authorized by resolution of
Township Board of Supervisors and shall be based on the
Township's actual ROW management costs as applied to such nontower
WCF.
L. Equipment facility. [Added 8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12243]
(1) Antenna arrays and micro facilities mounted on attachment
structures such as buildings. The equipment facility used in
association with a wireless communications facility proposed to be
located on a building shall comply with the following:
(a) The equipment facility shall not contain more than 64 square
feet of gross floor area or, if proposed to be located on the roof
of the building, shall not be more than four feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures which are less than 65
feet in height, the related equipment facility, if over 64 square
feet of gross floor area or four feet in height, shall be located in
the building.
(b) If the equipment facility is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment facility and other structures shall not
occupy more than 15% of the roof area.
(c) An equipment facility may be located on the ground only if it is
in compliance with regulations for accessory structures.
(d) An equipment facility shall comply with all applicable building
codes.
(2) Antenna arrays and micro facilities mounted on attachment
structures such as telephone poles, utility poles, light poles and
similar structures. The equipment facility used in association with
an attachment structure such as a telephone pole, utility pole, light
pole, high tension electrical tower and similar structures shall be
located in accordance with the following:
(a) In residential districts, an equipment facility:
243. Editor's Note: This section also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections L, M,
and N as Subsections P, Q, and R, respectively.
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:922
[1] May be located in a side yard, provided the equipment
facility is no greater than four feet in height and 64 square
feet of gross floor area and the equipment facility is
located a minimum of 10 feet from all lot lines. The
equipment facility shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge or trees with a planted height of at least 48 inches;
[2] May be located in the rear yard, provided the equipment
facility is no greater than six feet in height or 100 square
feet in gross floor area. The equipment facility shall be
screened by an evergreen hedge or tree with an ultimate
height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 48
inches;
[3] Is prohibited in the front yard unless such equipment
facility is small enough to be attached to the same
telephone pole, utility pole, light pole or similar structure
on which the antenna array or micro facility has been
attached. Such equipment facility shall have a height no
greater than four feet and a width no greater than two feet
and shall be constructed and painted so as to be as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(b) In nonresidential districts, the equipment facility associated
with a permitted attachment structure shall be no greater than
eight feet in height or 144 square feet in gross floor area. The
equipment facility shall be screened by an evergreen hedge or
evergreen trees with an ultimate height of no less than eight
feet and a planted height of at least 60 inches. In all cases, the
equipment facility shall be screened from the view of all
residential properties which abut or are located directly across
the street from the equipment facility by a solid fence or an
evergreen hedge with an installed or a planted height of at
least the height of the equipment facility.
(c) In all zoning districts, all cables, wires or lines from the
support structure or attachment to the equipment facility shall
be located underground unless the equipment facility is
mounted on the support or attachment structure consistent
with the regulations of this chapter.
(3) Wireless communications facilities with support structures. The
equipment facility for a wireless communications facility with
support structure shall not contain more than 250 square feet of
gross floor area or be more than eight feet in height, shall be
located in accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the
zoning district in which located, and shall be screened in
accordance with the standards of § 153-621E and any other
applicable landscaping or buffering provisions of this chapter.
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:923
(4) Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of
Subsection L(2)(a) through (c) above may be modified by the
Township during the conditional use process as may be proven
reasonably necessary to encourage collocation.
M. Conditional use; standards and criteria. The requirements of the
subsections below are the standards and criteria which shall be
satisfied prior to approval of any permitted or conditional use. [Added
8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Township or its consultants that the wireless communications
facility with support structure is the minimum height required to
function within the applicant's communications grid system. No
such facility that is taller than such functional minimum height
shall be entitled to receive a building permit except to facilitate colocation.
(2) If an antenna array or micro facility, or its appurtenances, extends
above the primary roof of any attachment structure, it must be set
back two feet from the edge of the primary roof for each one foot in
height (to a maximum height of 10 feet) above the primary roof
from which the antenna array or micro facility extends unless the
antenna array or micro facility is appropriately screened from view
through the use of panels, walls, or other screening techniques
approved by the Township. The setback requirements of this
subsection shall not apply to an antenna array or micro facility
which is mounted on the exterior of an attachment structure below
the primary roof, and which does not protrude more than 18 inches
from the side of such attachment structure.
(3) Setbacks from base of support structure. If a new support structure
is constructed (as opposed to mounting or co-locating a wireless
communications facility on an existing support structure), the
minimum distance between the base of the support structure or
any guy-wire anchors and any property line or right-of-way line
shall be the largest of the following:
(a) No wireless communications facilities with support structure
shall be permitted in residential zoning districts unless
explicitly permitted by this article.
(b) All wireless communications facilities with support structure
shall be set back from the lot line a minimum distance of 50
feet plus one foot for each additional foot in height of the
support structure above 75 feet.
(c) Setback requirements may be modified by the adoption of
condition(s) if the Township finds that placement of a wireless
communications facility with support structure in a particular
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:924
location will reduce its visual impact (for example, if location
adjacent to trees may provide a partial visual screen).
(4) Support structure safety. The applicant shall demonstrate that the
proposed wireless communications facility and support structure
are safe and the surrounding areas will not be negatively affected
by support structure failure, falling ice, or other hazards or radio
frequency interference. All support structures shall be fitted with
or protected by anticlimbing devices, as approved by the
manufacturers. The applicant shall submit certification from a
Pennsylvania-registered professional engineer that a proposed
communications tower will be designed and constructed in
accordance with the current structural standards for the type of
wireless communications facility proposed, published by the
Electrical Industrial Association/Telecommunications Industry
Association, and applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania
Building Code, the Building Code adopted by the Township, and
other applicable federal, state and municipal regulations,
resolutions and ordinances.
(5) Attached wireless communications facilities shall be designed so as
to blend into the existing attachment structure to the extent
feasible, including placement in a location which is consistent with
proper functioning of the wireless communications facility and use
of compatible or neutral colors.
(6) Attached wireless communications facilities which have aesthetic
impacts that are not able to be reasonably mitigated by placement
and color solutions may be required to be screened in a reasonable
and achievable manner.
(7) Wireless communications facilities with support structure shall be
designed so as to blend in with the existing surroundings to the
extent feasible, including the use of compatible colors and
disguised structures such as man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
support structures.
(8) Equipment facilities shall, to the extent practical, use materials,
colors and textures that blend in with the natural setting and built
environment.
(9) The applicant shall provide evidence satisfactory to Township
Zoning Officer that the camouflaging of the wireless
communications facility effectively minimizes its visual impact and
blends with its surroundings prior to the issuance of a building
permit.
(10) Effort to locate on existing structures. Before making application
for any wireless communications facility to be located on a new
support structure, the applicant shall demonstrate that a good faith
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:925
effort was made to mount an antenna array or micro facility,
whichever is applicable, on an existing structure. The applicant
shall submit proof that it contacted the owners of tall structures
within a one-mile radius of the site proposed, asked for permission
to install the facility on those structures, offered market
compensation to such owners, and was denied. These structures
would include smokestacks, water towers, tall buildings, existing
or proposed support structures of other cellular communications
companies, high tension power line towers, other communications
towers (fire, police, etc.), and other tall structures.
(11) Plan. The applicant shall provide a plan for all wireless
communications facilities showing the antenna array, micro facility
(if applicable), support structure, building (or equipment facility),
fencing, buffering, access, and such other information as the
Township may require to illustrate the relationship between the
proposed facility and adjacent structures and property lines.
(12) Other standards. Comply with all other standards of approval for
all wireless communications facilities as set forth in this section.
(13) Abandoned facilities. The applicant shall agree to remove
abandoned wireless communications facility improvements as set
forth in § 153-621E(28).
(14) Conditions for conditional uses. When granting a conditional use,
the Township may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this section, as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of this section. Such
conditions and safeguards may include, but need not be limited to,
conditions on height, camouflaging method, particular location on
a lot, fencing and other measures that implement the purposes of
this section.
N. Nonconforming uses. [Added 8-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-12]
(1) No expansion of nonconforming use. Antenna arrays, micro
facilities and any other wireless communications facilities which
are installed or attached to existing structures in accordance with
the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the
expansion of a nonconforming use or structure but shall rather
comply with all the requirements for a separate and distinct use
under the provisions of the Township's zoning, subdivision and land
development ordinances.
(2) Preexisting support structures. Preexisting, nonconforming
support structures shall be allowed to continue their usage as they
presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement with
a new support structure of like construction and height) shall be
permitted on such preexisting support structures. New
construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:926
support structure shall comply with the requirements of this
section.
(3) Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming support
structures, antenna arrays or micro facilities. Notwithstanding
§ 163-621E(28), bona fide nonconforming support structures,
antenna arrays or micro facilities that are damaged or destroyed
may be rebuilt without having to first obtain a new, conditional use
approval. The type, height, and specific location of the rebuilt
support structure, antenna array and micro facility on site shall be
of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval.
Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with then
applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 120 days
from the date the facility is damaged or, if no permit is obtained or
if said permit expires, the support structure, antenna array or
micro facility shall be deemed abandoned as specified in
§ 163-621E(28).
O. Modification of and/or variances from the requirements of this section.
(1) Variances from the design, dimensional and appearance criteria of
this section may be granted by Township during the conditional use
process upon satisfactory demonstration of the same type of severe
and unnecessary hardship as would be required for an applicant
seeing a variance from the Township Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) A request for a variance to permit the location of any wireless
communications facility anywhere other than as permitted by this
section may be granted only by the Township Zoning Hearing
Board.
P. Conflicts. Where the provisions of this section are in conflict with the
regulations of any underlying zoning district, the provisions of this
section shall control.
Q. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person who shall erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair,
convert, attach or maintain any wireless communications facility in
violation of the terms of this section, or who, being the owner or
agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall suffer or
permit another to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair,
convert, attach or maintain any such facility, shall be deemed to
have violated the provisions hereof and shall be subject to a fine of
up to $1,000 per day during the period such violation shall exist,
collected as like fines or penalties are collected by law. Each day
that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(2) If any wireless communications facility is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, attached or
maintained in violation of this section or any regulations made
pursuant hereto, an authorized official of the Township, in addition
§ 153-621 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-621
1:927
to other remedies, may institute in the name of the Township
any appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal process
or otherwise, to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance,
attachment or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to
prevent the use of such facility and/or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such facility.
§ 153-621 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-621
1:928
ARTICLE VII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 153-700. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided and satisfactorily
maintained in accordance with the following provisions of this article and
the parking and driveway provisions of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of Towamencin Township,244 as last amended.
§ 153-701. Exemptions.
Structures and uses in existence at the date of adoption of this chapter
shall not be subject to the requirements of this article providing that the
kind and/or extent of use is not changed, altered, extended or enlarged and
provided further that any parking facility now serving such structures or
uses shall not in the future be reduced below its current extent or below
what is now required by this chapter.
§ 153-702. Expansion, alteration or change in use.
Whenever there is an alteration or change in use which increases the
parking requirements, the total additional parking required for the
alteration, change or extension shall be provided in accordance with this
chapter.
§ 153-703. Shared parking for commercial developments.
Two or more uses in any single business or commercial development may
provide for required parking in a common parking lot if the total of the
spaces provided is not less than the sum of the spaces required for each
use individually, provided that, however, the number of spaces required in
a common parking facility may be reduced below this total if it can be
adequately demonstrated to the Board of Supervisors that the hours or days
of peak parking needed for the uses are so different that a lower total
will provide adequately for all uses served by the facility. Area for spaces
which are required, but not built, under this provision shall be reserved in
accordance with § 153-704 below.
§ 153-704. Reserved areas.
The Board of Supervisors may approve, as a conditional use, the placing
of open space in "reserve" for use as future parking areas. Under such
conditional use, the applicant would be permitted to construct reduced
parking facilities in accordance with his demonstrated need provided that
space is reserved for the construction of the necessary parking facilities
needed to satisfy the full parking requirement of this chapter and that the
conditional use plan satisfies the provision of § 153-705 below.
244. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-700 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-705
1:929
§ 153-705. Conditional reduction of parking requirements.
In order to prevent the establishment of a greater number of parking spaces
than is actually required, the Board of Supervisors may permit a conditional
reduction of parking spaces if the following conditions are satisfied:
A. The applicant shall show by documented evidence that the full parking
required for the proposed use would be excessive and that a conditional
reduction in parking would have a clear and definite public benefit.
B. The design of the parking lot, as indicated on the conditional use plan,
shall designate sufficient space, and illustrate an appropriate layout
and circulation plan to meet the full parking requirement of the Zoning
Ordinance. In addition, the conditional use plan shall indicate which
parking areas will be constructed, and which areas will be reserved as
open space.
C. The conditional use plan shall provide for the establishment of no less
than 80% of the required number of parking spaces as specified in
Article V, Use Definitions and Regulations, herein for the use or uses
proposed. Provided, however, that for manufacturing facilities of at
least 100,000 square feet combined with a warehousing facility of at
least 100,000 square feet, the conditional use plan shall provide for the
establishment of no less than 50% of the parking requirement,
provided, further, that a minimum of 1.1 spaces per employee on the
largest shift and one space for each vehicle normally stored on the
premises is constructed and not reserved.
D. The balance of the parking area shall be reserved and shall not include
areas for required buffer yards, setbacks, or areas which would
otherwise be unsuitable for parking spaces due to the physical
characteristics of the land, or other requirements of this chapter or the
Towamencin Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,245 as last amended.
E. The parking area which is reserved shall be located and have
characteristics so as to provide amendable open space should it be
determined in the future that additional parking spaces are not
required. The developer shall provide a landscaping plan for the
reserve area with the conditional use plan submission.
F. The applicant shall prepare, to the satisfaction of the Township
Solicitor, a covenant to be attached to the property deed establishing
the reserved parking area as open space until such time as the Board of
Supervisors may require the construction of said reserved area as
parking in accordance with the conditional use plan.
G. The applicant shall submit, to the satisfaction of the Township Solicitor,
a letter of credit or performance bond from an acceptable financial
institution in the amount required to construct the reserved parking as
245. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-705 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-705
1:930
§ 153-706. Location of and access to parking areas.
Off-street parking areas, including access thereto, shall be so designed and
so located that:
§ 153-707. Off-street loading and unloading requirements.
may be required. The letter of credit or performance bond shall be
issued and renewed for an aggregate period of 10 years from the date
of the final certificate of occupancy, or until the reserved parking is
constructed, whichever occurs first.
H. In the event that the Board of Supervisors believes that the
construction of the reserved parking areas is necessary, or upon
completion of the ten-year period as specified in Subsection G, the
Township shall hold a public hearing after public notice at which time
the Township, the property owner(s) and their duly authorized
representatives, and any interested party may provide testimony upon
which the Board of Supervisors shall consider when rendering a
decision to continue or discontinue the conditional reduction in parking
as previously granted. The applicant shall bear all costs associated with
the public notice and hearing including all related technical,
administrative and legal fees required by the Township in the
administration of this section.
I. A note shall be placed on the record plan indicating that the owner, his
successor or assign shall be responsible, without cost to the Township,
for the construction of the reserved parking in accordance with the
conditional use plan upon finding and decision to that effect by the
Board of Supervisors as provided in Subsection H herein.
A. Vehicles from nonresidential uses shall not be permitted to back out
directly onto a public or private street.
B. For single-family detached dwellings and single-family semidetached
dwellings on a corner lot, the driveways shall be located as far away
from the street intersection as possible, and onto the lower
classification street.
C. Driveways for all multifamily and nonresidential uses shall be located
not less than 30 feet from a street intersection, measuring from the
near side of the driveway to the near curbline of such street.
A. Adequate off-street loading and unloading space, with proper access
from a street, highway or service driveway, shall be provided for all
nonresidential uses. Such space shall be sufficient in size and design to
accommodate the maximum demand generated by the use or uses of
the lot. All required off-street loading areas shall be in addition to, and
shall be separate and distinct from, the required parking spaces for said
use.
§ 153-705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-707
1:931
§ 153-708. Design requirements.
In addition to the requirements herein, all facilities required under this
article shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Towamencin Township,246
as last amended, unless such requirements have been formally waived by
the Board of Supervisors at the time of subdivision and/or land development
approval.
§ 153-709. Shopping cart storage.
Any establishment which furnishes carts or mobile baskets as an adjunct
to shopping shall provide definite areas within the required parking space
area for the storage of such carts. Areas for the storage of shopping carts
shall be in addition to the area required for off-street parking as established
by this article and Article V herein. Each designated storage area shall be
clearly designed and marked for said storage.
B. All areas for the loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other
vehicles and for servicing of establishments and/or shops by refuse
collection, fuel or other service vehicles, shall have adequate and
unobstructed access from a street or service driveway and shall be so
arranged that they may be used without blocking or otherwise
interfering with the use of automobile accessways, parking facilities, or
pedestrian ways or would require backing out onto a street.
C. All loading berths shall be located at the side or rear of the property and
shall be screened from view by fencing and/or landscaped buffers per
§ 153-710 herein.
A. For all nonresidential parking areas, the area not landscaped shall be
graded, surfaced with asphalt or other suitable material, and drained to
the satisfaction of the Township Engineer to the extent necessary to
prevent dust, erosion, or excessive water flow. All parking spaces shall
be marked so as to indicate their location.
B. All enclosed facilities shall conform to the standards set forth in the
Township Building Code.247
C. All automobile parking facilities shall provide parking spaces for the
handicapped or disabled in accordance with the Township's Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, as last amended.
D. Where a contradiction arises in the application of the above standards,
the most stringent requirements shall govern.
246. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
247. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes.
§ 153-707 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-710
1:932
§ 153-710. Buffer yard and landscaping requirements.
Every parking lot shall be subject to the buffer yard and landscaping
requirements of the Towamencin Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as last amended, unless such requirements have
been formally waived by the Board of Supervisors at the time of subdivision
and/or land development approval, and the following: No off-street parking
space shall be located within any required buffer yard as determined by
the Towamencin Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
as last amended.
§ 153-711. Nighttime illumination.
All lighting shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Towamencin
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as last amended,
unless such requirements have been formally waived by the Board of
Supervisors at the time of subdivision and/or land development approval.
§ 153-712. Uses not listed.
In the event that parking requirements are not listed in Article V for a
proposed use type, and the Zoning Officer is unable to align the proposed
use with a listed use, the applicant shall provide, to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Officer, documentation regarding the parking requirement for
the proposed use by utilizing the most recent edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Parking Generation Standards or other
acceptable standard for the proposed use.
§ 153-710 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-712
1:933

ARTICLE VIII
Signs
[Amended [Amended 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10; 12-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-07; 12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-08; 10-3-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-07; 10-3-2007 by Ord. No. 07-08; 10-3-2007 by Ord. No.
07-09; 4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-06; 12-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09;
4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-07; 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
§ 153-800. Purpose.
It is recognized that signs perform an important function in identifying
residences and businesses. It is hereby found and declared, however, that
control of signs is necessary to promote the health, safety and general
welfare by:
§ 153-801. Definitions.
Words and terms in this article shall have the meanings given in this article.
Unless expressly stated otherwise, any pertinent word or term not part of
this listing but vital to the interpretation of this article shall be construed to
have its legal definition or, in absence of a legal definition, its meaning as
commonly accepted by practitioners, including civil engineers, surveyors,
architects, landscape architects, and planners.
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign, including both on-premises signs and offpremises
signs, which has not identified or advertised a current business,
service, owner, product, or activity for a period of at least 180 days.
ADDRESS SIGN — A sign that designates the street number and/or street
name for identification purposes, as designated by the United States Postal
Service.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign that uses action, motion, flashing, or color
changes and requiring either electrical energy or an electronic
manufactured source of supply. This does not include wind-actuated
elements such as flags or banners.
A. Setting standards and providing uniform controls that permit
reasonable use of signs and preserve the character of the Township;
B. Prohibiting the erection of signs in such numbers, sizes, designs,
illumination, and locations as may create a hazard to pedestrians and
motorists;
C. Preserving property values;
D. Avoiding excessive conflicts from large or multiple signs, so that
permitted signs provide adequate identification and direction while
minimizing clutter, unsightliness, and confusion; and
E. Ensuring sign design that builds on the image and visual environment
the Township seeks to promote.
§ 153-800 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-801
1:935
AWNING — A cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering which projects
from a wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window and is either
permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a
position against the building.
AWNING SIGN — A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to, an
awning, as defined herein.
BALLOON SIGN — A lighter-than-air, gas-filled balloon, tethered to a fixed
location, which contains an advertisement message either on its surface or
attached to the balloon in any other manner.
BANNER SIGN — Any temporary sign intended to be hung either with
or without frames and possessing characters, letters, illustration, or
ornamentations applied to fabric or similar material and attached to a
pole or building. National, state, or municipal flags, or flags containing
only decorative illustrations, shall not be considered a banner sign for the
purposes of this article unless its use or purpose is that of advertising the
location of a business at which it is flown.
BEACON LIGHT — A signaling or guiding device, such as a lighthouse,
spotlight, or other light, used to attract attention to a specific business,
property, or any location.
BENCH SIGN — A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat
placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way.
BILLBOARD — See "off-premises sign."
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The maximum linear width of a building
measured in a single straight line parallel with the abutting public street or
parking lot.
BUSINESS SIGN — An on-premises sign which advertises or otherwise
directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry, or other
activity which is sold, offered, or conducted, other than incidentally, on the
premises upon which the sign is located or to which it is affixed.
CANOPY — A structure other than an awning made of fabric, metal, or other
material that is supported by columns or posts affixed to the ground and
may also be connected to a building.
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign that is designed so that characters,
letters, panels, or illustrations can be manually changed or rearranged
without altering the face or the surface of the sign. This shall also include
the changing of a copy on a billboard.
CHANNEL LETTER SIGN — Any sign consisting of fabricated or formed
three-dimensional letters, illuminated or nonilluminated, individually
applied to a wall.
CLEARANCE — Either the vertical distance above a walkway (or other
surface if specified) to the bottom edge of a sign or the horizontal distance
between two objects.
§ 153-801 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-801
1:936
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — Any temporary sign displaying the names of
principal contractors, architects, or lending institutions responsible for
construction on the site where the sign is placed. Where permitted,
construction signs shall be limited to the duration of construction.
DIGITAL DISPLAY — Any portion of a sign consisting of internally
illuminated components capable of changing the message or image
automatically or by remote control, including but not limited to LCD, LED,
or plasma screen.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — An on-premises or off-premises incidental sign
designed to guide or direct pedestrians or vehicular traffic. Where
permitted, such signs shall not include logos, insignia, or any other
commercial symbols.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign on which the names and locations of occupants
or the use of a building is given, including, but not limited to, office
buildings and church directories.
FLAG SIGN — Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic, canvas, or other
like material with distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols attached to a pole
or staff and anchored along only one edge or supported or anchored at
only two corners. Flag signs include flags printed with logos or text for a
commercial purpose, not including local, state, or national flags.
FLASHING SIGN — A sign whose artificial illumination is not kept constant
in intensity when in use and which exhibits changes in light, color, direction,
or animation. This definition does not include signs meeting the definition
of "message center signs" or "digital displays."
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of incident light (on a surface) stated in lumens per
square foot and measureable with an illuminance meter. One footcandle is
equal to one lumen per square foot.
FOOTLAMBERT — A unit of emitted light (from a surface) stated in lumens
per square foot and measurable with an illuminance meter. One footlambert
is equal to one lumen per square foot.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign resting on or supported by
means of poles, standards, or masonry structure on the ground independent
from any building or other structure. The following are subtypes of
freestanding signs:
GAS STATION CANOPY — A freestanding, open-air structure constructed
for the purposes of shielding service station islands from the elements.
GROUND SIGN — A freestanding sign permanently affixed to the
ground at its base, supported entirely by a base structure, and not
mounted on a pole or attached to any part of a building (also referred
to as "monument sign").
A.
POLE SIGN — A freestanding sign that is permanently supported in
a fixed location by a structure of one or more poles, posts, uprights,
or braces from the ground and not supported by a building or base
structure.
B.
§ 153-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-801
1:937
GAS STATION CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of, or attached to, the
vertical sides of the gas station canopy roof structure. For the purposes of
this article, gas station canopy signs shall be considered wall signs.
GOVERNMENTAL REGULATORY SIGN — Any sign for the control of traffic
or for identification purposes which is erected by or at the order of a
public officer, employee or agent thereof, in the discharge of official duties,
including, but not limited to, street signs, warning signs, railroad signs, and
signs of public service companies indicating danger or construction.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS — Signs or displays including lighting which are
a nonpermanent installation celebrating national, state, and local holidays,
religious or cultural holidays, or other holiday seasons (also known as
"seasonal decorations").
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign in which a source of light is used in order
to make the message readable. This shall include signs with both external
illumination and internal illumination.
ILLUMINATION — A source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly
from a source of light incorporated in or indirectly from an artificial source
(also "illuminated").
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign that displays general site information,
instructions, directives, or restrictions that are primarily oriented to
pedestrians and motor vehicle operators who have entered a property from
a public street. These signs shall not contain any commercial advertising.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION — Artificial light, located away from the
sign, which lights the sign, the source of which may or may not be
visible to persons viewing the sign from any street, sidewalk, or
adjacent property.
A.
FESTOON LIGHTING — A directly illuminated sign, as defined herein,
comprised of either:
A group of incandescent light bulbs hung or strung overhead or on
a building or structures.
(1)
Light bulbs not shaded or hooded or otherwise screened to prevent
direct rays of light from shining on adjacent properties or right-ofway.
(2)
B.
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION — A light source that is concealed or
contained with the sign and becomes visible in darkness through a
translucent surface. Message center signs, digital displays, and signs
incorporating neon lighting shall not be considered internal
illumination for the purposes of this article.
C.
HALO ILLUMINATION — A sign using a three-dimensional message,
logo, etc., which is lit in such a way as to produce a halo effect (also
known as "back-lit illumination").
D.
§ 153-801 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-801
1:938
INCIDENTAL WINDOW SIGN — Signs displayed in a window displaying
information such as the business hours of operation, credit institutions
accepted, commercial and civic affiliations, and similar information. These
signs shall be informational only and shall not contain a commercial
message.
INFLATABLE SIGN — A sign that is an air-inflated object, which may be of
various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the ground or structure
and equipped with a portable blower motor that provides a constant flow of
air into the device.
INTERACTIVE SIGN — An electronic or animated sign that reacts to the
behavior or electronic signals of motor vehicle drivers.
LEGIBILITY — The physical attributes of a sign that allow for an observer's
differentiation of its letters, words, numbers, or graphics.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a lighting installation which extends
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited.
LUMINANCE — An objective measurement of the brightness of
illumination, including illumination emitted by an electronic sign, measured
in candela per square foot (cd/ft2).
MANUAL CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — See "changeable copy sign."
MARQUEE — A permanent structure, other than a roof or canopy, attached
to, supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection
from the elements.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to a marquee for the purposes of
identifying a use or product. If attached to a theater, performing arts center,
cinema, or other similar use, it may also advertise films or productions.
MECHANICAL MOVEMENT SIGN — A sign having parts that physically
move rather than merely appear to move as might be found in a digital
display. The physical movement may be activated electronically or by
another means but shall not include wind-activated movement such as used
for banners or flags. Mechanical movement signs do not include digital
displays.
MEMORIAL SIGN — A memorial plaque or tablet, including grave markers
or other remembrances of persons or events, which is not used for a
commercial message.
MENU SIGN — A permanent sign for displaying the bill of fare available at
a restaurant or other use serving food or beverages.
MESSAGE CENTER SIGN — A type of illuminated changeable copy sign
that consists only of electronically changing alphanumeric text, including,
but not limited to, gas price display signs and athletic scoreboards.
MESSAGE SEQUENCING — The spreading of one message across more
than one sign structure.
MULTITENANT SIGN — A freestanding sign used to advertise businesses
that occupy a shopping center or complex with multiple tenants.
§ 153-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-801
1:939
MURAL — A large picture/image (including but not limited to painted art)
which is painted, constructed, or affixed directly onto a vertical building
wall, which may or may not contain text, logos, and/or symbols (also known
as "mural sign").
NAMEPLATE SIGN — A nonbusiness sign which announces only the name
and/or address of the occupants of a residence.
NIT — The unit measurement for luminance equal to one candela per square
meter.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign that was legally erected and maintained
at the effective date of this article, or amendment thereto, that does not
currently comply with sign regulations of the district in which it is located.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — An outdoor sign whose message directs attention
to a specific business, product, service, event, or activity, or other
commercial or noncommercial activity or contains a noncommercial
message about something that is not sold, produced, manufactured,
furnished, or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. See
§ 153-502C(21) for additional requirements (also known as a "third-party
sign," "billboard," or "outdoor advertising").
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGN — Official highway route number signs, street
name signs, directional signs and other traffic signs erected and maintained
on public highways and roads in the interest of public safety or for the
regulation of traffic.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — An outdoor sign whose message and design relate
to an individual business, profession, product, service, event, point of view,
or other commercial or noncommercial activity sold, offered or conducted
on the same property where the sign is located.
PENNANT — A triangular or irregular piece of fabric or other material,
commonly attached in strings or strands or supported on small poles
intended to flap in the wind.
PERMANENT SIGN — A sign attached to or affixed to a building, window,
or structure or to the ground in a manner than enables the sign to resist
environmental loads, such as wind, and that precludes ready removal or
movement of the sign and whose intended use appears to be indefinite.
POLE BANNER SIGN — A sign possessing characters, letters, illustration,
or ornamentations applied to fabric or similar material and attached to a
single pole at the top and bottom.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign designed to be transported or moved and not
permanently attached to the ground or other structure. The following are
subtypes of portable signs:
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A type of freestanding, portable,
temporary sign consisting of two faces connected and hinged at the top
and whose message is targeted to pedestrians (also known as an "AFrame
Sign").
A.
§ 153-801 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-801
1:940
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY SIGN — A sign indicating a street or drive which is not
publicly owned and maintained and used for access by the occupants of the
development and their guests.
PROJECTING SIGN — A building-mounted, double-sided sign with the two
faces generally perpendicular to the building wall, otherwise known as a
"blade sign."
PUBLIC SIGN — A sign erected or required by governmental agencies or
utilities, including traffic, utility, safety, railroad crossing, and identification
signs, for public access.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — Any sign which is used to offer for sale, lease, or rent
the property upon which the sign is placed.
REFLECTIVE SIGN — A sign containing any material or device which has
the effect of intensifying reflective light.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign which revolves in a circular motion, rather than
remaining stationary on it supporting structure.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon, against, or over the roof of a building
which is wholly or partly supported by said building.
SAFETY SIGN — A sign that provides information or warning regarding
potential hazards, proper use or materials.
SCOREBOARD — A sign contained within an athletic venue and intended
solely to provide information to the attendees of an athletic event.
SECURITY SIGN — An on-premises sign regulating the use of the premises,
such as "No Trespassing," "No Hunting," or "No Soliciting" (also known as
"warning sign").
SHIELDED — The description of a luminaire from which no direct glare
is visible at normal viewing angles, by virtue of its being properly aimed,
oriented, and located and properly fitted with such devices as shields, barn
doors, baffles, louvers, skirts, or visors.
SIGN — Any device, structure, fixture, painting, emblem, or visual that uses
words, graphics, colors, illumination, symbols, numbers, or letters for the
purpose of communicating a message. A sign includes the sign faces as well
as any sign supporting structure.
SIGN AREA — The dimensions of a sign surface used to display information,
messages, advertising, logos, or symbols. See § 153-805C of this Code for
standards for measuring sign area.
SIGN FACE — The part of the sign that is or can be used for the sign area.
The sign area could be smaller than the sign face.
VEHICULAR SIGN — Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a
manner that the carrying of such sign, or signs, no longer is incidental
to the vehicle's primary purpose, but becomes a primary purpose in
itself, shall be considered a freestanding sign and, as such, shall be
subject to the provisions regarding freestanding signs in the district in
which the vehicle is located.
B.
§ 153-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-801
1:941
SIGN GROUP — A group of two or more similar signs placed on the same
property. All sign groups, except for those containing only signs exempt
from a permit by § 153-804, require a permit.
SIGN HEIGHT — The distance from the highest portion of the sign to the
mean grade at the base of the sign.
SIGN LIGHTER — A directed and controlled light specifically intended to
illuminate a sign.
SIGN SUPPORTING STRUCTURE — Poles, posts, walls, frames, brackets,
or other supports holding a sign in place.
SNIPE SIGN — Sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way
to a utility pole, official traffic sign, traffic signal pole, tree, stake, fences,
public benches, streetlights, or any similar object located or situated on
public or private property without permission of the property owner (also
known as a "bandit sign").
STOREFRONT — The exterior facade of a building housing a commercial
use visible from a street, sidewalk, or other pedestrianway accessible to
the public and containing the primary entrance to the commercial
establishment.
STREAMERS — A display made of lightweight, flexible materials, consisting
of long, narrow, wavy strips hung individually or in a series, with or without
a logo or advertising message printed or painted on them and typically
designed to move in the wind.
STREET BANNER SIGN — Any off-premises temporary banner sign which
is stretched across and hung over a public right-of-way.
STREET FRONTAGE — The side or sides of a lot abutting a public street or
right-of-way.
STREET POLE BANNER — A banner sign suspended above a public
sidewalk and attached to a single street pole. These signs shall not contain
any commercial advertising.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A type of nonpermanent sign that is located on
private property that can be displayed for no more than 120 days and is
not intended to be permanent and which is intended to advertise, without
limitation, special events, sales, general elections, community or civic
projects, construction projects and real estate for sale or lease on a
temporary basis.
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN — A display containing numerals flashing
alternately to show the temperature and time.
TRAILER SIGN — Any sign which is erected upon a structure having
wheels, rollers, or similar devices facilitating movement and is capable of
being moved from one location to another.
TRI-VISION SIGN — An outdoor unit with a slatted face that allows three
different copy messages to revolve at intermittent intervals.
§ 153-801 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-801
1:942
UNDER-MARQUEE SIGN — A display, whether illuminated or
nonilluminated, attached to the underside of a marquee protruding over a
public or private sidewalk or right-of-way.
VENDING MACHINE SIGN — A sign displayed on a vending machine
indicating the name of the product being sold and/or the price.
WALL SIGN — A building-mounted sign which is either attached to,
displayed on, or painted on an exterior wall in a manner parallel with the
wall surface. A sign installed on a false or mansard roof is also considered a
wall sign (also known as "fascia sign," "parallel wall sign" or "band sign").
WINDOW SIGN or DOOR SIGN — A sign which is applied, painted or affixed
to a window, or placed inside a window or glass door, within three feet of the
glass, facing the outside of the building, and easily seen from the outside,
which advertises or otherwise directs attention to an activity conducted on
the same lot or premises. Customary displays of merchandise or objects
and material without lettering behind a store window are not considered
window or door signs.
§ 153-802. Engineering design and standards for signs.
A. Only materials as permitted by the Building Code,248 as adopted and
last revised by Towamencin Township, shall be used in the manufacture
of signs. The design and construction of illuminated signs shall be in
accordance with the requirements set forth by the National Electrical
Code and the Underwriters Laboratories.
B. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist
wind forces as specified in the Building Code, as adopted and last
revised by the Township.
C. Detailed plans showing supporting structural members and foundations
must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Department for approval
before the issuance of a permit. In the case of a freestanding sign in
excess of 50 square feet, on one side, and over 16 feet in height above
the existing grade, a seal of a registered professional engineer
registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be required on
all such plans.
D. Electrical standards.
(1) Permits for illuminated signs will not be issued without an
approved electrical permit, if required. Applications for electrical
permits shall be filed at the same time as the sign permit
application.
(2) The electrical supply to all exterior signs, whether to the sign itself
or to lighting fixtures positioned to illuminate the sign, shall be
provided by means of concealed electrical cables. Electrical supply
248. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes, Art. II, Building Code.
§ 153-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-802
1:943
§ 153-803. Prohibited signs.
to freestanding signs shall be provided by means of underground
cables.
(3) The owner of any illuminated sign shall arrange for a certification
showing compliance with the brightness standards set forth herein
by an independent contractor and provide the certification
documentation to the Township as a condition precedent to the
issuance of a sign permit.
A. The following types of signs, illumination of signs, and lights shall be
prohibited in Towamencin Township, excluding, specifically,
government regulatory signs and official traffic signs:
(1) Abandoned signs.
(2) Animated signs.
(3) Beacon light.
(4) Bench signs.
(5) Festoon lighting.
(6) Flashing signs or signs that scroll or flash text or graphics.
(7) Inflatable signs or balloon signs, with the exception of balloons
used in temporary, noncommercial situations.
(8) Interactive signs.
(9) Marquee signs.
(10) Pennants.
(11) Projecting signs.
(12) Mechanical movement signs.
(13) Reflective signs or signs containing mirrors.
(14) Revolving signs.
(15) Roof signs.
(16) Snipe signs.
(17) Trailer signs.
(18) Under-marquee signs.
(19) Vehicular signs. This regulation does not include the use of
business logos, identification, or advertising on vehicles primarily
and actively used for business purposes and/or personal
transportation.
§ 153-802 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-803
1:944
§ 153-804. Signs exempt from sign permit.
(20) Any sign that imitates, resembles, interferes with, or obstructs
government regulatory signs, official traffic signs, official traffic
lights, signs, or signals.
(21) Any sign which prevents free ingress and egress from any door,
window or fire escape or that prevents free access from one part of
a roof to any other part. No sign other than a safety sign shall be
attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(22) Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors, particulate matter, sound,
odor, or contain open flames.
(23) Banner signs or any other sign suspended across a public street
without the permission of the owner of the property and road.
(24) Signs erected without the permission of the property owner, with
the exception of those authorized or required by local, state or
federal government.
(25) Any sign containing information which states or implies that a
property may be used for any purpose not permitted under the
provisions of the Towamencin Township Zoning Ordinance.
(26) Signs that exhibit statements, words, or pictures of obscene or
pornographic subjects as determined by Towamencin Township.
(27) Any sign that promotes illegal activity.
(28) Any exterior sign that is affixed with only adhesives.
A. The following signs shall be allowed without a sign permit and shall not
be included in the determination of the type, number, or area of
permanent signs allows within a zoning district, provided that such
signs comply with the regulations in this section, if any.
(1) Official traffic signs.
(2) Governmental regulatory signs.
(3) Signs inside a building, or other enclosed facility, which are not
meant to be viewed from the outside and are located greater than
three feet from the window or glass door.
(4) Holiday decorations.
(5) Up to two address signs or nameplate signs which do not exceed
one square foot, are nonilluminated and do not include any
commercial advertising or other identification.
(6) Residential districts. Signs permitted in any residential district by
§ 153-808, provided that they do not create a sign group and do not
exceed four square feet.
§ 153-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-804
1:945
(7) Nonresidential Districts. Signs permitted in any nonresidential
district by § 153-808, provided that they do not create a sign group
and do not exceed five square feet.
(8) Public signs.
(9) Signs or emblems of a religious, civil, philanthropic, historical, or
educational organization, provided that they do not create a sign
group and do not exceed four square feet in area. The sign shall
include only the name of such organization and its location.
(10) Private drive signs. One sign per driveway entrance, not to exceed
two square feet in area. Private drive signs may not be illuminated.
(11) Security and warning signs. Signs not to exceed 1 1/2 square feet
in area for every 100 square feet of street frontage. The limitations
shall not apply to the posting of conventional "No Trespassing"
signs in accordance with the state law. Security and warning signs
may not be illuminated.
(12) Legal notices.
(13) Memorial signs, public monument or historical identification sign
erected by the Township.
(14) Signs which are a permanent architectural feature of a building or
structure, existing at the time of the adoption of this article.
(15) Farmstand signs. Signs advertising the sale of farm products, when
associated with a permitted farmstand in accordance with this
chapter, are permitted, provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet;
(b) Not more than two signs are used;
(c) Such signs shall be displayed only when such products are on
sale;
(d) Such signs shall not be located in the right-of-way or obstruct
visibility at an intersection; and
(e) The signs shall not be illuminated.
(16) Incidental signs, including incidental window signs.
(17) Directional signs, provided that they do not contain any
commercial messaging.
(a) Area. No single directional sign shall exceed four square feet in
area.
(b) Height. Directional signs shall have a maximum height of five
feet.
§ 153-804 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-804
1:946
§ 153-805. General regulations applicable to all districts.
(c) Illumination. Directional signs shall not be illuminated.
(18) Art and murals, provided that such signs to do not contain any
commercial messaging.
(19) Temporary signs in accordance with § 153-806C.
A. Sign location.
(1) Signs shall not be placed in such position as to endanger traffic on a
street by obscuring a clear view, or by confusion with local street
signs, or traffic signals, by virtue of position or color. In addition, no
sign shall be located or arranged so that it interferes with traffic
through glare, blocks reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks
or driveways, or causes confusion with traffic control devices by
reason of color, location, shape, or other means. Signs which are
located adjacent to any driveway or right-of-way must meet the
approval of the Township Engineer.
(2) No sign, other than governmental regulatory signs or official traffic
signs, is to be erected or maintained within the ultimate right-ofway
of any public street unless a waiver of damages, in a format
acceptable to the Township, is provided by the property owner and
recorded at the Montgomery County Recorder of Deeds, indicating
that if it becomes necessary to have the sign removed that the
Township and/or governing agency having jurisdiction of the street
shall not be liable for any damages or cost of removal.
(3) Any signs with any part of the sign or sign supporting structure
which is not set back a minimum of 10 feet from an ultimate street
right-of-way are subject to the following:
(a) Submission of a waiver of damages as described in Subsection
A(2) above if within the ultimate right-of-way.
(b) The square footage size of the total sign shall not exceed 15
square feet in area and must comply with Subsection A(1)
above.
(4) No sign may occupy any sight triangle as defined by the Township
Engineer.
(5) Signs and sign supporting structures shall maintain clearance and
noninterference with all surface and underground utility and
communications lines or equipment.
(6) No freestanding sign shall occupy a designated parking area or
intended parking area, walkway, cartway, driveway or area
designated for any other use.
B. Sign materials.
§ 153-804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-805
1:947
(1) All signs permitted by this chapter must be constructed of durable
materials, using noncorrosive fastenings; shall be structurally safe
and erected or installed in strict accordance with § 153-802; and
must be maintained in good condition and repair.
(2) All signs not properly maintained and abandoned signs shall be
subject to removal pursuant to § 153-807.
C. Sign area. In calculating the area of signs, the following provisions shall
apply:
(1) The area of a sign shall mean the area of all lettering, wording and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background
on which they are displayed (whether such background is open or
enclosed), excluding any supporting framework and bracing which
are solely incidental to the display itself, provided that the same do
not contain any such lettering, wording, designs or symbols.
(2) Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs, or symbols
attached to a building, awning, wall, or window, the area shall be
that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters,
designs and symbols.
(3) Where a sign consists of a double face, only one side shall be
considered for the purpose of calculating such area, provided that
both faces are identical, but if the interior angle formed by two
faces of a double-faced sign is greater than 45°, then both sides
shall be considered in calculating the sign area.
(4) Signs that consist of, or have attached to them, one or more threedimensional
or irregularly shaped objects shall have a sign area of
the sum of two adjacent vertical sign faces of the smallest cube
encompassing the sign or object.
(5) If elements of a sign are movable or flexible, such as a flag or
banner, the measurement is taken when the elements are fully
extended and parallel to the plane of view.
(6) The permitted maximum area for all signs is determined by the sign
type and the zoning district in which the sign is located.
D. Sign spacing. The spacing between signs shall be measured as a
straight-line distance between the closest edges of each sign.
E. Landscaping. A landscaped area around the base of a freestanding sign
on the ground, including but not limited to pole signs and monument
signs, equal to two square feet of landscaped area for each square foot
of sign. The landscaping shall be in accordance with the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance249 as last amended with
modifications as approved by the Township Engineer.
249. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-805 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-805
1:948
F. Sign illumination.
(1) Signs may be illuminated, unless otherwise specified within,
consistent with the following standards:
(a) Location. The type of illumination permitted is determined by
the type of sign and the zoning district.
(b) Light sources to illuminate signs shall be neither visible from
any street right-of-way nor cause glare hazardous or
distracting to pedestrians, vehicle drivers or adjacent
properties.
(c) No more than 0.2 footcandle of light shall be detectable at the
boundary of any abutting property.
(d) Hours of operation.
[1] Signs on nonresidential properties adjacent to a
residential use or district may be illuminated from 5:00
a.m. until 11:00 p.m. or 1/2 hour past the close of business
of the facility being identified or advertised, whichever is
later.
[2] Signs shall provide an automatic timer to comply with the
intent of this section.
(e) Brightness. Message center signs and digital displays are
subject to the following brightness limits:
[1] During daylight hours between sunrise and sunset,
luminance shall be no greater than 5,000 nits.
[2] At all other times, luminance shall be no greater than 250
nits.
[3] Each sign must have a light-sensing device that will
automatically adjust the brightness of the display as the
natural ambient light conditions change to comply with the
limits set here within.
(f) Glare control. Glare control shall be achieved primarily
through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields, and
baffles and appropriate application of fixture mounting height,
wattage, aiming angle and fixture placement. Vegetation
screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary means
for controlling glare.
(2) Types of illumination. Where permitted, illumination may be:
(a) External. Signs with external illumination, where permitted,
are subject to the following regulations:
§ 153-805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-805
1:949
[1] The source of the light must be concealed by translucent
covers.
[2] External illumination shall be by a steady, stationary light
source, shielded and directed solely at the sign. The light
source must be static in color.
(b) Internal. Signs with internal illumination, where permitted, are
subject to the following regulations:
[1] Internal illumination, including neon lighting, must be
static in intensity and color.
[2] Message center signs are permitted in accordance with
the regulations contained in § 153-805F(3).
[3] Digital displays are permitted in accordance with the
regulations contained in § 153-805F(4).
(3) Message center signs are subject to the following regulations, in
addition to all other illumination requirements established in
§ 153-805F(1) and (2).
(a) Sign type. Message center signs are permitted in the form of
freestanding signs and monument signs, both on-premises and
off-premises, in accordance with the requirements in
§ 153-806A and B and in accordance with the requirements for
the specific zoning district in § 153-808.
(b) Height. A message center sign shall have the same height
limits as other permitted signs of the same type and location.
(c) Area. When used as an on-premises sign, message center signs
shall not exceed 50% of the sign area for any one sign and shall
not exceed more than 30% of the total area for all signs
permitted on a property.
(d) Maximum number. Where permitted, one message center sign
is permitted per street frontage, up to a maximum of two
message center signs per property.
(e) Message display.
[1] The words, symbols or images must remain stationary for
a minimum of 30 seconds before changing to any other
words, symbols or images.
[2] No message center sign may contain text which flashes,
pulsates, moves, or scrolls. Each complete message must
fit on one screen.
[3] The content of a message center sign must transition by
changing instantly (e.g., no fade-out or fade-in).
§ 153-805 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-805
1:950
[4] Default design. The sign shall contain a default design
which shall freeze the sign message in one position if a
malfunction should occur.
(f) Conversion of a permitted non-message center sign to a
message center sign requires the issuance of an additional sign
permit.
(g) The addition of any message center sign to any nonconforming
sign is prohibited.
(h) Public service announcements. The owner of every message
center sign shall coordinate with the local authorities to
display, when requested by local authorities, emergency
information important to the traveling public, including, but
not limited to, Amber Alerts or alerts concerning terrorist
attacks or natural disasters. Emergency information messages
shall remain in the advertising rotation according to the
protocols of the agency that issues the information.
(4) Digital display signs are subject to the following regulations in
addition to all other requirements established in § 153-805F(1) and
(2).
(a) Sign type. Digital displays are permitted in the form of
freestanding signs or monument signs, both on-premises and
off-premises, in accordance with the regulations established in
§ 153-806A and B and in accordance with the requirements for
the specific zoning district in § 153-808.
(b) Height. A digital display shall have the same height limits as
for other permitted signs of the same type and location.
(c) Area.
[1] When used as an on-premises sign, digital displays shall
not exceed more than 30% of the total sign area permitted
on the site.
[2] When used as an off-premises sign, digital displays may be
used for the full permitted sign area in accordance with
the requirements in Article VIII and § 153-502C(21).
(d) Maximum number per property. Where permitted, one digital
display sign is permitted per property.
(e) Message display:
[1] The words, symbols or images must remain stationary for
a minimum of 30 seconds before changing to any other
words, symbols or images.
§ 153-805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-805
1:951
§ 153-806. Regulations by sign type.
[2] Any digital display containing animation, streaming video,
or text or images which flash, pulsate, move or scroll is
prohibited. Each complete message must fit on one screen.
[3] One message/display may be brighter than another, but
each individual message/display must be static in intensity.
[4] The content of a digital display must transition by
changing instantly, with no transition in graphics (e.g., no
fade-out or fade-in).
[5] Default design. The sign shall contain a default design
which shall freeze the sign message in one position if a
malfunction should occur.
(f) Conversion of a permitted nondigital display to a digital display
requires the issuance of a sign permit.
(g) The addition of any digital display to any nonconforming sign is
prohibited.
(h) Public service announcements: The owner of digital display
shall coordinate with the local authorities to display, when
requested by local authorities, emergency information
important to the traveling public, including, but not limited to,
Amber Alerts or alerts concerning terrorist attacks or natural
disasters. Emergency information messages shall remain in the
advertising rotation according to the protocols of the agency
that issues the information.
A. On-premises signs.
(1) Wall signs.
(a) No portion of a wall sign shall be mounted less than eight feet
above the finished grade. If the wall sign projects less than
three inches from the building wall on which it is affixed, the
eight-foot height requirement need not be met.
(b) A wall sign shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall,
roofline or other surface to which it is mounted and shall not
project more than 12 inches from its mounting surface.
(2) Canopy or awning signs.
(a) A canopy or awning without lettering or other advertisement
shall not be regulated as a sign.
(b) Canopy signs or awning signs must be centered within or over
architectural elements such as windows or doors.
§ 153-805 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-806
1:952
(c) No canopy sign or awning sign shall be wider than the building
wall or tenant space it identifies.
(d) No canopy sign or awning sign shall be illuminated with
internal illumination or external illumination.
(e) Sign placement.
[1] Letters or numerals shall be located only on the front and
side vertical faces of the awning or canopy.
[2] Logos or emblems are permitted on the awning or canopy
up to a maximum of three square feet. No more than one
emblem or logo is permitted on any one awning or canopy.
(f) Sign height. The lowest edge of the canopy sign or awning sign
shall be at least eight feet above the finished grade.
(g) Any ground-floor awning projecting into a street right-of-way
must be retractable.
(h) Awnings above the ground floor may be fixed, provided that
they do not project more than four feet from the face of the
building.
(i) Multi-tenant Buildings. If the canopy sign or awning sign is
mounted on a multitenant building, all canopy signs or awning
signs shall be similar in terms of height, projection, and style
across all tenants in the building.
(3) Window signs.
(a) Incidental window signs displaying pertinent business
information, such as the business's hours of operation and
credit cards accepted, shall be excluded from area calculations
for window signs.
(b) Total square footage of such signs shall not exceed 25% of the
square footage of the individual window at/on which the sign is
located.
(c) Such signs shall be installed only at/on the windows of the
ground-level floor of a building.
(d) Such signs shall be installed at/on no more than 1/2 of the total
number of windows on one facade only of the first floor/
ground-level floor of the building. In the event that the building
has multiple street frontages, the total number of window signs
shall be limited to no more than two street frontage facades.
(4) Freestanding signs.
(a) The lowest edge of any freestanding pole sign shall either be
less than four feet or greater than seven feet above the ground.
§ 153-806 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-806
1:953
(b) Freestanding ground signs shall be supported and
permanently placed by embedding, anchoring, or connecting
the sign in such a manner as to incorporate it into the
landscape or architectural design scheme.
(c) No freestanding sign may occupy an area designated for
parking, loading, walkways, driveways, fire lane, easement,
cartway or other areas required to remain unobstructed.
(d) Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs are only
permitted when integrated into a freestanding sign or wall
sign.
(e) Flag signs. Flags containing commercial messages may be
used as permitted freestanding signs, and if so used, the area
of the flag shall be included in and limited by the computation
of allowable area for signs on the property. Flags containing
commercial messages are not exempt from permit
requirements.
(5) Sandwich board signs.
(a) Sandwich board signs are permitted if specifically allowed in
§ 153-808 for the district.
(b) One sandwich board sign is permitted per establishment.
(c) Sandwich board signs are only permitted for eating places and
are limited to displaying the daily specials and hours of
operation.
(d) Area. Each sign shall have a maximum area of five square feet
per sign face.
(e) Height. Signs shall have a maximum height of 3 1/2 feet.
(f) Sign placement.
[1] If a sign is located on a public or private sidewalk, a
minimum of 36 inches of unobstructed sidewalk clearance
must be maintained between the sign and any building or
other obstruction.
[2] The sign must be located on the premises, and within 10
feet of the primary public entrance, of the establishment it
advertises.
[3] The sign must be weighted, temporarily secured, or
strategically placed so as to avoid being carried away by
high winds.
(g) The sign shall be removed at the end of the business day.
(6) Pole banner signs.
§ 153-806 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-806
1:954
(a) Pole banner signs are permitted if specifically allowed in
§ 153-808 for the district.
(b) Area. Each sign may not exceed 12 square feet in area.
(c) Height. Signs shall have a maximum height of 20 feet.
(d) Clearance. A minimum clearance of 10 feet is required
between the ground surface and the bottom of the sign.
(e) Sign placement. The sign must be placed within the site and
set back a minimum of 20 feet from the right-of-way or
property line.
(f) Sign groups. Identical pole banner signs may be installed
within the property. The maximum number of pole banner
signs shall be 12. Permits are required for sign groups.
B. Off-premises signs.
(1) Billboards as defined in § 153-502C(21) are permitted in the Zoning
Districts where the use C-21 is permitted.
(2) Billboards or off-premises signs must comply with the requirements
in § 153-502C(21) and this article. In the event of a conflict, the
more restrictive requirement applies.
(3) Message sequencing is prohibited.
(4) All off-premises signs shall be identified on the structure with the
name, address, and phone number of the owner.
(5) Off-premises signs may not be attached to the external wall or
otherwise affixed to any part of any building and shall not extend
over any public property or right-of-way.
(6) Off-premises signs shall not be located on sewer rights-of-way, or
water, electric, or petroleum pipelines.
(7) Off-premises signs may be illuminated in accordance with
§ 153-805F, provided that:
(a) All light sources are designed, shielded, arranged, and
installed to confine or direct all illumination to the surface of
the off-premises sign and away from adjoining properties.
(b) Light sources are not visible from any street or adjoining
property.
(8) Off-premises signs may incorporate manual changeable copy signs,
message center signs, digital displays, or tri-vision signs. The
words, symbols, or images for off-premises signs must remain
stationary for a minimum of 30 seconds before changing to any
other words, symbols, or images.
§ 153-806 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-806
1:955
C. Temporary signs, as defined in § 153-801, located on private property,
are subject to the regulations set forth below. Temporary signs that
comply with the requirements in this subsection shall not be included in
the determination of the type, number, or area of signs allowed on a
property. Unless otherwise stated below, the requirements listed below
shall apply to both commercial and noncommercial signs.
(1) Nonresidential districts.
(a) Large temporary signs. One large on-premises temporary sign
is permitted per property in all nonresidential districts
advertising the sale, rental or development of the property on
which the sign has been erected or a special event to be held
on the property on which the sign has been erected. On lots
with more than one street frontage, one sign is permitted per
street frontage.
[1] Types of large temporary signs permitted:
[a] Freestanding signs.
[b] Wall signs.
[c] Window signs.
[d] Banner.
[2] Area.
[a] Each freestanding sign, wall sign, or window sign
shall have a maximum area of 16 square feet.
[b] Each large temporary banner shall have a maximum
area of 60 square feet. Any temporary banner shall be
affixed to a building or awning on the building.
[3] Height.
[a] Large temporary freestanding signs shall have a
maximum height of six feet.
[b] Large temporary banner signs shall hang at a height
no greater than 24 feet.
[4] Duration.
[a] A sign for the sale, rental, or development of a
property shall be removed within 20 days after
agreement of sale or rental or completion of the
development.
[b] A banner sign or temporary sign for a special event
may not be displayed earlier than 30 days prior to the
§ 153-806 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-806
1:956
event, and such banner sign and temporary sign can
only be displayed for a maximum of 45 days.
[c] Display of a banner sign or temporary sign for a
special event may occur no more than two times per
year at a subject property.
(b) Small temporary signs. In addition to the large temporary
sign(s) outlined above, one small on-premises temporary sign
for the purpose of advertising contractors, mechanics, painters
and artisans on the property where such work is being
performed is permitted per property in all nonresidential
districts. On properties with more than one street frontage,
one small temporary sign is permitted per street frontage.
[1] Types of small temporary sign permitted:
[a] Freestanding sign.
[b] Wall sign.
[c] Window sign.
[2] Area. Each small temporary sign shall have a maximum
area of six square feet.
[3] Height. Small temporary signs shall have a maximum
height of six feet.
[4] Duration. The temporary sign shall be permitted during
the period in which the work is being performed on the
property.
(2) Residential districts.
(a) Large temporary signs. One large on-premises freestanding
temporary sign is permitted per property for the purpose of
advertising the development or proposed development of a
parcel.
[1] Each large temporary sign shall have a maximum area of
16 square feet and a maximum height of six feet.
(b) Small temporary sign. One small on-premises freestanding
temporary sign is permitted per property. Corner lots may have
one such sign on each street frontage.
[1] Purpose. Small temporary signs in a residential district are
only permitted for the following purposes:
[a] The advertising of the sale or rental of a property; or
[b] To identify contractors, mechanics, painters or
artisans who are performing work on the property.
§ 153-806 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-806
1:957
[2] Type of temporary signs permitted.
[a] Freestanding signs.
[3] Area.
[a] Each small freestanding sign shall have a maximum
area of four square feet.
[b] For a sign advertising the sale or rental of the
property, the maximum area may be increased to six
square feet.
[4] Height.
[a] Temporary freestanding signs shall have a maximum
height of four feet.
(c) Signs advertising the sale of residential property may be
erected on the day of an open house for which the hours of the
open house have been published in a newspaper of general
circulation and provided that:
[1] Such signs may be on-premises signs or off-premises signs.
[2] Signs must be removed within one hour after the open
house, but in no event is the sign permitted after 8:00 p.m.
on any day.
[3] Such signs are permitted if they are stationary and
nonilluminated.
[4] Such signs must not exceed four square feet in area.
[5] No such sign shall be placed within a street or public rightof-
way or placed at or attached to any utility pole or other
structure therein.
[6] Prior to placement of any such sign, the approval of the
subject property owner on which said sign is to be placed
shall be secured by the placer of such sign.
[7] Such signs shall not be placed on any Towamencin
Township property without written permission from the
Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township.
(3) Political signs designed to influence action of the voters for the
passage or defeat of a measure or the election of a candidate to a
public office at a national state or local election are exempt from
obtaining a sign permit; the signs are in accordance with the
following provisions:
(a) Such signs may be on-premises signs or off-premises signs.
§ 153-806 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-806
1:958
§ 153-807. Removal of signs.
(b) Such signs are permitted if they are stationary, nonilluminated,
and temporary.
(c) Such signs shall be displayed no earlier than 30 days prior to a
voting day.
(d) Such signs may not exceed four square feet in area.
(e) No such sign shall be placed within a street or public right-ofway
or placed or attached to any utility pole or other structure
therein.
(f) Prior to the placement of any such sign, the approval of the
subject property owner on which said sign is to be placed shall
be secured by the placer of such sign.
(g) Such signs shall be removed within five days after the election
to which they pertain.
(4) No temporary banner sign or other sign shall extend into, or over, a
public right-of-way.
(5) Display of temporary sign or banner for a special event may occur
no more than two times per calendar year at a subject property and
may not be displayed for a duration of more than 45 days for each
occurrence.
(6) Temporary signs may not be attached to any pole or structure
within a street or public right-of-way.
(7) Permission. The party posting the temporary sign is solely
responsible for obtaining the permission of the property owner
before posting their temporary sign.
(8) Installation and maintenance.
(a) All temporary signs must be installed such that, in the opinion
of the Township Zoning Officer, they do not create a safety
hazard.
(b) All temporary signs must be made of durable materials and
shall be well-maintained.
(c) Temporary signs that are frayed, torn or broken or that are no
longer legible will be deemed unmaintained and required to be
removed.
(9) Illumination. Illumination of any temporary sign is prohibited.
(10) Temporary signs meeting the requirements in this article are
exempt from permit requirements.
§ 153-806 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-807
1:959
§ 153-808. Sign regulations by district.
A. Unsafe or unlawful signs. The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to
require the removal and/or demolition of a sign under the following
circumstances:
(1) When it is determined by such officer that the sign has deteriorated
to the point of becoming a danger to the public, is in danger of
falling, or becomes so deteriorated that it no longer serves a useful
purpose of communication, or it is determined by the Zoning
Officer to be a nuisance, or it is unlawfully erected in violation of
any of the provisions of this article.
(2) In the case of unsafe or unlawful signs, the sign removal procedure
will be initiated by a letter to the owner or lessee by the Zoning
Officer requiring the removal of such sign within 30 days, provided
that within such 30 days the owner or lessee shall take steps to
begin the repair or rehabilitation of such sign or the alteration
thereof so as to make the same comply with the provisions hereof,
then such letter shall be automatically rescinded, provided that
such owner or lessee promptly commences and diligently pursues
such repair or alteration to conclusion.
(3) Should the subject sign fail to be removed within the time frame set
herein, the Zoning Officer shall have the subject sign removed from
the premises, and any costs incurred by the Township for the
removal of the subject sign shall be billed to the owner of the
premises, including any inspection fees as may be required by the
Zoning Officer, and the owner shall have 30 days from the date of
billing to remit the necessary fees for the removal of the sign from
the premises. Should the owner fail to remit the necessary funds,
appropriate legal action as may be taken will be initiated in order to
collect money due the Township at the expense of the owner.
B. Abandoned signs.
(1) It shall be responsibility of the owner of any property upon which
an abandoned sign is located to remove such sign within 180 days
of the sign becoming abandoned as defined in § 153-801. Removal
of an abandoned sign shall include the removal of the entire sign
including the sign face, sign supporting structure, and structural
trim.
(2) Where the owner of the property on which the abandoned sign is
located fails to remove such sign in 180 days, the Township may
remove such sign. Any expense directly incurred in the removal of
such sign shall be charged to the owner of the property. Where the
owner fails to pay, the Township may file a lien upon the property
for the purpose of recovering all reasonable costs associated with
the removal of the sign.
§ 153-807 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-808
1:960
A. Signs in the R-200, R-180, R-175, R-125, R-50, MRC and RBP
Residential Districts. The following signs and no other, subject to the
conditions specified, may be erected in the above-referenced districts:
(1) General conditions.
(a) Freestanding signs may not exceed six feet in height from
grade to the highest point above grade of the top of the sign.
(b) Wall signs, or portions of such signs, shall not be located at a
height greater than the ceiling/floor division of the first story of
the building.
(c) Signs must meet the maximum size requirements outlined
below, but if not specified, a sign may not have an area greater
than 20 square feet.
(d) Signs listed as "exempt from a sign permit" in § 153-804 are
permitted.
(e) Temporary signs in accordance with § 153-806C are permitted.
(2) On-premises signs. The following signs shall be permitted:
(a) One nonilluminated nameplate sign or address sign not
exceeding one square foot in area announcing the name and
address of the occupants of the residence.
(b) One internally illuminated, externally illuminated, or
nonilluminated sign for home occupations or accessory offices
indicating only names of persons and their occupations,
provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed two
square feet.
(c) A professional business sign of a physician, dentist, magisterial
justice, and such other persons whose services in emergency
situations are customarily considered essential to the public
health, safety and welfare, may be externally illuminated,
provided that the illumination is white light only and the light
is directed only at the sign without causing glare on adjacent
properties or distraction to drivers. The professional business
sign shall not exceed two square feet.
(d) Residential subdivisions of 10 or more lots or dwelling units
may have one on-premises, externally illuminated freestanding
sign, displaying only the name and/or address of the
subdivision or land development located at the main entrance,
provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 25
square feet in area, or two signs not exceeding 15 square feet
each, and may not exceed five feet in height. The structure
supporting the sign may not exceed seven feet in height.
§ 153-808 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-808
1:961
[1] Signs may also be permitted at other entrances to the
subdivision or development with conditional use approval
of the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Off-premises signs. No off-premises signs are permitted except:
(a) Government regulatory signs, official traffic signs, and signs
necessary for the direction, regulation, and control of traffic,
street name signs, legal notices, warnings at railroad
crossings, and other official signs which are singularly
authorized or erected by duly constituted governmental
bodies.
(b) Signs exempt from a sign permit or temporary signs in
accordance with §§ 153-804 and 153-806C.
B. Signs in the MR Multifamily Residential, MH Manufactured Housing,
and IN Institutional Districts. The following signs and no other, subject
to the conditions specified, may be erected in the above-referenced
districts or as indicated for a permitted institutional use in another
district:
(1) All signs permitted in Subsection A above.
(2) Freestanding signs may not exceed six feet in height from grade to
the highest point above grade of the top of the sign.
(3) On-premises directional signs displayed for the direction, safety, or
convenience of the public, including signs which identify a business
or rental office, public rest rooms, parking areas, entrances and
exits, freight entrances or the like, provided that the area of any
such sign shall not exceed four square feet.
(4) One on-premises internally or externally illuminated or
nonilluminated sign, displaying only the name and address of the
premises or complex, provided that the area of any such sign shall
not exceed 32 square feet.
(5) One on-premises internally or externally illuminated or
nonilluminated bulletin board or announcement board for the
identification of community service notices for a permitted building
or use, provided that the area of any such board shall not exceed
eight square feet in area.
(6) Pole banner signs may be installed in IN Institutional Districts in
accordance with § 153-806A(6).
(7) The following numbers and types of signs may be erected in lieu of
the foregoing for a combined E-7 Nursing Home and E-8 Personal
Care Facility use ("community") on a single tract or multiple tracts
of land 100 acres or more in the IN Institutional District, subject to
the conditions specified below:
§ 153-808 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-808
1:962
(a) Freestanding signs shall be permitted subject to the following
regulations:
[1] Number. The following freestanding signs shall be
permitted:
[a] One sign shall be permitted at each access road to the
community, except for the main entrance as set forth
in § 153-808B(7)(a)[1][c] below. Only one such sign
per road frontage may be a full-sized freestanding sign
in accordance with § 153-808B(7)(a)[2] below. All
other signs at an access road shall be a directional
sign. Directional signs shall identify only the name of
the community, facilities, and destinations within the
community to be accessed from such access road.
[b] One sign shall be permitted at the intersection of two
public roads adjoining the community. If the
community is located on more than one corner of the
intersection, such sign shall be located on only one
corner of the intersection.
[c] At the main entrance to the community, single-sided
freestanding signs may be erected on both sides of the
entrance (one on each side), provided that 1) the main
entrance drive is similar in nature to a public street
creating the characteristics of a corner property on
either side of such entrance drive; 2) the main
entrance drive is the primary means of access to the
administrative offices on the property; and 3) the signs
are the same size and colors.
[2] Area: 32 square feet, except as follows: 1) in the event that
two freestanding signs are erected at the main entrance in
accordance with § 153-808B(7)(a)[1][c] above, the signs
shall not exceed 80 square feet each; and 2) directional
signs shall not exceed 12 square feet.
[3] Height. Signs shall have a maximum height of nine feet
measured from grade. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
directional signs shall have a maximum height of six feet
measured from grade.
[4] Illumination. Signs may be illuminated subject to
compliance with all applicable criteria contained in this
article.
(b) On-premises directional signs displayed along internal private
roads for and used to identify facilities, on-site traffic direction,
hours of operation, and other information for the direction,
safety, or convenience of the public shall be exempt from
permit requirements, subject to the following:
§ 153-808 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-808
1:963
[1] Area. Each sign shall have a maximum area of 12 square
feet.
[2] Height. Each sign shall have a maximum height of six feet
measured from grade.
[3] Illumination. These signs shall not be illuminated.
(c) Parallel wall signs displayed for and used to identify facilities
for the direction, safety, or convenience of the public within the
community, and not intended to be viewed from a public street
or road, are permitted, subject to the following regulations:
[1] Area. The total sign area of all parallel wall signs on any
one building shall not exceed 30 square feet.
[2] Height. Such signs shall not be installed higher than the
eaveline of the building wall where they are proposed to be
located.
[3] Illumination. Signs may be illuminated only as follows:
[a] Internally illuminated; or
[b] Externally illuminated from an artificial source above
the sign only.
C. Signs in the VC Village Commercial, PBC Planned Business Campus, C
Commercial, SC Shopping Center, and LI Limited Industrial Districts.
The following signs and no other, subject to the conditions specified,
may be erected in the above-referenced districts:
(1) All signs permitted in Subsection A above.
(2) Wall signs shall be permitted, subject to the following provisions:
(a) One internally or externally or nonilluminated wall sign may be
attached to or mounted on a building front, provided that the
total area of such sign does not exceed 35 square feet plus one
additional square foot of sign area for each two feet in excess
of the minimum front yard setback required for such districts.
The maximum square footage of the sign area shall be 50
square feet, except the sign area may be increased to a
maximum of 65 square feet where the building front that the
sign is attached to is located 150 feet in excess of the minimum
front yard setback required for such districts. In the event of a
property with more than one street frontage, one such sign
shall be permitted for each street frontage.
(b) In lieu of the wall sign set forth in Subsection C(2)(a) above,
one on-premises internally or externally illuminated or
nonilluminated parallel wall sign is permitted for each use or
tenant/subtenant, provided that the total area of all parallel
§ 153-808 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-808
1:964
signs for each tenant/subtenant shall not exceed 1 1/2 square
feet for each foot of length of the front building or length of
that portion of such wall devoted to such tenant/subtenant.
Maximum size for single tenant/subtenant is 35 square feet.
(c) Canopy or awning signs in accordance with § 153-806A(2) are
permitted. A canopy sign or awning sign shall be included in
the size calculation for wall signs, and the combination of wall
sign, canopy sign, or awning signs shall not exceed the
maximum area for wall signs in this section.
(3) In addition to permitted wall signs, the following on-premises
freestanding business signs are permitted under the following
conditions:
(a) Freestanding signs may not exceed 30 feet in height from
grade to the highest point above grade of the top of the sign
except signs that are located within the boundaries of the
Village Overlay District as shown on the Township Zoning
Map,250 which shall have a maximum height of 12 feet.
(b) Only one such sign shall be permitted on each street frontage
of the property, except where properties have continuous
frontage on the same street in excess of 1,000 feet, a second
sign is permitted along that frontage with a maximum of two
such signs per property regardless of the number of streets, or
length of frontage, which such property abuts. The signs shall
not be located closer to each other than at least 1/3 the length
of the street frontage.
(c) Sandwich board sign in accordance with § 153-806A(5).
(d) Pole banner signs in accordance with § 153-806A(6).
(e) As part of a sign, the following is permitted for nonresidential
uses on properties that are not located within the boundaries
of the Village Overlay District as shown on the Township
Zoning Map:
[1] Changeable copy signs, provided that said sign copy is not
altered at a rate greater than one time per hour.
[2] Time and temperature signs.
(f) The following signs are prohibited on properties that are
located within the boundaries of the Village Overlay District as
shown on the Township Zoning Map:
[1] Digital display signs.
[2] Projecting signs.
250. Editor's Note: Said Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 153-808 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-808
1:965
[3] Changeable copy signs.
[4] Time and temperature signs.
[5] Message center signs.
[6] Pole banner signs.
(g) In the case of three or fewer permitted uses or tenants located
in one or an arrangement of buildings, one freestanding sign
shall be permitted for the entire group of uses or tenants and
shall have an area of not more than 35 square feet per street
frontage. In the event that the height of such sign is eight feet
or less (as measured from grade to the highest point above
grade of the top of the sign), the maximum square footage of
such sign may be increased to 50 square feet, provided that
such sign shall also be set back an additional 10 feet from the
requirement as set forth in § 153-805A(3) herein resulting in a
minimum setback of such sign of 20 feet from an ultimate
street right-of-way.
(h) In the case of four or more permitted uses or tenants located in
one or an arrangement of buildings, one freestanding sign shall
be permitted for the entire group of uses or tenants and shall
have an area of not more than 150 square feet per street
frontage except signs for properties that are located within the
boundaries of the Village Overlay District as shown on the
Township Zoning Map shall not exceed 50 square feet in area.
(i) In all Limited Industrial Districts, the sign area of any
permitted freestanding business sign may be increased to 120
square feet.
(4) Window signs or door signs in accordance with § 153-806A(3).
(5) Landscaping must be provided for all freestanding signs as follows:
(a) The applicant shall provide two square feet of landscaped area
for each square foot of sign area.
(6) On-premises directional signs displayed for the direction, safety, or
convenience of the public, including signs which identify a business
or rental office, public restrooms, public telephone booths, parking
areas, entrances and exits, freight entrances, or the like, provided
that the area of any such sign shall not exceed four square feet.
Only signs necessary, as determined by the Township, for the safe
vehicular or pedestrian circulation shall be permitted.
(7) One on-premises message center sign or digital display shall be
permitted as part of any permitted sign but shall not exceed more
than 50% of the allowable square footage of the permitted sign or
signs for the property or 20 square feet in area, whichever is less.
§ 153-808 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-808
1:966
§ 153-809. Permit requirements.
These signs shall be permitted only in the districts identified in
§ 153-808C.
D. Signs in the IN-A District.
(1) One on-premises, internally or externally illuminated or
nonilluminated freestanding sign, displaying only the name and/or
address of the premises or complex, provided that the area of any
such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet and may not exceed six
feet in height from grade to highest point above grade to the top of
the sign; or
(2) Two on-premises, internally or externally illuminated or
nonilluminated wall signs, displaying only the name and/or address
of the premises or complex, provided that the area of each sign
shall not exceed 16 square feet.
(3) Directional signs shall be allowed within the development, so long
as said signs are located at least 15 feet from the ultimate right-ofway
line of a street from which access is taken. The maximum
number of signs on either side of the street shall be two.
E. Signs permitted for Use Groups E-5 Library or Museum, E-6 Municipal
Facility, E-9 Place of Worship, E-10 Private Organization and E-12
School:
(1) All signs permitted in Subsection A above.
(2) One internally or externally illuminated or nonilluminated
freestanding sign not exceeding 30 square feet.
(a) The sign may not exceed six feet in height.
(b) Ten square feet of the sign may contain a message center sign
or digital display.
(c) In residential zoning districts, the message center sign or
digital display shall not be illuminated between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
A. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, or alter any sign other than the
signs listed in § 153-804 [signs exempt from a sign permit] without first
obtaining a duly approved sign permit from the Township's Code
Enforcement Department. In addition, a sign permit is required for all
illuminated signs regardless of size or location.
B. Applications for permits for the erection, construction or alteration of
signs shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawings of the proposed
work, zoning district in which the sign is located, structural details of
the sign, all of which are to be drawn to scale, and any other details as
may be required by the Zoning Officer.
§ 153-808 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-809
1:967
C. All application fees for permits for the erection, construction, or
alteration of signs shall, at the time of making application, be paid to
the Township, in accordance with the respective fee schedule adopted
by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 153-809 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-809
1:968
ARTICLE IX
Nonconformities
§ 153-900. Purpose.
This article is intended to recognize the property rights of owners of
nonconforming structures and uses to the extent required by law, while
also recognizing the legitimate desire of the Township to minimize
nonconformities, since they are in derogation of the comprehensive
planning scheme reflected in this chapter.
§ 153-901. Continuation.
The lawful use of a building or structure or the lawful use of any land
as existing and lawful at the time of the enactment of this chapter or
amendment thereto, may be continued although such use or structure does
not conform to the provisions of this chapter provided said use or structure
is not altered, expanded, enlarged or extended except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 153-902. Isolated lots.
Any nonconforming lot may be used as a lot for purposes of zoning provided:
§ 153-903. Merger of nonconforming lots.
Where two or more adjacent lots, one or more of which is nonconforming,
are owned by the same owner, and the ownership of the lots is concurrent,
such lots shall be deemed to be merged into a single conforming or more
A. The subject lot is and has been held in single and separate ownership
from the date at which said lot originally became nonconforming. "Held
in single and separate ownership" for the purpose of this section means
that the current or former owner(s) of the subject lot have not, and do
not, own or have any interest whatsoever in any adjoining property to
the lot in question.
B. That the owner of an isolated lot has made a good faith attempt to sell
the nonconforming lot to an adjoining property, or has offered to
purchase adjoining land to make the isolated nonconforming lot
conforming or more closely conforming to the provisions of this chapter.
C. In the event different use types and associated lot sizes are permitted
within the zoning district in question, only the use or uses permitted on
the smallest or most closely related lot area and/or dimension as the
existing undersized lot shall be permitted by right. All other uses shall
only be permitted by special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. All structures proposed upon an existing nonconforming lot shall meet
all other requirements for the use and zone it which it is located
including but not necessarily limited to building and lot coverage,
yards, setbacks, height and parking requirements.
§ 153-900 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-903
1:969
closely conforming lot. For the purpose of this chapter, the merger of
nonconforming lots shall occur upon the date said lots became
nonconforming or upon the date when adjacent property is purchased by
the same owner, whichever date shall first occur.
§ 153-904. Cessation of use; abandonment.
Absent documentation to the contrary as provided in § 153-905 below,
whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a continuous
period of one year there is a rebuttable presumption of the intent to
abandon said nonconforming use. Upon the abandonment of a
nonconforming use, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished. Any
subsequent use of such land or structure shall be in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 153-905. Resumption of nonconforming use.
In the event that a cessation of a nonconforming use occurs for a period
exceeding one year, the owner shall have the burden of proof to clearly
demonstrate to the Zoning Officer or Zoning Hearing Board upon appeal,
that there was no intent to abandon said use, in which case, the existing
use type and extent of use lawfully established prior to the presumed
cessation of use shall be registered with the Zoning Officer and may then be
continued as provided herein.
§ 153-906. Changes in nonconforming use.
Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted
to revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to
another nonconforming use only under the following conditions:
§ 153-907. Expansion of nonconforming use or structure.
Any lawful nonconforming use or structure or portion thereof may be
expanded, provided:
A. All changes shall be permitted only by special exception of the Zoning
Hearing Board.
B. The applicant shall show that the proposed use will be more conforming
and/or less objectionable in external effects than the existing
nonconforming use with respect to:
(1) Traffic generation and congestion including truck, passenger car
and pedestrian traffic.
(2) General nuisance.
(3) Appearance and function.
A. The proposed expansion shall take place only upon the lot held in single
and separate ownership as existed on the date the use became
§ 153-903 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-907
1:970
§ 153-908. Damage or destruction of building; reconstruction.
A nonconforming structure or any structure containing a nonconforming
use which has been damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, accident, or
calamity (as contrasted to deterioration due to time or neglect) may be
reconstructed and used for the nonconforming use, provided that:
§ 153-909. Condemnation of building.
A nonconforming building which has been legally condemned shall not be
rebuilt or used for nonconforming purposes.
§ 153-910. Repair and maintenance.
Normal and customary repairs and maintenance of a nonconforming
structure or use shall be permitted, provided such repair or maintenance
does not extend, expand, or increase the nonconformity.
§ 153-911. Registration of nonconforming uses.
The Zoning Officer may provide for the registration of all uses which are
nonconforming under the terms of this chapter within a reasonable time
nonconforming. A nonconforming use or structure shall be prohibited
from encroaching upon another parcel of land subsequently added to
the original parcel.
B. The area of such use or structure shall not be increased by more than
25% of the area of the use or structure as existed on the date it became
nonconforming.
C. Any and all expansions of a nonconforming use or structure shall
conform to all height, area, width, yard and coverage requirements for
the district in which said use or structure is located. A structure which
is nonconforming in terms of height shall not be extended to increase
the height.
D. Permission to extend a nonconforming use as described in this article
shall not be construed to mean that a new use or uses may be
established.
E. Structures or land uses that have reached their maximum expansion
allowance under previous ordinances are not eligible for additional
expansion under provision of this chapter.
A. The reconstructed structure shall not exceed in height, area and
volume the structure destroyed except that expansion may be made as
provided for herein.
B. Building reconstruction shall be started within one year from the date
the building was destroyed and shall be carried on without interruption
and completed in a timely manner.
§ 153-907 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-911
1:971
after the effective date of this chapter or upon appeal of a cessation of use.
The record of nonconforming uses shall certify, after inspection, the extent
and kind of use and disposition of the structure and land. Each occupant or
owner of a premises used as a nonconforming use or structure shall make
available such information as may be necessary to determine the extent and
nature of the nonconformity as established by this chapter.
§ 153-911 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-911
1:972
ARTICLE X
Conditional Uses
§ 153-1000. Authority to grant conditional uses.
The Board of Supervisors may allow or deny conditional uses pursuant to
public notice and hearing and pursuant to express standards and criteria set
forth in this chapter. In allowing conditional uses, the Board of Supervisors
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in the chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purpose of this chapter.
§ 153-1001. Application required.
This article sets forth the conditions and procedures which must be met
before a conditional use can receive approval by the Board of Supervisors.
Applicants for conditional uses shall submit a conditional use permit
application to the Zoning Officer for review and submission to the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 153-1002. Pending applications; effect of modified ordinances.
When an application for a conditional use has been filed with the Board of
Supervisors, and the subject matter of such application would ultimately
constitute either a subdivision or land development as defined by this
chapter, no change or amendment to the zoning, subdivision and land
development, or other governing ordinance or plans shall affect the decision
on such application adversely to the applicant, and the applicant shall be
entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly
filed. Provided further, should such an application be approved by the
Board of Supervisors, the applicant shall be entitled to proceed with the
submission of either land development or subdivision plans within a period
of six months or longer as may be approved by the Board of Supervisors
following the date of such approval in accordance with the provisions of the
governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was
duly filed before the Board of Supervisors. If either a subdivision or land
development plan is so filed within said period, such plan shall be subject to
the provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 153-1003. Site plan requirements.
All applicants for a conditional use shall submit 15 sets of site plans and
all required additional information to include the following to the Township
Zoning Officer when making application for a conditional use permit:
A. A written statement including a letter of intent specifying the intended
use and operation of the building or land. At a minimum, this statement
shall include the following elements:
§ 153-1000 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1003
1:973
(1) That the proposed use complies with the declaration of legislative
intent of this chapter and for the district in which the use is
proposed.
(2) That the proposed use or activity is compatible in type, character
and intensity with surrounding land uses and the neighborhood in
which it is planned.
(3) That essential public services are available and of adequate
capacity to service the intended use or activity. This services
evaluation shall include water, sewage disposal, utilities, police and
fire protection, schools (if applicable), park and recreation and
transportation. The transportation element shall indicate the
existing and projected peak traffic demands and the capacity of the
road network to accommodate said demands. This element shall
also indicate methods to accommodate any increase in service
demands necessitated by the proposed use or activity. All required
services improvements necessitated by the proposed use or activity
shall be borne exclusively by the applicant at no cost to the
Township, unless otherwise determined appropriate by the Board
of Supervisors.
(4) That the proposed use or activity complies with the land use and
design standards of this chapter including but not necessarily
limited to internal circulation, parking, lighting and landscaping.
B. A plot plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet
showing the location, dimensions and height of all existing and
proposed buildings, structures, and uses including their relationship to
all property and street lines. If the application relates to property which
is scheduled to be developed in successive stages, such plans shall
show the relationship of the portion scheduled for initial development
to the proposed layout of the entire property.
C. The location, dimensions and arrangements of all open space, yards and
buffer yards including methods and materials to be employed for
screening.
D. The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to be used for
motor vehicle access, off-street parking, off-street loading and
unloading, and provisions to be made for lighting such areas.
E. The dimensions, location, type and methods of illumination for signs, if
applicable.
F. The location and dimensions of all sidewalks and other areas to be
devoted to public or pedestrian use.
G. Provisions to be made for the treatment and disposal of sewage, water
supply and stormwater management.
§ 153-1003 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1003
1:974
§ 153-1004. Procedure for conditional use review and action.
H. The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or intended to be
used for dwelling purposes, including the proposed density in terms of
number of dwelling units per acre.
I. A description of any proposed industrial or commercial operations in
sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing
noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards, traffic
congestion, and other safety or nuisance type affects including
safeguards and methods to control and/or mitigate same.
J. The bounds of all easements either existing or proposed, either on or
directly affecting the subject property.
K. A site analysis map indicating all of the natural features located on the
site including but not necessarily limited to slopes, soils, woodlands,
wetlands, floodplains and waterways.
L. Any other data and information deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer
to enable him to determine the compliance of the proposed conditional
use with the terms of this chapter.
A. Submission. The Zoning Officer upon receipt of a conditional use
application, providing said application is in complete compliance with
the submission requirements of this article, shall submit the requisite
number of copies of the application and supportive documentation to
the Township Board of Supervisors.
B. Board of Supervisors review and action. The Board of Supervisors shall
hold at least one public hearing after public notice to determine the
compliance of the conditional use application with the requirements of
this chapter. The Board of Supervisors shall approve any proposed
conditional use provided that they find adequate evidence that the
proposed use will meet all of the following general requirements as well
as any specific requirements, standards and criteria which may be
listed for the use or district, and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable ordinances and regulations. In
evaluating conditional use applications, the following standards shall
apply:
(1) The Board shall require that the proposed land use be made
compatible with the surrounding existing land uses. Conditions
controlling planting of shade trees, evergreen buffers and planted
berms may be imposed to create a buffer beyond the normal
requirements of this chapter if deemed necessary by the Board.
(2) The Board shall make favorable findings regarding all of the
following prior to approving a conditional use application:
§ 153-1003 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1004
1:975
(a) That the propose use is appropriate to the tract in question and
will not adversely effect the character of the surrounding land
uses and general neighborhood.
(b) That the proposed use provides for adequate access to public
roads, without creating hazardous conditions at intersections
or areas of poor road alignment and without creating undue
congestion. All applications shall be accompanied by a traffic
impact analysis which meets the requirements of the
Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,251
as last amended.
(c) That the proposed use conforms to all applicable requirements
of this chapter.
(d) That the proposed use's water supply and sanitation systems
are adequate and able to prevent disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions. Where applicable, a certificate of
adequacy of sewage and water facilities shall be provided.
(e) That the proposed use will result in an appropriate use of land,
the conservation of the value of buildings, safety from fire,
panic and other dangers, adequacy of light and air, the
prevention of overcrowding of land and congestion of
population, and the adequacy of public and community
services.
(3) A conditional use approval issued by the Board of Supervisors may
be canceled or revoked for any violation of this chapter or any
condition imposed thereon. A conditional use approval shall expire
within six months of the date of the original approval, unless
extended by a motion and affirmative vote of the Board of
Supervisors.
251. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-1004 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1004
1:976
ARTICLE XI
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 153-1100. Purpose.
A Zoning Hearing Board is herein established in order that the objectives
of this chapter may be more fully and equitably achieved and a means
for appeals from the administrative determinations of the Township Zoning
Officer or Township Engineer as the case may be shall be decided in
accordance with this chapter and Article IX of the Municipalities Planning
Code.252 Any rights, duties or obligations of the Board not specified within
this chapter shall be governed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.
§ 153-1101. Establishment of Board; terms of office.
The Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township shall appoint, by
resolution, a Zoning Hearing Board consisting of three members. The Board
of Supervisors shall designate one such member to serve until the first day
of January following the effective date of this chapter, one until the first
day of the second January thereafter, and one until the first day of the
third January thereafter. The Board of Supervisors shall thereinafter appoint
three successors on the expiration of the respective terms of the original
members to serve individual three-year terms, and shall fill any vacancy for
the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The word
"Board" when used in this article shall mean the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 153-1102. Membership; qualifications; vacancies.
Members of the Board shall be residents of the Township and shall hold no
other governmental office in the Township. The Board shall promptly notify
the Board of Supervisors of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the previous member's
term.
§ 153-1103. Quorum.
A quorum shall be necessary for the conduct of any hearing and the taking
of any action by the Board. A quorum shall be not less than two voting
members of the Board. In the event that a quorum cannot be achieved,
or in other instances when deemed appropriate by the Board, the Board
may appoint a Hearing Officer from its own membership to conduct any
hearing on its behalf, and the parties thereto may waive further action by
the Board as provided by Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,253 as amended.
§ 153-1104. Alternate members.
252. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
253. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 153-1100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1104
1:977
§ 153-1105. Removal of members.
Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance, or
nonfeasance in the office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Board of Supervisors. Action of the Board of Supervisors shall only be taken
after the member has received a 15 days' advance notice of the intent to
take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the
member shall request such a hearing in writing to the Board of Supervisors.
§ 153-1106. Organization of Board.
A. The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least one but no
more than three residents of the Township to serve as alternate
members of the Board. An alternate shall, when seated on the Board as
provided herein to complete the quorum, participate in all proceedings
and discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by
law for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as
a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers
and duties set forth in this act and as otherwise provided by law and
this chapter. At any time, an alternate may participate in any
proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote
as a member of the Board nor be compensated unless seated as an
alternate member needed to complete the quorum. Alternates shall
hold no other office in the Township. The term of office of an alternate
member shall be three years.
B. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a
quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on
the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a final
decision of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to
this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according
to declining seniority among all alternates.
A. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, to include a
Chairman and Vice Chairman, who shall serve annual terms as such and
may succeed themselves.
B. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the
commonwealth.
C. Within the limits of funds provided by the Township Supervisors, the
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants, and other technical and clerical services.
D. The Board shall keep full public records of its business, which records
shall be the property of the Township, and shall submit a report of its
activities to the Township Board of Supervisors as requested by the
§ 153-1104 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1106
1:978
§ 153-1107. Powers, duties and jurisdiction.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudication in the following land use matters:
Board of Supervisors. All action taken by the Board shall be fully set
forth in the minutes of the Board which shall indicate the vote of each
member of each question before same.
E. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the performance
of their duties, as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors, but in no
case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to
the members of the Board of Supervisors. Alternate members of the
Board may receive compensation, as may be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors, for the performance of their duties when designated as
alternate members, but in no case shall such compensation exceed the
rate of compensation authorized to be paid to members of the Board.
A. Appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
or determination made by an administrative official responsible for, and
in the enforcement of, this chapter, to include but not be limited to the
determination of the Zoning Officer regarding the applicability of the
words, terms, rules, regulations, provisions and restrictions of this
chapter including determinations in specific instances to whether
questionable uses are permitted by virtue of being "similar to" or
"customarily incidental to" permitted uses as provided by this chapter.
B. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
those brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the
landowner curative amendment sections, Sections 609.1 and
916.1(a)(2), of the Municipalities Planning Code,254 as amended.
C. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of said ordinance.
D. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not
limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the
application therefor, the issuance of any enforcement order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
E. Appeals from a determination by a municipal engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
F. Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter.
G. Applications for special exceptions under this chapter.
254. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1.
§ 153-1106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1107
1:979
§ 153-1108. Persons entitled to initiate action before Board.
Appeals under this section may be filed with the Board in writing by the
landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Township, or any person
aggrieved. Requests for a variance and for a special exception may be filed
with the Board by any landowner or his duly authorized agent.
§ 153-1109. Manner of initiating action before Board.
All action before the Board shall be initiated by a written application for
hearing which shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. All applications shall
be made on forms specified by the Board, and no applications shall be
accepted unless the same shall be fully and legibly completed and unless all
exhibits, fees, and supplemental material required by the application shall
be attached. Final administrative action by way of a zoning determination
shall be rendered by the Zoning Officer as a prerequisite for appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board as provided herein and by the Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended. Every appeal or application shall refer to the
specific provision of the chapter involved, and shall exactly set forth the
position claimed and/or sought, the use for which the special exception is
sought, the details of the variance that is applied for, and the grounds on
which it is claimed that a variance should be granted, as the case may be.
§ 153-1110. Function of Board: variances and special exceptions.
H. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under the preliminary
opinion section, Section 916.2, of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,255 as amended.
I. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision
thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
stormwater management insofar as the same related to developments
not involving applications for subdivisions or land developments, as
defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
A. Variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary
hardship on the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of
application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning
Officer. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purpose of this chapter. The Board may grant a variance provided that
all of the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
255. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 153-1107 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1110
1:980
§ 153-1111. Hearings.
The Board shall conduct open public hearings and make Zoning Ordinance
decisions in accordance with the following requirements:
hardship is due to such conditions, and not to the circumstances
or conditions generally created by the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation at issue.
B. Special exceptions. Where this chapter has provided for stated special
exceptions to be granted or denied by the Board pursuant to express
standards and criteria, the Board shall hear and decide requests for
such special exceptions in accordance with such standards and criteria.
In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this
chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter.
A. Public notice. Public notice as a prerequisite to the holding of a hearing
by the Board shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. [Amended
12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
B. Fees. The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with
respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said
hearings may include compensation for the members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing.
C. Timing. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time. The Board shall render a written decision or written
§ 153-1110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1111
1:981
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing or, if
such hearing is continued, within 45 days after said continued hearing.
If the Board does not make a decision within 45 days after the hearing
or continued hearing, it shall be deemed that such Board has decided
in favor of the applicant affected who is seeking relief, unless the
applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
D. Conduct of hearing. All hearings shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such times as the Board may determine. The Chairman
or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman or, as necessary, a Hearing
Officer selected from the Board's membership, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall keep a stenographic record of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or
if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
E. Standing. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record
before the Board, and any other person including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
the power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
F. Oaths and subpoenas. The Chairman or Acting Chairman shall have the
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties
with standing before the Board.
G. Representation. All parties with standing before the Board shall have
the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the
opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and crossexamine
adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Evidence. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant,
immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded at the
discretion of the Board upon advice from the Board's solicitor.
I. Conduct. The Board or the Hearing Officer shall not communicate,
directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in
connection with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity
for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their
solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the
material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings
after the commencement of hearings with any party or his
representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
§ 153-1111 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1111
1:982
J. Orders. In exercising their statutory powers, the Board may reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order and/or requirement
from the administrative determination appealed from and, in so doing,
may make such additional order and/or requirement as part of the
Boards' decision as may be pertinent or germane.
K. Decisions.
(1) The Board or Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or Hearing Officer. Where the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, this chapter, or other
rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provisions relied
on and the reasons why the conclusions are deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found. Where the Board fails to render the
decisions within the period required or fails to hold the required
hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for
a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in
favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or
on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been
rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the
Board to meet or render a decision as hereinafter provided, the
Board shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days from
the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same
manner as provided herein. If the Board shall fail to provide such
notice, the appellant may do so. Nothing in this section shall
prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal
the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) A copy of the final decisions, or where no decision is called for, the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than five days following the date of the decision. To all
other persons who have filed their name and address with the
Board not later than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall
provide by mail or otherwise brief notice of the decisions or
findings and a statement of the place at which the full decisions or
findings may be examined.
L. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board may, within
30 days after such decision of the Board, file an appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas of Montgomery County. Such appeal shall be made in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, and in such form as may be prescribed or otherwise
authorized by law.
§ 153-1111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1112
1:983
§ 153-1112. Board procedure and considerations.
In passing upon applications for special exceptions and variances the Board
shall consider the following factors as well as all relevant factors and
procedures specified in this chapter:
A. Technical assistance. The Zoning Hearing Board in considering any
matter within its jurisdiction may consult with the Towamencin
Planning Commission, the Montgomery County Planning Commission,
or any other specialist or groups of specialists having expert knowledge
of the matter under consideration, but need not be bound thereby.
B. Burden of proof. The applicant for a special exception or variance shall
have the burden of proving that his application falls within the provision
of the chapter and shall have the further burden of proving:
(1) That the special exception or variance, if authorized, will not alter
the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located.
(2) That the variance or special exception, if authorized, will not
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property.
(3) That the special exception or variance, if authorized, will not be
detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or the general welfare of
the Township or the community.
(4) That the special exception or variance, if authorized, will not result
in or aggravate existing, adverse or abnormal patterns of traffic
flow, nor cause an unwarranted impact on traffic at or near the
particular location involved in the application.
C. Standards for Board actions. In any instance where the Zoning Hearing
Board is required to render a land use decision, the Board shall, among
other things, give consideration to the following:
(1) Consider the suitability of the property for the use desired. Assure
itself that the proposed change is consistent with the spirit,
purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Determine that the proposed change will not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property or from the character
of the neighborhood and that the use of the property adjacent to
the area included in the proposed change or plan is adequately
safeguarded.
(3) Determine that the proposed change will serve the best interests of
the Township, the convenience of the community (where
applicable) and the public welfare.
(4) Consider the effect of the proposed change upon the logical,
efficient, and economical extension of public services and facilities
§ 153-1112 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1112
1:984
such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection and public
schools.
(5) Consider the suitability of the proposed location of the use with
respect to probable effects upon highway traffic, and assure
adequate access arrangements in order to protect major streets
from undue congestion and hazard.
(6) Be guided in its study, review, and recommendation by sound
standards of land development practice where applicable.
(7) Impose such conditions, in addition to those required, as are
necessary to assure that the intent of the Zoning Ordinance is
complied with, which conditions may include, but are not limited to
harmonious design of buildings, planting and its maintenance as a
sight or sound screen, the minimizing of noxious, offensive or
hazardous elements, and the provision for adequate parking and
sanitation.
(8) Determine whether there are special circumstances or conditions
fully described in the findings applying to the land or buildings for
which the variance is sought, which justify that the application of
the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the
reasonable use of such land or building.
(9) Determine whether the unique circumstances for which the
variance is sought were either created by the owner of the
property, or were due to, or the result of, general conditions in the
district in which the property is located.
(10) Consider the effects of the proposed change with respect to the
most appropriate use of land; conserving the value of land and
buildings; safety from fire, panic and other dangers; the
overcrowding of land; congestion of population; and the adequacy
of public and community services.
(11) Consider the compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable
future.
(12) Give full consideration to the size, scope, intent, and character of
the exception requested and assure the compatibility of the
proposed use with the spirit, purpose and intent of the
Comprehensive Plan, the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,256 as last amended and the provisions of this chapter.
(13) Such other factors as may be relevant to achieving the purpose of
this chapter.
256. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-1112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1113
1:985
§ 153-1113. Time limitations.
All appeals from administrative determinations adverse to any landowner
or affected party shall be filed by the landowner or affected party with
the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days after official notice of the
determination has been issued.
§ 153-1114. Mediation option.
A. Parties to proceedings authorized in this article may utilize mediation
as an aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the
Zoning Hearing Board, in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board
initiate mediation or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall
supplement, not replace, those procedures in this article once they have
been formally initiated. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
expanding or limiting Township police powers or as modifying any
principles of substantive law. Applications for special exceptions and
variances are not appropriate for the mediation option and, therefore,
may not utilize this section.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case, and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. The terms
and conditions of mediation are hereby set forth as follows:
(1) The cost of mediation shall be borne by the applicant.
(2) The parties shall agree on a mediator who shall have a working
knowledge of municipal land use and zoning and land development
procedures and demonstrated skills in mediation.
(3) Parties to proceedings under this application may select the
mediation option by sending written notice to the Zoning Hearing
Board of their intention to do so. Mediation shall be completed
within 90 days of the date of notification to the Board.
(4) The written notice to the Zoning Hearing Board indicating the
party's intent to mediate shall include a written consent signed by
all parties agreeing to the suspension of time limits otherwise
required by this chapter and the Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, and by an applicant or Township decision-making body if
either is not a party to the mediation.
(5) All parties to the proceedings shall be identified in the notice to the
Board and shall be served notice of the party's intent to mediate. All
parties shall be afforded the opportunity to participate in any
mediation proceeding.
(6) Any mediation to which a Township entity is party shall be open to
the public.
§ 153-1113 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1114
1:986
§ 153-1115. Expiration. [Amended 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Hearing Board, a special
exception or variance, or specified by the Board of Supervisors for a
conditional use, such zoning relief shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain
a building permit in connection therewith within one year of the date of the
order of the Zoning Hearing Board, Board of Supervisors or court granting
such special exception, variance or conditional use. In those instances
where land development/subdivision approval is a necessary prerequisite
prior to obtaining a building permit, the special exception, variance, or
conditional use shall expire if the applicant fails to make a diligent effort
to obtain such land development/subdivision approval within six months
following the date of zoning approval. Upon receipt of land development
approval, the special exception, variance, or conditional use shall expire
if a building permit is not obtained within six months of the date of land
development approval.
(7) All mediated solutions must be in writing and signed by the parties
and become subject to review and approval by the appropriate
decision-making body pursuant to the authorized procedures set
forth in this chapter and the Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.
(8) No offers or statements made in the mediated sessions, excluding
the final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as
evidence in any subsequent judicial or administrative proceeding.
§ 153-1114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1115
1:987

ARTICLE XII
Amendments
§ 153-1200. Power of amendment.
The Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township may from time to time
amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal this chapter, including the
Zoning Map, by proceeding in the following manner, and as otherwise
required by law. Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, or
modification or repeal may be initiated by the Board of Supervisors on its
own motion, the Township Planning Commission, or by petition by one or
more owners of property to be affected by the proposed amendment. Any
proposed amendment favorably acted upon shall be specifically found to
be in accordance with the spirit and intent of the community development
objectives of the Township Comprehensive Plan.
§ 153-1201. Applicability of amendments. [Added 5-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-7]
A. When an application for either a special exception or a conditional use
has been filed with either the Zoning Hearing Board or governing body,
as relevant, and the subject matter of such application would ultimately
constitute either a land development or a subdivision as defined in
§ 153-1301, no change or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plans shall affect the decision on such
application adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be
entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly
filed.
B. Provided, further, should such an application be approved by either the
Zoning Hearing Board or governing body, as relevant, the applicant
shall be entitled to proceed with the submission of either land
development or subdivision plans within a period of six months or
longer or as may be approved by either the Zoning Hearing Board or
the governing body following the date of such approval in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood
at the time the application was duly filed before either the Zoning
Hearing Board or governing body, as relevant.
C. If either a land development or subdivision plan is so filed within said
period, such plan shall be subject to the provisions of Section 508(1)
through (4) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10508(1) through (4), and specifically to the time limitations of
Section 508(4), 53 P.S. § 10508(4) which, shall commence as of the date
of filing such land development or subdivision plan.
§ 153-1200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1201
1:989

ARTICLE XIII
Definitions
§ 153-1300. Word usage and interpretation.
A. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have, for the purposes of this chapter, the meanings given
in the following clauses.
B. Any word, term or phrase used in this chapter, but not specifically
defined herein, shall be defined as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.257 Any word, term or phrase that is not
specifically defined either in this chapter or in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code shall be given its normal and customary
meaning as found in the most recent edition of Webster's New
Collegiate Dictionary.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) Words of the masculine gender are intended to represent the
feminine as well.
(2) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) The term "shall" is mandatory.
(5) The term "may" is permissive.
(6) The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or structure
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or
designed to be used or occupied."
(7) The word "Commission" and the words "Planning Commission"
shall mean the Towamencin Township Planning Commission.
(8) The word "Board" or the words "Zoning Hearing Board" shall mean
the Towamencin Township Zoning Hearing Board as granted
jurisdiction under the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(9) The words "Township," "municipality" and "governing body" shall
mean the Board of Supervisors of Towamencin Township as granted
jurisdiction under the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(10) "Zoning Ordinance" shall mean the Zoning Ordinance of
Towamencin Township, as amended.
257. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-1300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1300
1:991
§ 153-1301. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICE — That which conforms to accepted
principles, tests or standards of nationally recognized technical or scientific
authorities.
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a
lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."
ACCESSORY USE — See "use, accessory."
ACRE — A measure of land area containing 43,560 square feet.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — An enterprise that is actively engaged in
the commercial production and preparation for market of crops, livestock
and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and preparation
for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and
aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes an enterprise that
implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of
crops, livestock, livestock products or commodities produced consistent
with practices and procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or
are consistent with technological development with the agricultural
industry.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
ALTERATIONS — Any change in or addition to the supporting or structural
components of a building, such as the bearing walls, partitions, columns,
beam or girders, or any modification which would convert an existing
building into a different structure or adapt it to a different use or any
enlargement or diminution of a building or structure.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, equitable owner, tenant or
contractor who, with the written consent of the owner, has filed an
application for development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, or for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a land development plan.
AUTHORITY — A duly authorized politic or corporate body established
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(11) "Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance" shall mean the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Towamencin
Township,258 as last amended.
258. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-1300 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:992
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) — The total volume of traffic during a
given time period (in whole days greater than one day and less than one
year) divided by the number of days in that time period.
AWNING — A cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering which projects
from a wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window and is either
permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a
position against the building.[Amended 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
BANQUET FACILITY — A building or establishment which can
accommodate a group of people attending a specific, prearranged event
such as a wedding or bar mitzvah where food and beverages are to be
served and consumed within the building and/or an attached patio. No food
or beverage service and no gathering of people other than for the specific,
prearranged event is permitted.259
BASEMENT — A story partly underground, but having 1/2 or more of its
height (measured from floor to ceiling) above the average level of the
adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six feet
eight inches. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of
height measurements or determining square footage, only if the vertical
distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground
is more than four feet, or if used for business or dwelling purposes.
BEACON LIGHT — Any light with one or more beams, capable of being
directed in any direction or directions or capable of being revolved
automatically.
BUFFER — An area designated and functioning to separate the elements
and uses of land which abut it and to ease the transition between them.
Unless otherwise specified, buffers may be included as part of the required
setbacks and yard areas.
BUFFER SCREEN — A buffer comprised of natural and/or man-made
materials arranged in a certain specific depth, height, and density to block
the view from one site to another during all seasons of the year, and to
reduce the transmittal of noise and odor between sites.
BUILDER — A person who, by contract or other agreement, is charged
with the responsibility of construction of buildings or other structures, or of
making any construction improvements on any parcel of land.
BUILDING — Any structure having enclosed walls and roof, intended for
support or sheltering a use or occupancy, and attached to the land. Included
shall be all mobile homes and trailers used for human habitation.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building located on the same lot as a principal
building and incidental and subordinate to the principal building. Any
portion of a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an
accessory use is not an accessory building.
259. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of “base flood” and “base flood elevation,” which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06. See now
Ch. 82, Floodplain Management.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:993
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal area measured from the outermost
exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on
a lot including all portions of the structure which form the total footprint of
the structure. The percent of building coverage of any lot is measured by
dividing the total area of all building coverage within the lot by the lot area.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The two-dimensional area of a lot within which
a principal structure is permitted to be built and which is defined by the
required yard setbacks.
BUILDING ENVELOPE IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE TOWAMENCIN
VILLAGE OVERLAY DISTRICT — The two-dimensional area of a lot within
which buildings and structures and required off-street parking are
permitted to be built and which are specifically shown on the building
envelope plan contained in the Towamencin Village Land Use and Design
Manual.
BUILDING FACADES — A portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire
width of the building elevation.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance of a building measured from
the average elevation of the proposed finished grade surrounding the
building to the highest point of the roof, provided that chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks, solar energy apparatus and similar
projections shall not be included in the height.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — That individual designated by the Board of
Supervisors to enforce the provisions of the official building code or
codes260 of the Township of Towamencin.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted, or is intended
to be conducted, the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING RESTRICTION LINE — See "building setback line."
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line extending the full required width of a
lot which is parallel to the ultimate street right-of-way at a perpendicular
distance therefrom equal to the required front yard setback. The location of
this line determines the closest point to the street that any building may be
located.
CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of any street, which is that
portion of a street between the curbs where there are curbs or that portion
of the paved surface customarily used by vehicles in the regular course of
travel over the street.
CELLAR (OR CRAWLSPACE) — A space partly underground and having
more than 1/2 of its height (measured from floor to ceiling) below the
average finished grade of the adjoining exterior ground surface, or with a
floor-to-ceiling height of less than six feet eight inches. A cellar shall not
be included in determining the permissible number of stories or square
footage, nor shall it be used for dwelling, office or business purposes.
260. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Construction Codes.
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:994
CENTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES — The Governor's Center
for Local Government Services located within the Department of
Community and Economic Development.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No.
01-7]
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A document issued by the
Zoning Officer and/or the Building Inspector pursuant to Township
ordinance(s) adopted for this purpose.
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY — Any change of tenant or resident, or the sale
or transfer of title or ownership of any structure, building, dwelling unit or
nonresidential occupied land area.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use which differs from the previous use of a
building, structure or land.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision established
in accordance with accepted engineering practice at street intersections
defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance and height
as specified in Township ordinances or Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Regulations and Standards. Where said ordinances,
standards or regulations differ, the most restrictive (safest) sight triangle
area shall be required.
CLUSTER — A development design technique that concentrates buildings
in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land area to be used
for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally
sensitive features.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — See "open space, common."261
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A plan comprised of maps, charts, descriptive
matter officially prepared by Planning Commission and duly adopted by the
Board of Supervisors showing among other things recommendations for the
most appropriate use of land; the most desirable density of population; a
system of thoroughfares, parkways and streets; parks and recreation areas;
the general location and extent of facilities for water, sewer, light, and
power; and for the general location, character, and extent of community
facilities within Towamencin Township in accordance with Article III of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247,262 as amended.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may be permitted or denied pursuant
to express standards or criteria by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
the provisions of Article X of this chapter and Article VI of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended. The burden of proof
and compliance with express standards and criteria applicable shall be
on the applicant. The Board of Supervisors may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in the Zoning
261. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “completely dry space,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06. See now Ch. 82,
Floodplain Management.
262. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:995
Ordinance as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the
Zoning Ordinance.
CONDOMINIUM — A unit owned and maintained in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act,263 as amended, and in accordance
with the provisions for open space, roads and other development features in
the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development Regulations.
CONSISTENCY — An agreement or correspondence between matters being
compared which denotes a reasonable, rational, similar connection or
relationship.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or a structure
including the placement of a mobile home.
CONVERSION — The change in the use of land or a structure.
COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A land use and growth management
plan prepared by the County Planning Commission and adopted by the
County Commissioners which establishes broad goals and criteria for
municipalities to use in preparation of their comprehensive plans and land
use regulation.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
CRAWLSPACE — See "cellar."
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian travel.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with access closed at one end and with a vehicular
turnaround at the closed end.
CUT —
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance as provided by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, either by reason of the
grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals of determinations. All
decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common Pleas of the county
and Judicial District wherein the municipality lies.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per lot area. (See "lot area.")
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of land use ordinances or applications thereunder, except
the following:
An excavation; the difference between a point on the original grade of
the ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade.
A.
B. The material removed in an excavation.
A. The governing body;
B. The Zoning Hearing Board; or
263. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:996
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets or other pavings; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; filling operations; storage
of equipment or material; and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Zoning, subdivision, site plan, official
map, floodplain regulation or other governmental regulation over the use
and development of land.
DISTRICT — A part, zone or geographical area within the Township wherein
certain and specific land use, zoning and/or development regulations apply
uniformly.
DRAINAGEWAY, NATURAL — Any natural waterways or watercourses,
formed to carry stormwater over land, and which are typically referred to
as "swales" and/or "intermittent streams."
DRIVEWAY — A private vehicular way providing access to parking spaces,
a garage, dwelling or other structure.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof designed, used and occupied
exclusively for human habitation.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters for one or more individuals living
together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitary, and
sleeping facilities.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to, and/or for, the use by the public, a corporation, or other person
in equity, which is subordinate to, but not inconsistent with, the owner's
general property rights.
EASEMENT, DRAINAGE — An easement secured for the preservation of
natural drainageways, stream corridors and perennial and/or intermittent
streams, and for man-made drainage facilities related thereto.
EGRESS — An exit.
ENCROACHMENT — Any placement or obstruction in a delineated
floodway, right-of-way, easement, required yard, setback or adjacent land.
The planning agency, only if, and to the extent, the planning agency
is charged with the final decision on preliminary or final plans under
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,264 as last amended,
or planned residential development provisions. Determinations shall be
appealable only to the boards designated as having jurisdiction for such
appeal.
C.
264. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:997
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly appointed by Towamencin
Township.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — An area with one or more of the
following characteristics:
EXCAVATION — Any act by which natural materials are dug into, cut,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated, as well as the
conditions resulting therefrom.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living and cooking together as a
single housekeeping unit, provided that not more than two of such number
are unrelated to all of the others by blood, marriage or legal adoption.
As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may interpret the term
"family" to apply to a group of individuals, not exceeding four, not related to
each other by blood, marriage or legal adoption, living and cooking together
as a single housekeeping unit. Domestic servants shall be considered an
adjunct to the term "family."
FAMILY MEMBER, IMMEDIATE — A person that is related by birth, legal
adoption, marriage or blood. For the purpose of this chapter, an immediate
family member shall be comprised of only the following relations: spouse,
child, parent, and sibling.
FILL —
A. Slopes in excess of 15%;
B. Floodplains and/or alluvial soils;
C. Hydric soils;
D. Soils classified as highly erodible or corrosive;
E. Land incapable of meeting percolation requirements;
F. Land formerly used for landfill operations or hazardous industrial uses;
G. Geologic fault areas;
H. Stream corridors;
I. Mature stands of native vegetation;
J. Aquifer recharge and discharge areas.265
Any act by which natural materials are placed, pushed, dumped, pulled,
transported or moved to a new location above the natural surface of
A.
265. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “essentially dry space,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06. See now Ch. 82,
Floodplain Management.
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:998
FLAG LOT — A lot with reduced frontage on a public street and where
access to the public street is by means of a private drive and/or easement.
Flag lots shall have a minimum pole width along a public or private street
of not less than 25 feet.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map prepared by the Federal
Insurance Administration or the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) designating the boundaries of areas having special flood hazards in
Towamencin Township.
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
FLOODPLAIN — That area established in this chapter as the Floodplain
District; the "floodplain" definition contained therein shall be considered the
definition for floodplain for all purposes and uses of this chapter.266
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.[Amended 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building
or structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required for
the conduct of the business or use, and basements, attics, and penthouses,
as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. This term does not
include cellars, attics not used for human occupancy, nor any floor space
in an accessory building . This term does include enclosed and unenclosed
porches and floor space in a principal building intended or designed for the
parking of motor vehicles.
the ground on or top of the stripped surface, as well as the conditions
resulting therefrom.
Sand, gravel, earth, earthen or other materials of any composition
whatsoever placed or deposited by humans on or under the ground
surface.
B.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the several floors of a building or structure from the exterior face
of exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two
buildings, but excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is
less than six feet.
A.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular
parking or loading; and all floors below the first or ground floor, except
B.
266. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “floodproofing,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06. See now Ch. 82, Floodplain
Management.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:999
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.[Added 5-23-2001
by Ord. No. 01-7]
FRONTAGE — That dimension of a lot abutting on a street that is between
the side lot lines measured along the principal street's ultimate right-of-way
line.
FRONT LOT LINE — See "lot line, front."
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."
GARAGE — A deck, building or structure, or part thereof, used or intended
to be used for the parking and/or storage of vehicles.
GENERAL CONSISTENCY; GENERALLY CONSISTENT — That which
exhibits consistency.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
GRADE — The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
GRADE, FINISHED — The final elevation of the ground surface after
development.
GRADE, NATURAL — The elevation of the ground surface in its natural
state, before man-made alterations.
GRADING — The changing of the natural topography through cutting or
filling by more than one foot in elevation over an area exceeding 2,000
square feet, or in which the natural drainage pattern of a lot is altered.
GROUND COVER — Natural mulch or nondeciduous or low-growing plants
installed or planted in such a manner as to provide a continuous cover over
the ground.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room in a dwelling unit other than a kitchen,
bathroom, closet, pantry, hallway, cellar, storage space and garage.
HEARING — An administrative proceeding conducted by a Board pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247,267 as amended.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to
the public.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
267. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:1000
HYDRIC SOILS — See "soils, hydric."268
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — A measure of the intensity of the use of a
piece of land. The percent of impervious coverage of any lot is measured by
dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces within the lot by the lot
area.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Ground cover material which does not readily
absorb rain. All buildings, structures, parking areas, driveways, roads,
sidewalks and any areas in concrete, asphalt, and packed stone shall be
considered impervious surfaces within this definition. In addition, other
areas determined by the Township Engineer to be impervious within the
meaning of this definition will also be classified as impervious surfaces.
IMPROVEMENT — Grading, paving, curbing, roadways, streetlights and
signs, fire hydrants, wells, water mains, sanitary sewers, on-lot sewage
disposal, storm drains, sidewalks, crosswalks and street shade trees.
JUNK — Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or
not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage,
storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition.
LAKES AND PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year-round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams, or result from
excavation. The shoreline of such water bodies shall be measured from
the spillway crest elevation rather than permanent pool if there is any
difference. Lakes are bodies of water two or more acres in surface area.
Ponds are any water bodies less than two acres in surface area.
LAND — Ground, soil or earth including structures thereon, above, at, or
below the ground surface.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
(1)
A.
268. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “identified floodplain area,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06. See now Ch. 82,
Floodplain Management.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:1001
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LAND USE ORDINANCE — Any ordinance or map adopted pursuant to
the authority granted in Articles IV, V, VI and VII of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planing Code, Act 247,269 as amended.
LOADING SPACE — An area accessible from a street or way, in a building
or on a lot for temporary use of vehicles, while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land, established by a plat, or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area contained within the property lines
of an individual lot and shown on a subdivision or plot plan or as may
otherwise be required by this chapter, excluding any area within an existing
or designated future street right-of-way or the pole of a flag lot which sole
purpose is to gain access to the rear or flag portion of the lot.
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
B. A subdivision of land.
The following activities are excluded from this definition:
The conversion of an existing single-family dwelling, detached
dwelling or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For purposes of this subclause, an amusement park is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by proper authorities.
(3)
C.
269. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:1002
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets
at their intersection.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of a lot covered by impervious surfaces.
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the ultimate right-of-way
line and the rear lot line, measured from the midpoint of the front ultimate
right-of-way line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT, FLAG — See "flag lot."
LOT FRONTAGE — See "frontage."
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public or private
space. The street lot line shall be co-terminus with the ultimate street rightof-
way line for such portion of the lot as abuts the street, and shall not be
the center line of the street, or any other line within the street even though
such line may be the property boundary line by deed.
LOT LINE, FRONT — Any lot line which is also a street line.[Amended
5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of being
parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself a street line, and
except that in the case of a corner lot the owner shall have the option
of choosing which of the two lot lines that are not street lines is to be
considered a rear lot line. In the case of a lot having no street frontage or
a lot of an odd shape, the lot line furthest (at its furthest point) from any
street shall be considered a rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF — The smallest lot area established by the Zoning
Ordinance on which a use or structure may be located in a particular zoning
district.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot abutting two streets which is not a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines at the
required or proposed building setback line. In a case where there is only
one side lot line, lot width shall be measured between such lot line and the
opposite rear lot line or ultimate right-of-way line.270
MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, office, or place of assembly, contained
in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which arrives at a
site completed and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used
with or without a permanent foundation. The term includes park trailers,
travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on
a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
270. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “lowest flood,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06. See now Ch. 82, Floodplain
Management.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:1003
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership,
which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
manufactured homes for nontransient use.271
MEADOW — An informal open space consisting of native plants and grasses
left undisturbed to allow for the process of natural succession.[Added
12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-09]
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a land
use dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly
exploring and settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement
which the parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not
coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and dolomite,
sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore,
vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat and
crude oil and natural gas.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of the existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the existing requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste,
vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MODULAR HOME — A single-family dwelling, intended for permanent
occupancy, made by assembling one or more factory produced threedimensional
sections into an integral living unit whose construction
materials and specifications conform to those of conventionally built units.
MONUMENTS — A stone or concrete reference marker with a flat top of
at least four inches square, containing a copper or brass dowel scored with
an "X" to mark the reference point, and at least 30 inches in length. The
bottom sides shall be at least two inches greater than the top, to minimize
movements caused by frost.
271. Editor’s Note: The definition of "marquee," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01. See now Art. VIII, Signs, § 153-801, Definitions.
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:1004
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after January 1, 1999, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
NONCOMMERCIAL SWIMMING POOLS — An accessory recreational
structure designed to contain a water depth of 24 inches or more for use by
the residents of the principal use and/or their guests.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully exists prior to the enactment of such
ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming
structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior
to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
OCCUPANCY — The use of a building, lot or portion thereof for a specific
purpose.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — See "certificate of use and occupancy."
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated or reserved for public or private use and
enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space. Open space shall not include
land occupied by nonrecreational structures, roads, street rights-of-way,
parking lots, land reserved for future parking, or any portion of required
minimum lot areas as required by this chapter.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Land and/or water within or related to a
development, not individually owned or dedicated for general public use,
which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the
residents of the development and may include such complementary
structures and improvements as may be required and/or appropriate but
shall not include common parking areas, roadways and structures not
A. Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or
B. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
C. Endangers or injures personal or real property.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:1005
primarily intended for the recreational use and benefit of the designated
users.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping in an unroofed area of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise, or one or more motor vehicles not having
valid inspection stickers issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
OVERFLOW PARKING — Any parking in addition to the minimum parking
requirements that are established by the Zoning Ordinance.
OWNER — The owner of record of a parcel of land or equitable owner acting
on behalf of the owner of record.
PARCEL — See "lot."
PARKING AREA — Any public or private land area designed, designated
and/or used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots, garages,
private driveways and legally designated areas of public streets.
PARKING AREA, COMMON — An off-street area containing parking space
for six or more vehicles.
PARKING FACILITY, STRUCTURED — A building or structure, or portion
thereof, consisting of more than one level and used for the temporary
parking of motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space with dimensions as required
by applicable Township Ordinance, available for the parking of one motor
vehicle exclusive of passageways, driveways, or other means of circulation
or access. A garage or garage area shall not be considered a parking space
except as otherwise provided by Township ordinance. A parking space shall
have adequate base stone and be paved with concrete, asphalt or other
material with like qualities.
PEDESTRIAN — An individual traveling by foot.
PERMIT — Written governmental permission issued by an authorized
official empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law
but not allowed without such authorization.
PERMIT, BUILDING — A permit issued by the designated Township official
prior to the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or addition to a
building, structure or part thereof.
PERMITTED USE — A use allowed by right in a zoning district subject to
the restrictions applicable to that use and zoning district.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic, including a trustee, a
receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative thereof.
PLOT PLAN — A drawing which indicates the uses, locations, dimensions
and orientations of all physical features on a lot including but not
necessarily limited to property lines, streets, buildings, structures, access
to buildings or structures, driveways, parking areas, walkways, patios,
other impervious surfaces, large trees, on-site sewer or water systems,
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:1006
easements, deed restrictions, detention basins, and other significant natural
features located on a lot, and the uses of all contiguous lots.
PRESERVATION OR PROTECTION — When used in connection with natural
and historic resources, shall include means to conserve and safeguard these
resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall not be interpreted to
authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry, mining or other lawful
uses of natural resources.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land use for agricultural purposes that
contains soils of the first, second or third class as defined by the United
States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource and Conservation
Services County Soil Survey.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominate use of a lot.
PROHIBITED USE — A use that is not permitted in a zoning district.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any improvement or other facility which is, or
is intended to be, the responsibility of, or located within a right-of way or
easement of, the Township.
QUORUM — A majority of the full membership of the Planning Commission,
Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors as is required by the
Municipalities Planning Code to take official action or render a decision
regarding a land use application.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of a decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to any
proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at the cost
of reproduction.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.272
D.
272. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “regulatory flood elevation,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06. See now Ch. 82,
Floodplain Management.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:1007
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of land separating a street from adjacent
property.
RETENTION/DETENTION AREA — A water impoundment, made by
constructing a dam or embankment or by excavating a pit, for the purpose
of retaining runoff water and releasing it slowly into the ground or into its
natural watercourse.
REVIEW — An examination of applications, sketches, plans, or submissions
of an applicant in accordance with the procedures established by the
Township for this purpose.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land usually linear in configuration, set aside for use
as streets, roads, pedestrian ways or other means of travel and/or for the
location of other public utilities.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING — The legal right-of-way as established by the
commonwealth or other appropriate governing authority and currently in
existence.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE — The right-of-way established by the
Towamencin Township Comprehensive Plan and Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as last amended, and designated on the Official
Right-of-Way Map on file in the Township Offices. The ultimate right-ofway
is intended to provide adequate width for future street and/or utility
improvements within the Township.
ROOF LINE — The juncture of the roof and the perimeter wall of the
structure.
RUNOFF — The volume of surface water discharge of a given watershed
after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs off the
surface of the land.
SANITARY SEWER — A public or private utility system designed to collect,
centrally treat and dispose of sewage from customers in compliance with
the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources or of the Township, or the Authority.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or by gravity. Once this
matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred
to as "sediment."
SETBACK — The distance between a lot line and the closest portion of
a building, structure, use or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered
steps.
SETBACK LINE — That line that is the required minimum distance from the
ultimate street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the
area within which the principal structure must be located. (See "building
envelope.")
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:1008
SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PRIVATE —
SEWER, STORM — A system of conduits that collect and route stormwater
to a surface water discharge point.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance of unobstructed view established in
accordance with accepted engineering practice from a predetermined
driver's eye height to the furthest visible point a predetermined distance
above the street surface.
SIGN — Any device, structure, fixture, painting, emblem, or visual that uses
words, graphics, colors, illumination, symbols, numbers, or letters for the
purpose of communicating a message. A sign includes the sign faces as well
as any sign supporting structure as defined by Article VIII (Signs) of this
Code.273[Amended 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-01]
SIGN AREA — The dimensions of a sign surface used to display information,
messages, advertising, logos, or symbols. See § 153-805C of this Code for
standards for measuring sign area.274
SITE — A parcel of land intended to have one or more structures, buildings
or uses, or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
SITE AREA — All land area within a site as defined by deed and determined
by field survey excluding rights-of-way of existing public roads.
SITE PLAN — The map of the property showing the proposed location of
facilities, structures and other improvements.
SKIRTS — Panels specifically designed for the purpose of screening the
underside of a mobile home by forming an extension of the vertical exterior
walls of the mobile home and covering the entire distance between the
bottom of the exterior walls and the ground elevation below.
SLOPE — The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed in percent or degrees. (See "grade.")
ON-LOT — An on-lot septic system comprised of a septic tank and
disposal field intended to service effluent disposal from one building
or a group of buildings on a single lot under single ownership in
compliance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, the Montgomery County Health Department,
and/or the Township.
A.
COMMUNITY SYSTEMS — A sewage disposal system designed and
intended to serve more than a single lot or more than one building
or dwelling unit under separate ownership in compliance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, the
Montgomery County Health Department and/or the Township,
whichever is more stringent.
B.
273. Editor's Note: See Art. VIII, Signs, in this chapter.
274. Editor's Note: The definitions of "sign height," "sign, nonilluminated," and "sign
structure," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 1-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-01. See now Art. VIII, Signs, § 153-801, Definitions.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:1009
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin
that overlies bedrock and can be readily excavated.
SOILS, AGRICULTURAL — Soils classified in the Soil Survey of Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, and U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service. The term, unless otherwise specified, refers to land
capability units I, II and III which may be considered prime agricultural
soils.
SOILS, ALLUVIAL/FLOODPLAIN — Areas subject to periodic flooding and
listed in the Soil Survey of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, and U.S.
Department of Agricultural Soil Conservation Service, as being "on, or in,
the floodplain" or "subject to flooding."
SOILS, HYDRIC — Soils that are categorized as poorly drained that can
support hydrophilic plants, but may not do so in many cases. For the
purpose of this chapter hydric soils are general wetland indicator soils. (See
"wetlands.")
SOIL SURVEY — A report entitled Soil Survey of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, published April 1967 and inclusive of any amendments, by
the Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture,
which is available in the Township or through the Montgomery County
Conservation District.
SOLAR ACCESS — The ability of sunlight to shine on a property owner's
land, or more specifically, the owner's solar energy facility or solar energy
system, without the sunlight being blocked by structures, vegetation, or
other obstructions on neighboring land.[Added 2-26-2015 by Ord. No.
15-03]
SOLAR EASEMENT — A legal agreement that protects access to sunlight,
or solar access, on a property.[Added 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY — An alternative energy facility that consists
of one or more ground-mounted, freestanding, or building-mounted or
integrated solar collection devices, solar-energy-related equipment and
other associated infrastructure with the primary intention of generating
electricity or otherwise converting solar energy to a different form of energy
for primary commercial or other off-site use in accordance with applicable
laws and regulations.[Added 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An alternative energy system that consists
of one or more ground-mounted, freestanding, or building-mounted or
integrated solar collection devices, solar-energy-related equipment and
associated infrastructure with the primary intention of generating
electricity or otherwise converting solar energy to a different form of energy
to reduce on-site consumption of purchased power, when a property upon
which the system is installed also receives electricity supplied by a utility
company. The solar energy system shall be designed to supply no more
power than required by the principal use on the property and shall not
be used for the generation of power for the sale of energy to other users,
although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of
excess power generated from time to time to the local utility company in
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:1010
accordance with applicable law and regulation.[Added 2-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-03]
SOLAR GLARE — The effect produced by light reflecting from a solar
module with an intensity sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss
in visual performance and visibility.[Added 2-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
SOLAR MODULE — A device containing one or more receptive cells equal
to or greater than two square feet, the purpose of which is to convert solar
energy into electrical or thermal energy.[Added 2-26-2015 by Ord. No.
15-03]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to § 153-1110B of this chapter and Articles VI and IX of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.275
SPORTS COURTS — Private tennis courts, basketball courts, hockey rinks,
skateboard/bike ramps and multiuse sports courts, and all facilities
incidental thereto, when located in the rear yard. Each such sport court
shall be unilluminated and shall be for the private use of the owners of the
subject property. Further, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any
sport court, a drainage system therefor shall be approved by the Township
Engineer, specifically with respect to the discharge of water onto adjacent
properties.[Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope exceeds 15%, which,
because of its slope, is subject to high rates of stormwater runoff and
therefore erosion.
STORY — That part of a building located between a floor and the floor or
roof next above. The first story of a building is the lowest story having 1/2
or more of its walls above grade level. A half-story is a story under a gable,
hip or gambrel roof.
STREET — A right-of-way municipally or privately owned, serving as a
means of vehicular and pedestrian travel and access.
STREET, ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A street connecting districts or
communities, serving large volumes of fast-moving through traffic.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street carrying higher volumes of fast-moving
traffic than a feeder street.
STREET, CONTROLLED ACCESS — A street connecting districts or
communities, serving large volumes of fast-moving through traffic, which is
physically divided by barriers and which has a limited amount of entrances
and exits.
STREET, FEEDER — A street connecting local access streets to streets of a
higher order such as collector streets or controlled access streets and which
carries a lesser volume of traffic.
275. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “special permit,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06. See now Ch. 82, Floodplain
Management.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:1011
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the ultimate rightof-
way line of a public street, road or highway legally opened or officially
plotted or between a lot and a privately owned street, road or way over
which the owners or tenants of two or more lots each held in single and
separate ownership have right-of-way.
STREET, LOCAL ACCESS — A street used primarily as the principal means
of access to local properties, and which carries a small volume of traffic.
STREET, SERVICE OR MARGINAL ACCESS — A street parallel and adjacent
to an arterial street providing access to abutting properties by a cartway
separated from the arterial street by a reserve strip.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — See "alteration."
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the surface.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.276
SUBTENANT — One who has the temporary use and occupancy of the real
property of another, who is not the owner of the property, the duration
and terms of tenancy being usually fixed by an instrument or agreement
between the tenant and subtenant. For the purpose of signage, the
subtenant and the space occupied by the subtenant shall be considered
separate only when the space occupied by the subtenant has been approved
as a subdivision/land development and when the space complies with all
of the codes and regulations of Towamencin Township for a separate
leasehold, including, but not limited to, having a separate access and
firewall separation from the area occupied by the tenant.[Added
12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10]
SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TENANT — One who has the temporary use and occupancy of the real
property of the owner, the duration and terms of his tenancy being usually
fixed by an instrument called a lease. For the purpose of signage, any tenant
occupying the space of the real property of the owner, shall be considered
the same use as the owner of the real property, and shall have no rights to
additional signage unless and until the tenant's space has been approved
as a subdivision/land development and when it complies with all of the
codes and regulations of Towamencin Township for a separate leasehold,
276. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of “substantial damage” and “substantial
improvement,” which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 3-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-06. See now Ch. 82, Floodplain Management.
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:1012
including, but not limited to, having a separate access and firewall
separation from the area occupied by of the owner of the real
property.[Added 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-10; 12-8-2004 by Ord. No.
04-07]
TOWAMENCIN VILLAGE MASTER PLAN — The Preliminary Feasibility
Analysis, the Village of Kulpsville Town Center Master Plan and
Transportation Center, March 1995, as may be subsequently amended from
time to time by the Board of Supervisors; and the Kulpsville Town Center
Recreation Plan. In the case of inconsistencies, the Land Use and Design
Manual shall control.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT — An area of land
developed for a compatible mixture of residential units for various income
levels and nonresidential commercial and workplace uses, including some
structures that provide for a mix of uses within the same building.
Residences shops, offices, workplaces, public buildings, and parks are
interwoven within the neighborhood so that all are within relatively close
proximity to each other. Traditional neighborhood development is relatively
compact, limited in size and oriented toward pedestrian activity. It has an
identifiable center and a discernible edge. The center of the neighborhood
is in the form of a public park, commons, plaza, square, or prominent
intersection of two or more major streets. Generally, there is a hierarchy
of streets laid out in a rectilinear or grid pattern of interconnecting streets
and blocks that provides multiple routes from origins to destinations and
are appropriately designed to serve the needs of pedestrians and vehicles
equally.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — See "right-of-way, ultimate."
USE — Includes the phrases "arranged," "designed" and "intended to be
used" and shall mean a specific purpose for which land, buildings or
structures are designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained, or
any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be
carried on, in a building or other structure or on a lot, parcel or tract of
land.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use located on the same lot with a principal use, and
clearly incidental and subordinate to, and in connection with, the principal
use.
USE, MUNICIPAL — Any use created or facility utilized by Towamencin
Township, any authority created by Towamencin Township under the
Municipality Authorities Act277 or in any authority in which the Township
participates, for the provisions of governmental functions or public services
or the maintenance of the public health, safety, or welfare including, but not
limited to, the public administration, police, fire, recreation and public work
uses.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use on a lot and/or of a building or structure
thereon.
277. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:1013
UTILITIES — Those services customarily rendered by public utility
corporations, municipalities, or municipal authorities, to include but not
necessarily limited to, electricity, gas, telephone, cable TV, water and
sewage, and the appurtenances used in connection with the supplying of
such services, including but not limited to, buildings, wires, pipes and poles.
VARIANCE — Relief granted to the provisions of Articles VI and IX of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247,278 as amended.
VILLAGE — An unincorporated settlement that is part of a township where
residential and mixed-use densities of one unit to the acre or more exist or
are permitted and commercial, industrial or institutional uses exist or are
permitted.[Added 5-23-2001 by Ord. No. 01-7]
WATER SUPPLY, INDIVIDUAL — A system for supplying and distributing
potable water to a single dwelling and accessory building thereto from a
source located on the same lot.
WATER SYSTEM, PRIVATE CENTRALIZED — Any privately owned system
for the supplying and distribution of potable water from a common source
to two or more dwellings units and/or lots.
WATER SYSTEM, PUBLIC — Any supply system owned and/or operated by
an Authority or other approved public entity.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, or similar areas which meet the characteristics and criteria
for wetlands as established by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or the
Pennsylvania Fish and Wildlife Service.
WHOLESALE — The selling of merchandise to retailers and to industrial,
commercial, and institutional users, or other wholesalers.[Added 6-8-2005
by Ord. No. 05-01]
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — An alternative energy system that consists of a
pole-mounted wind turbine, wind energy related equipment and associated
infrastructure with the primary intention of generating electricity or
otherwise converting wind energy to a different form of energy to reduce
onsite consumption of purchased power, when a property upon which the
system is installed also receives electricity supplied by a utility
company.[Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator and
includes the nacelle, rotor, tower and pad turbine, if any.[Added 2-24-2016
by Ord. No. 16-03]
WOODLANDS — Areas, groves, or stands of mature or largely mature trees
the majority of which are greater than six-inch caliper measured four feet
278. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:1014
above grade covering an area greater than 1/4 of acre; or groves of mature
trees without regard to minimum area consisting of more than 10 individual
specimens which are greater than twelve-inch caliper measured four feet
above grade.
YARD — An open, unoccupied area located on the same lot with a building,
structure and/or use and which is unobstructed from the ground to the
sky except for public utility lines or facilities, landscaping and parking as
restricted by the applicable zoning district.
YARD, FRONT — A required or existing yard between the front yard line and
the ultimate street right-of-way line and extending the entire length of the
street line. In the case of a corner lot, the yards extending along all streets
are front yards. In the case of a lot other than a corner lot that fronts on
more than one street, the yards extending along all streets are front yards.
YARD LINE — A line drawn parallel to and within a lot line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required yard.
YARD, REAR — A required, or existing yard between the rear yard line and
the rear lot line and extending the entire length of, and parallel to, the rear
lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A required or existing yard between a side yard line and a
side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. In the case of
a lot having no street frontage or a lot of odd shape, any yard that is not a
front yard or a rear yard shall be considered a side yard.
ZONE — A specifically delineated area or district in the municipality within
which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement,
spacing and size of land, buildings and structures.
ZONING — The dividing of the municipality into districts or zones and the
establishment of regulations governing each and every zone.
ZONING ENVELOPE — The three-dimensional space within which a
structure is permitted to be erected on a lot and which is defined by
maximum height regulations, bulk, area and yard setbacks requirements.
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map of Towamencin Township.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer designated with the
exclusive powers and duties of administering and enforcing the Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 153-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:1015
Appendix
Chapter A156
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § 153-1301
1:1016
ARTICLE I
Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania and Comcast of Pennsylvania
[Ordinance No. 06-05, adopted 9-13-2006, granted a franchise to
construct, operate and maintain a cable television system in the
Township to Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC and Comcast
of Pennsylvania, LLC. Said Ord. No. 06-05 also repealed former
Ch. A156, Cable Television Franchise, adopted 5-22-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-5. A complete copy of Ord. No. 06-05 and any subsequent
amendments is on file in the Township offices.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:1017

ARTICLE II
Verizon Pennsylvania
[Ordinance No. 06-06, adopted 9-13-2006, granted a franchise to
construct, operate and maintain a cable television system in the
Township to Verizon Pennsylvania. A complete copy of Ord. No.
06-06 and any subsequent amendments is on file in the Township
offices.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1301
1:1019
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
03-03 9-24-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
03-04 9-24-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
03-05 9-24-2003 Readoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
03-06 10-22-2003 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
03-07 10-22-2003 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
Ch. 27, Art. II
03-08 12-17-2003 Township Manager
amendment; brush, grass and
weeds amendment; blasting;
vehicles and traffic
amendment; impact fees;
streets and sidewalks
amendment
Chs. 17; 46; 49; 76,
Art. IV; 133
(repealed by Ord.
No. 13-07); 147
03-09 12-17-2003 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 136; 153
03-10 12-17-2003 Compensation of Tax
Collector amendment
Ch. 35, Art. II
04-01 2-25-2004 Stormwater management
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-08
04-02 6-23-2004 Uniform Construction Code Ch. 62, Art. IX
04-03 9-8-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
04-04 9-22-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
04-05 9-22-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
04-06 11-17-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
04-07 12-8-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
04-08 12-22-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
05-01 6-8-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
§ 153-1301 TOWAMENCIN CODE § DL-1
1:1020
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-02 3-14-2005 Sewer regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 127, Part 1
05-03 8-24-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
05-04 9-28-2005 Sewage grinder pumps Ch. 127, Part 4
05-05 12-28-2005 Sewer regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 127, Part 1
05-06 12-28-2005 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Ch. 143, Art. I
06-01 2-8-2006 Emergency and municipal
services tax amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
06-02 3-22-2006 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
06-03 3-22-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
06-04 NCM
06-05 9-13-2006 Cable television franchise See Ch. A156, Art. I
06-06 9-13-2006 Cable television franchise See Ch. A156, Art. II
06-07 11-29-2006 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 143, Art. III
06-08 NCM
06-09 12-20-2006 Police pension plan
enactment
NCM
06-10 12-20-2006 Nonuniformed employees
pension plan enactment
NCM
07-01 3-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
07-02 4-25-2007 Garbage and other solid
waste
Ch. 84
07-03 4-25-2007 Pretreatment of industrial
and commercial waste
Ch. 127, Part 2
07-04 5-9-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
07-05 8-8-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
07-06 9-12-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
07-07 10-3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
07-08 10-3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
07-09 10-3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
07-10 12-12-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
07-11 12-12-2007 Local services tax Ch. 143, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1021
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-01 4-23-2008 Construction tax repealer Ch. 143, Art. II,
footnote only
08-02 5-14-2008 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 09-01
08-03 8-13-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
08-04 8-13-2008 Sewers: pretreatment
program amendment
Ch. 127, Part 2
08-05 9-24-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
08-06 10-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
08-07 11-19-2008 Street vacation NCM
09-01 1-28-2009 Police Pension Plan Ch. 27, Art. I
09-02 1-28-2009 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan
Ch. 27, Art. II
09-03 2-11-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
09-04 4-8-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
09-05 4-8-2009 Stormwater management
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-08
09-06 4-8-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
09-07 4-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
09-08 12-9-2009 Change of occupancy Ch. 59
09-09 12-30-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
09-10 12-30-2009 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 136
10-01 1-27-2010 Sewer District expansion NCM
10-02 7-14-2010 Sewers: pretreatment
program amendment
Ch. 127, Part 2
10-03 7-14-2010 Police Pension Plan
amendment; Nonuniformed
Employees Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 27, Arts. I and II
10-04 9-22-2010 Tax Collector: duties and fees
amendment
Ch. 35, Art. I
10-05 11-23-2010 Peddling and soliciting Ch. 110
10-06 11-23-2010 Garbage and other solid
waste amendment
Ch. 84
11-01 1-12-2011 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
§ DL-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § DL-1
1:1022
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-02 4-27-2011 Outdoor burning amendment Ch. 54
11-03 6-8-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
11-04 6-8-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
11-05 6-8-2011 Noise Ch. 103
11-06 6-22-2011 Outdoor burning amendment Ch. 54
11-07 10-12-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
11-08 10-12-2011 Earned income and net
profits tax amendment
Ch. 143, Art. IV
11-09 12-14-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
11-10 12-14-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
12-01 1-25-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
12-02 4-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
12-03 8-8-2012 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
Ch. 27, Art. II
12-04 8-8-2012 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
12-05 8-8-2012 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
Ch. 27, Art. II
13-01 3-27-2013 Right-of-Way Map
amendment
See Ch. 97
13-02 5-8-2013 Property maintenance Ch. 117
13-03 6-12-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
13-04 5-22-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
13-05 6-26-2013 Sewer capital projects note NCM
13-06 7-10-2013 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 136
13-07 7-10-2013 Streets, curbs and sidewalks Ch. 133
13-08 12-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
13-09 12-11-2013 Sewers: regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 127, Part 1
14-01 1-22-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
14-02 1-22-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
14-03 2-12-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
14-04 2-12-2014 Noise amendment Ch. 103
14-05 2-12-2014 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1023
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-06 4-23-2014 Sewers: regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 127, Part 1
14-07 6-25-2014 Parks amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 17-03
14-08 6-25-2014 Stormwater management Ch. 132
14-09 7-23-2014 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
Ch. 27, Art. II
14-10 7-23-2014 Nonuniformed Employees
Money Purchase Pension Plan
Ch 27, Art. IV
14-11 10-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
14-12 10-8-2014 Swimming pools amendment Ch. 139
14-13 11-12-2014 Sewers: regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 127, Part 1
14-14 11-12-2014 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
14-15 11-12-2014 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
Ch. 27, Art. II
15-01 2-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
15-02 2-26-2015 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 136
15-03 2-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
15-04 2-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
15-05 3-11-2015 Parks amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 17-03
15-06 5-13-2015 Capital projects NCM
15-07 5-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
15-08 5-27-2015 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 136
15-09 7-22-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
15-10 7-22-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
15-11 7-22-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
15-12 8-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
15-13 10-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
15-14 10-14-2015 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
15-15 10-28-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
15-16 11-24-2015 Capital projects NCM
§ DL-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § DL-1
1:1024
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-01 2-24-2016 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 82
16-02 2-24-2016 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 136
16-03 2-24-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
16-04 3-9-2016 Nonuniformed Employees
Money Purchase Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 27, Art. IV
16-05 3-9-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 147
16-06 3-23-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
16-07 4-13-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
16-08 4-13-2016 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 27, Art. I
16-09 5-11-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
16-10 7-27-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
16-11 7-27-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
16-12 7-27-2016 Sewers: on-site disposal
systems amendment
Ch. 127, Part 3
16-13 8-24-2016 Collection bins Ch. 61
16-14 10-12-2016 Insurance: emergency
services cost reimbursement
Ch. 90, Art. II
16-15 11-22-2016 Sewers: pretreatment
program amendment
Ch. 127, Part 2
17-01 1-11-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 153
17-02 1-25-2017 Compensation of Board of
Supervisors
Ch. 2
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
17-03 6-14-2017 Parks Ch. 107 11
17-04 8-23-2017 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 153 11
17-05 10-11-2017 Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 147 11
18-01 4-25-2018 Subdivision and
Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 136 11
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1025
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
18-02 6-27-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 147 11
18-03 7-25-2018 Special Events Ch. 56 11
18-04 8-8-2018 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 153 11
18-05 11-14-2018 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 153 11
18-06 11-14-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 147 11
18-07 12-26-2018 Taxation: Earned
Income and Net
Profits Tax
Amendment
Ch. 143, Art.
IV
11
19-01 1-9-2019 Taxation: Local
Economic
Revitalization Tax
Assistance
Ch. 143, Art.
V
11
19-02 2-27-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 153 11
19-03 3-27-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 147 11
19-04 4-24-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 153 11
19-05 4-25-2019 General Obligation
Note
NCM 11
19-06 5-8-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 153 11
19-07 6-26-2019 Lease Rental Debt NCM 11
19-08 6-26-2019 Lease Rental Debt NCM 11
19-09 7-24-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 147 11
19-10 8-14-2019 Firearms Ch. 79 11
19-11 9-11-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 147 11
19-12 9-25-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 153 11
§ DL-1 TOWAMENCIN CODE § DL-1
1:1026