8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 1/244
A.
Borough of Tamaqua, PA
Monday, August 17, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 710]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 3301.5 of the Borough Code (8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3301.5), the codification of a complete
body of legislation for the Borough of Tamaqua, County of Schuylkill, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 350, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single
ordinance of the Borough of Tamaqua, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of
the Borough of Tamaqua," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of the 1971 Code of
Ordinances and the ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new
enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior
ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby
reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua, and it is the
intention of said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby
reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are
omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and
only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the
effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-4, Legislation saved from repeal;
matters not affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the
provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of
such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Tamaqua which is not in conflict
with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 2/244
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Repeal of specific ordinances. The Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua has determined
that the following ordinances are no longer in effect and hereby specifically repeals the following
legislation:
Former Chapter I, Part 4, § 42, Recreation Board Established, of the 1971 Code of
Ordinances.
Former Chapter IV, Bicycles, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances.
Former Chapter VI, Comfort Station, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances.
Former Chapter VII, Conduct, Secs. 1, 5, 6 and 12, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances.
Ordinance No. 379, regarding the Communications Commission, adopted November 8, 1978.
Ordinance No. 383, regarding disorderly conduct, adopted March 6, 1979.
Ordinance No. 384, regarding solid waste collection from business consumers, adopted
August 7, 1979.
Ordinance No. 87, regarding stoves and chimneys, adopted February 19, 1980.
Ordinance No. 407, regarding the alcoholic beverages, adopted April 6, 1982.
Ordinance No. 410, regarding adult entertainment, adopted June 21, 1983.
Ordinance No. 429, regarding solid waste landfill permits, adopted January 20, 1987.
Ordinance No. 379, regarding the Communications Commission, adopted November 8, 1978.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal;
provided, however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from repeal of
ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously
repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 20, 2017.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the Borough
prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance m violation of any
legislative provision of the Borough or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Borough.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the
Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 3/244
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
T.
Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax rate.
Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special taxes, assessments or
charges.
Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or acquiring property
by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise of eminent domain.
Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or reconstruction or opening of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place
or property or designating various streets as public highways.
Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose districts and designating the
boundaries thereof; providing for a system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers
or water supply lines.
Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the
Borough or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for municipal employees.
Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit
or service obtained from the Borough.
Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental cooperation or establishing an
intermunicipal agreement.
The following specific portions of the 1971 Code of Ordinances:
Former Chapter I, Part 1, Elected Officers.
Former Chapter I, Part 7, Pensions, Retirement and Social Security.
Former Chapter X, Franchises.
Former Appendix II, Annexation of Territory; Appendix III, Bond Issues and Loans; Appendix
IV, Electricity; Appendix V, Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs; Appendix VI, Public
Property; Appendix VII, Sewers; Appendix VIII, Sidewalks; Appendix X, Taxation; and
Appendix XI, Water.
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 4/244
A.
[1]
B.
C.
A.
B.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A
and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and
shall, upon being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation;
new provisions.
Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions of the
Borough for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and
style changes were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention of
the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances
and resolutions so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and revisions described above,
changes and revisions of a substantive nature, as set forth in Schedule A[1] attached hereto and
made a part hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included in the Code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the
Borough Council, and it is the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously formally amended to read as
such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-15.
Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, articles and sections which were added,
amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a history
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation, histories
indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the following history:
"Amended (added, repealed) 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 710." Schedule A, which contains a complete
description of all changes, is on file in the Borough offices.
Statutory references. Pursuant to recodification of the Borough Code in 2012 and 2014 (see now 8
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), statutory citations referring to specific sections of the Borough Code
have been updated accordingly throughout the Code.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Where the provisions of the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation impose greater restrictions or
requirements, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other divisions in the Code or in
supplements made to the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to
the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or referring to the statutes or
to other parts of the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the
Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 5/244
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the Ordinance Book in the
office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon
adoption, such copy or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and
such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code
shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and directed by him or her to keep
up-to-date the certified copy or copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office
of the Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all legislation adopted
by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council
shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements to said Code books, at
which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner required a notice of
the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
The enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of
introduction, the availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public and the filing of
an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required by law, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, or to alter or
tamper with the Code or any part or portion thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law
of the Borough to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this
section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay
a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or
agents of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable, and if any clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 6/244
[1]
competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation and application
to the clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this ordinance and
the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after August 20,
2019.
Chapter 8. Authorities, Municipal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Tamaqua Borough Authority
[Adopted 1-9-1962 by Ord. No. 253 (Ch. I, Part 3, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 8-1. Intention and desire to organize authority.
The Council of this Borough signifies its intention and desire to organize an Authority under provisions
of the Act of May 2nd, 1945, P.L. 382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended
and supplemented (the "Authorities Act"),[1] for the purpose of exercising any and all powers conferred
by the Authorities Act.
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 8-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor, President of Council and Secretary, respectively, of this Borough are authorized and
directed to execute, in behalf of this Borough, Articles of Incorporation for such Authority in
substantially the following form:
Articles of Incorporation
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with requirements of the Act of May 2nd, 1945, P.L. 382, known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945," as amended and supplemented, and pursuant to an ordinance enacted by
the municipal authorities of the Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, expressing the
intention and desire of the municipal authorities of said municipality to organize a municipality
authority under said Act, the incorporating municipality does certify:
1. The name of the Authority is "Tamaqua Borough Authority."
2. The Authority is formed under provisions of the Act of May 2nd, 1945, P.L. 382, known as the
"Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended and supplemented.
3. No other Authority has been organized under said Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as
amended and supplemented, or under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended and
supplemented, and is in existence in or for the incorporating municipality.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County,
Pennsylvania.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 7/244
[1]
[2]
5. The names and addresses of the municipal authorities of said incorporating municipality are. . . .
[1]
6. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board of Authority, each of
whom is a resident and citizen of said incorporating municipality, are as follows. . . .[2]
Editor's Note: Here followed the names and addresses of the principal officers of the Borough at the
time of enactment of the ordinance.
Editor's Note: Here followed the names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board
of Authority and the notarizing statement.
§ 8-3. Purpose.
The enactment of this ordinance is deemed necessary for the benefit of and the preservation of the
public health, peace, comfort, and general welfare of and will increase the prosperity of citizens of this
Borough.
Article II. Community Revitalization and Improvement Zone
Contracting Authority
[Adopted 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 676]
§ 8-4. Intent.
It is the intent of the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua to organize an authority under
provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act.
§ 8-5. Name of authority.
The name of the authority shall be the "Tamaqua Community Revitalization and Improvement Zone
Contracting Authority".
§ 8-6. Articles of Incorporation.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Tamaqua Community Revitalization and Improvement
Zone Contracting Authority are as follows:
Tamaqua Community Revitalization and Improvement Zone Contracting Authority
Articles of Incorporation
To: The Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
In compliance with requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5601 et seq., Act 22 of 2001, effective June 19, 2001, which codifies and amends the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented (the "Municipality Authorities Act"), and
pursuant to the ordinance enacted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill
County, Pennsylvania, expressing the intention and desire of the Borough Council of said municipality
to organize a municipal authority under said Municipality Authorities Act, the incorporating
municipality does hereby certify:
(a) The name of the Authority is "Tamaqua Community Revitalization and Improvement Zone
Contracting Authority."
(b) The Authority is formed under provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities Act, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., Act 22 of 2001, effective June 19, 2001, which codifies and amends
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 8/244
[1]
[2]
A.
the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented, with all powers
authorized by said Municipality Authorities Act.
(c) No other authorities have been organized under said Municipality Authorities Act, under the
former Act of June 28, 1935 (P.L. 463, No. 191), or under the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No.
164), known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945", and is in existence in or for the
incorporating municipality, except that the incorporating municipality has heretofore organized (i)
the Tamaqua Borough Authority, and (ii) the Tamaqua Area Water Authority, as a joint
incorporating municipality, each under the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No.
164), known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," which authorities are in existence in or
for said incorporating municipality.
(d) The name of the incorporating municipality is the Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County,
Pennsylvania.
(e) The names and addresses of the members of the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua,
the incorporating municipality, are as follows:[1]
(f) The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board of the Tamaqua
Community Revitalization and Improvement Zone Contracting Authority, are as follows:[2]
(g) The terms of office of the first members of the Board of said Tamaqua Community Revitalization
and Improvement Zone Contracting Authority shall be five-year terms; however, the initial terms
shall be staggered as set forth above and shall commence on the date of appointment and shall
be computed from the first Monday in January of 2015.
(h) The term of existence of the Tamaqua Community Revitalization and Improvement Zone
Contracting Authority shall be for a period of 50 years.
(i) Advertisement of notice of filing these Articles of Incorporation is submitted herewith.
In WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned has executed these Articles on behalf of the Borough of
Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, and has caused to be affixed the seal and attested this
18th day of November, 2014.
BOROUGH OF TAMAQUA
BY:
Micah J. Gursky, President
Kevin Steigerwalt, Manager
Editor's Note: Here followed the names, addresses and terms of office of the principal officers of the
Borough at the time of enactment of the ordinance.
Editor's Note: Here followed the names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board
of Authority, which are on file with the original ordinance.
§ 8-7. Members.
The first members of the Board of said Tamaqua Community Revitalization and Improvement Zone
Contracting Authority, named in the aforesaid Articles of Incorporation, are hereby specifically
appointed members of said Board for the terms set after their respective names, commencing on the
date of appointment and computed from the first Monday in January, 2015.
§ 8-8. Authority to effect incorporation of Authority.
The Council President and Borough Manager of the Borough of Tamaqua are hereby authorized
and directed to execute the Articles of Incorporation of the proposed Tamaqua Community
Revitalization and Improvement Zone Contracting Authority in substantially the form set forth in
this article, and the Council President and Borough Manager of the Borough are hereby
authorized and directed to attest the same and to affix thereto the seal of the Borough. Such
officers are authorized and directed to execute and deliver such other documents, agreements,
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 9/244
B.
[1]
[1]
certificates and instruments, and to do all acts necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation
of the proposed Tamaqua Community Revitalization and Improvement Zone Contracting Authority,
including, but not limited to, to cause notice of the substance of this article, including the
substance of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and the proposed filing of such Articles of
Incorporation, to be published as required by the Municipality Authorities Act.
The Council President and Borough Manager of the Borough are authorized and directed to file
such Articles of Incorporation and the necessary proofs of publication with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to do all other things necessary to effect the incorporation of
the Tamaqua Community Revitalization and Improvement Zone Contracting Authority, including
payment of the required filing fees.
§ 8-9. Purposes and projects authorized.
The Tamaqua Community Revitalization and Improvement Zone Contracting Authority shall have all
the purposes, powers, and rights, as provided by the City Revitalization Improvement Zone Program,
Act 52 of 2013,[1] including, but not limited to, the designation of revitalization and improvement zones
in the Borough, engaging in and financing the construction, including related site preparation and
infrastructure, reconstruction or renovation of facilities within such revitalization and improvement
zones, for purposes of taking any and all actions and performing any and all duties authorized by a
contracting authority as defined in and authorized by the City Revitalization Improvement Zone
Program, Act 52 of 2013, and shall have all the purposes, powers, and rights as provided by the
Municipality Authorities Act.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8804-C.
Chapter 15. Boards, Commissions and Committees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Planning Commission
[Adopted 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(14) (Ch. I, Part 4, § 41, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 15-1. Borough Planning Commission established.
[Amended 5-10-1972 by Ord. No. 316; 3-16-2004 by Ord. No. 581; 3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 673]
A Borough Planning Commission, to be composed of five members, to be appointed as provided by
law and with members holding office for a term of four years in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,[1] or as otherwise provided by law. The said Commission shall perform
all the duties and may exercise all the powers vested by law in Borough planning agencies. Provided
that the Borough Planning Commission in office at the time of enactment of this article shall constitute
the Planning Commission hereby established, and nothing herein shall affect the tenure of any
member of such Borough Planning Commission, but all appointments hereafter made to fill vacancies
in the said Planning Commission shall be made under the law in effect at the time of the happening of
such vacancy and for the term set in the said law.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Article II. International Property Maintenance Code Appeals
Board
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 10/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
A.
[Adopted 5-4-2004 by Ord. No. 586]
§ 15-2. Creation, appointment, organization.
Creation. The governing body (Tamaqua Borough Council) hereby creates an International
Property Maintenance Code Appeals Board, herein referred to as the Board, consisting of
residents of the municipality appointed by the governing body, which shall perform all the duties
and have all the powers prescribed as herein provided.
Appointment. The governing body shall appoint members of the Board. The Board shall consist of
five members. There shall be no term limit for members of the Board. Members shall be residents
of the Borough.
Removal. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in
office or for other just cause by vote of a majority of the governing Body which appointed the
member, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a
vote. A hearing shall be held, if the Board member requests one in writing.
Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the governing body.
Compensation. The members of the Board may receive such compensation as shall be fixed by
the governing body, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid
to the members of the governing body.
Organization. The Board may promulgate such rules or procedure, not inconsistent with this article
and the Property Maintenance Code (Ordinance Number 582),[1] as it may deem necessary to the
proper performance of its duties and to the proper exercise of its powers. Such rules shall be
continued in force and effect, until amended or appealed by the Board.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 246, Property Maintenance Code.
Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times
as the Board may determine. The Chairman or, in his absence, the acting Chairman may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open
to the public.
Minutes and records. The Board shall keep full public record of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact. The Board
shall keep the records of its examinations and other official action, all of which shall be
immediately filed with the Secretary of the governing body, and shall be a public record. The
Board shall submit an annual report to the governing body.
Hearings. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less
than a majority of all the members of the Board but the Board may appoint a hearing officer from
its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive further action
by the Board as provided in § 15-11 of this article.
§ 15-3. Jurisdiction, powers and duties.
The International Property Maintenance Code Appeals Board shall have the following powers:
Jurisdiction. The International Property Maintenance Code Appeals Board shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:
Substantive challenges to the validity of the International Property Maintenance Code
Ordinance.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 11/244
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
Appeals from the Code Enforcement Officer's determination related to the International
Property Maintenance Code.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny the appellant the right to proceed directly
to court, where appropriate, pursuant to Rules 1091 through 1098 of the Pennsylvania Code
Rules of Civil Procedure relating to mandamus.
§ 15-4. Application procedures.
The Board shall act in strict accordance with the procedure specified by this article. All appeals and
applications made to the Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal or
application shall refer to the specific provision of the ordinance involved and shall exactly set forth the
interpretation that is claimed, the grounds for any challenges to validity of the ordinance, the use for
which a special permit is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on
which it is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case may be.
Appeals.
Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Enforcement
Official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the Board
of Appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day
the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim
that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are
adequately satisfied by other means, or that the strict application of any requirement of this
code would cause an undue hardship.
Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person or governing body official aggrieved or
affected by any provision of this article or by any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer.
Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Board by
filing with the Code Enforcement Officer and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Code Enforcement Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
Applications for appeal shall be submitted to the Borough Secretary.
Hearings and notice of hearings.
The Property Maintenance Appeals Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as notice to the applicant, the Code Enforcement
Officer, other parties in interest, and other person(s) entitled to notice by law; and the
International Property Maintenance Code Appeals Board shall decide the same within 45
days after the hearing, or if said hearing is continued within 45 days after said continued
hearing. The reasons for its decision or in support of its findings shall be given, in writing, to
all parties concerned who are entitled to receive same by law. If the International Property
Maintenance Code Appeals Board does not make a decision within 45 days after the hearing
or continued hearing, it shall be deemed that such Board had decided in favor of the person
who is seeking relief. At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent, or by
attorney.
The hearing shall be conducted by the Board or by a member of the Board appointed as
hearing officer. The decision or findings shall be made by the Board unless the parties waive
such procedure, and accept decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
The Chairman or designee of the Board or Hearing Officer shall have power to administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 12/244
(4)
(5)
A.
[1]
B.
A.
B.
C.
relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the
parties.
The Board or Hearing Officer shall not communicate with any party or his representative in
connection with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, and shall not take notice of communications or inspect the site unless all parties
are given an opportunity to be present.
A copy of the final decision or where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be mailed to
the applicant by registered mail on the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board prior to the hearing, the Board shall provide by
mail a brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
§ 15-5. Stay of proceeding.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Code
Enforcement Officer certifies to the International Property Maintenance Code Appeals Board facts
indicating that such a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property, in which
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted
by the International Property Maintenance Code Appeals Board or by a court of record on petition,
after notice to the Code Enforcement Officer and due cause shown.
Any person, taxpayer, or the governing body aggrieved by any decision of the Board may within
30 days after such decision by the Board seek review by the Court of Common Pleas of such
decision in the manner provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Article III. Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board
[Adopted 7-20-2004 by Ord. No. 590]
§ 15-6. Creation, appointment, organization.
Creation. The governing body (Tamaqua Borough Council) hereby creates a Uniform Construction
Code Appeals Board, herein referred to as the Board, consisting of residents of the municipality
appointed by the governing body, which shall perform all the duties and have all the powers
prescribed as herein provided. Should the governing body not be able to find persons to serve on
the Board who meet the minimum qualifications in accordance with the Uniform Construction
Code, hereinafter "UCC," the governing body may fill positions on the Board with qualified
individuals who reside outside the municipality.
Appointment and qualifications. The governing body shall appoint members of the Board. The
Board shall consist of five members and three alternate members. There shall be no term limit for
members of the Board. Members may not be members of the governing body or its code
enforcement administrators. Members may be residents or nonresidents, if qualified residents
cannot be found, who shall be qualified by training and experience on matters pertaining to
building construction. Training and experience may consist of licensure as an architect or
engineer, experience in the construction industry, and training or experience as an inspector or
plan reviewer.
Removal. Members of the Board hold office at the pleasure of the governing body. Any Board
member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 13/244
D.
E.
[1]
F.
[2]
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
cause by vote of a majority of the governing body which appointed the member, taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be
held if the Board member requests one in writing.
Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the governing body.
Compensation. The members of the Board may receive such compensation as shall be fixed by
the governing body by resolution from time to time, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the governing body.
Organization. The Board may promulgate such rules or procedure, not inconsistent with this article
and the Uniform Construction Code (Ordinance Number 585)[1] as it may deem necessary to the
proper performance of its duties and to the proper exercise of its powers. Such rules shall be
continued in force and effect until amended or appealed by the Board.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 129, Uniform Construction Code.
Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times
as the Board shall determine and schedule. The Chairman, or in his absence the acting Chairman,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be
advertised and open to the public in accordance with the Sunshine Act.[2]
Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701
Minutes and records. The Board shall keep full public record of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Board
shall keep the records of its examinations and other official action, all of which shall be
immediately filed with the Secretary of the governing body, and shall be a public record. The
Board shall submit an annual report to the governing body.
§ 15-7. Application, jurisdiction, powers, and duties.
Procedures for application to the Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board. The Board shall act
in strict accordance with the procedure specified by this article. All appeals and applications made
to the Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal or application
shall refer to the specific provision of the ordinance or UCC section involved and shall be based
on a claim that the true intent of the Act or UCC has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
the Act or UCC do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used. The appeal
or application shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the grounds for any
challenges to validity of the ordinance, the details of the variance or extension that is applied for
and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance or extension should be granted, as the
case may be.
Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Enforcement
Official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the Board,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision,
notice or order was served.
Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person or governing body official aggrieved or
affected by any provision of this article or by any decision of the Code Enforcement Official.
Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Board by
filing with the Code Enforcement Official and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Code Enforcement Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
Applications for appeal shall be submitted to the Borough Secretary.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 14/244
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(2)
(3)
B. Jurisdiction over appeals, variances, and extensions of time. The Board shall have jurisdiction to
hear and rule on appeals, requests for variances, and requests for extensions under the UCC.
Appeals, variances, and extensions of time.
An owner or owner's agent may seek a variance or extension of time or appeal a building
Code Enforcement Official's decision by filing a petition with the building Code
Enforcement Official or other person designated by the Board on a form provided by the
municipality.
The postmark date or date of personal service will establish the filing date of the appeal,
request for variance, and/or extension of time.
An appeal or request for a variance or extension of time to the Board will automatically
suspend an action to enforce an order to correct until the matter is resolved. An action
relating to an unsafe building, structure, or equipment may not be stayed.
Hearings and decisions.
The Board shall decide an appeal, variance request, or request for extension of time by
reviewing documents and written briefs or argument unless the owner or owner's agent
request a hearing.
The Board shall hold a hearing within 60 days from the date of an applicant's request
unless the applicant agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.
The hearing shall be conducted by the Board or by a member of the Board appointed as
hearing officer. The decision or findings shall be made by the Board unless the parties
waive such procedure, and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
For the conduct of any hearing before the Board and the taking of any action by the
Board, a quorum shall be required. A quorum shall constitute not less than a majority of
all the members of the Board. If the Board appoints a hearing officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, the parties may waive further action by
the Board as provided above.
If the owner or owner's agent requests a hearing, the Board shall schedule a hearing and
notify the owner or owner's agent and building Code Enforcement Official of the date,
time and place of the hearing.
At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney.
When making its final decision, the Board may deny the request in whole or in part, grant
the request in whole or in part, or grant the request upon certain conditions being
satisfied.
The Board shall give the reasons for its decision or reasons in support of its findings, in
writing, to all parties (applicant, owner, representative, or Code Enforcement Official)
concerned who are entitled to receive same by law. If the Board does not make a
decision or notify the applicant within 45 days after the hearing or continued hearing, it
shall be deemed that such Board had decided in favor of the applicant seeking relief.
The Board shall mail a copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings to the applicant or owner by registered mail on the day following its date. To all
other persons who have filed their name and address with the Board prior to the hearing,
the Board shall provide by mail a brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement
of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
Factors to consider.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 15/244
[1]
[2]
[1]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
(b)
C.
D.
A.
B.
Whether making a decision after a hearing or without a requested hearing, the Board
shall only consider the following factors when deciding an "appeal" under Section 501c(2)
of the UCC[1]:
The true intent of the Act or the UCC was incorrectly interpreted.
An equivalent form of construction is to be used.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 7210.501(c)(2).
Whether making a decision with a hearing or without a requested hearing, the Board may
consider the following factors when ruling upon a "request for extension of time" or
"request for variance":
The reasonableness of the UCC's application in a particular case.
The extent to which the granting of a variance or an extension of time will pose a
violation of the UCC or an unsafe condition.
The availability of professional or technical personnel needed to come into
compliance.
The availability of materials and equipment needed to come into compliance.
The efforts being made to come into compliance as quickly as possible.
Compensatory feature that will provide an equivalent degree of protection to the
UCC.
Conflict of interest. A Board member may not cast a vote or participate in a hearing in any appeal,
request for variance or request for extension of time in which the member has a personal,
professional or financial interest.
Joint Board of Appeals. A joint Board of Appeals may be established with other municipalities
through an intermunicipal agreement. Such agreement shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions of the ordinance.
Article IV. Board of Health
[Adopted 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 692]
§ 15-8. Health administration.
The administration of the health laws and ordinances in the Borough of Tamaqua shall be
enforced by a Board of Health or Health Officer and/or a Code Enforcement Official.
The Borough's Health Officer and Code Enforcement Officials are hereby delegated with the
powers of police officers regarding the enforcement of health- and code-related ordinances and
shall function in accordance with the laws of criminal procedures.
§ 15-9. Board membership.
A Board of Health is hereby established in and for the Borough of Tamaqua. It shall be composed of
five members, one of whom shall be a practicing physician for at least two years. The members of the
Board shall be appointed by the Borough Council for a term of five years, staggered in such a way that
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 16/244
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
the term of one member shall expire at the end of each year. The aforesaid appointments for a
specified term notwithstanding, a Board member may stay in office until a successor qualifies or is
appointed or the Borough Council may remove any member of the Board, at the pleasure of the
Borough Council. The members of the Board of Health shall serve without compensation. They shall
severally take and subscribe to the oath of office prescribed by law and shall annually organize by
electing a President who must be, and a Secretary who need not be, a member of the Board. Members
of the Board of Health need not give bond in order to assume office.
§ 15-10. Powers.
The Board of Health shall have the power and its duty shall be to supervise the enforcement of the
health laws of the commonwealth as well as the regulations of the State Department of Environmental
Protection, the Department of Agriculture, including, but not limited to, Pennsylvania Code Title 7,
Agriculture, Chapter 78, Food Establishments[1]; the Department of Health and any and all state
departments/agencies concerned with public health laws and regulations and all health ordinances in
the Borough in accordance with 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3106. In addition, the Board of Health shall function as a
Board of Appeals for all appeals of the decisions of the Code Enforcement Official or Health Officer
taken under Chapter 129, Uniform Construction Codes.
Editor's Note: See now 7 Pa. Code Chapter 46, Food Code.
§ 15-11. Secretary to Board.
The Secretary of the Board of Health shall perform the duties outlined in 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3104 and shall
receive such compensation as may be provided from time to time by the Borough Council.
§ 15-12. Health Officer.
The Board of Health, with the approval of Borough Council, shall appoint a Health Officer, who shall
have been certified by the State Department of Health in accordance with the regulations of the
Department in accordance with 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 and 28 Pa. Code § 11.1. Such Health Officer shall
have the powers and perform the duties provided by 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3105. All official actions shall be
performed in the name and under the signature of the Health Officer.
§ 15-13. Procedures and authority.
Procedures for handling nuisances. The Health Officer and/or Code Enforcement Official, upon
receiving a complaint of the existence within the Borough of a nuisance which may affect the
public health or which is or may be so offensive to the senses as to interfere with the comfort or
enjoyment of life, or when the probable existence of any such nuisance comes to his attention,
shall make an immediate and thorough investigation, and if such nuisance exists, he shall take all
measures within his power and authority to secure its abatement.
Investigation.
The Health Code Officer shall make or cause to be made such surveys, investigations,
inspections and visits as he may deem necessary to ascertain the existence of a nuisance
within the Borough or to prevent the occurrence of a nuisance within the Borough by securing
compliance with the provisions of this Code.
The Health Code Officer shall collect or cause to be collected and shall analyze or cause to
have analyzed all samples, specimens, materials or substances from any premises
whatsoever wherein a nuisance is suspected to exist for the purpose or determining the
existence of a nuisance or noncompliance with this Code.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 17/244
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
Authority of the Health Code Officer. Whenever any declared nuisance, source of filth, or cause or
probable cause of sickness shall be found by the Board of Health to exist on any private or public
property within the Borough in violation of this Code, which violation injuriously affects or may
affect the health of the residents of the Borough, the Board of Health shall order, in writing, the
owner or occupant or user thereof by appropriate action, at the expense of such owner, occupant
or user, to correct and remove such nuisance, source of filth or cause of probable sickness within
such reasonable time as the Board of Health shall determine. Appropriate citations and/or
complaints may be issued by the Health Code Officer in connection with any such violation.
§ 15-14. Violation of health-related provisions.
Enforcement; service of notices and orders; hearings. Whenever the Health Code Officer
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
health-related provision or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice
of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided.
Such notice shall:
Be in writing.
Include a statement of the reason why it is being issued.
Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the case may require,
provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or
agent or upon such occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a copy
thereof is sent by registered mail to his last known address or if a copy thereof is posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state.
Such notice may:
Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will affect compliance with the
provisions of the Borough and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement
of any health-related provision of the Borough, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on this matter before the Board of
Health, provided that such person shall file in the office of the Board of Health a written
petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor
within 10 days after the day of the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the Board
of Health shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written
notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to
show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not
later than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application
of the petitioner, the Board of Health may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable
time beyond such ten-day period if, in its judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and
sufficient reason for such postponement.
After such hearing, the Board of Health shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice,
depending upon its finding as to whether the health-related provisions of this Borough and of
the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of
Health sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served
pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall automatically become an order if a written
petition for a hearing is not filed with the Board of Health within 10 days after such notice is
served.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 18/244
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(7)
B.
The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the Board of Health,
shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record. Such
record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek relief therefrom in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
Whenever the Health Officer/Code Enforcement Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing,
issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be
taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of
the Borough, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately, but, upon petition to the Board of Health, shall be
afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon its finding as to
whether the provisions of the Borough and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with, the Board of Health shall continue such order in effect or
modify it or revoke it. All such hearings before the Board of Health shall be scheduled within
10 days of the date that the petition is filed.
The Borough of Tamaqua Health Officer is hereby empowered to issue notification of
violations of the Borough's health-related provisions and amendments thereto. Such
notification shall be in the form and substance as suggested by the Board of Health.
Thereafter, the Health Officer shall:
See that the directives of the notification are carried out.
In the absence of compliance and if no hearing is requested before the Board of Health,
the Health Officer shall file with the appropriate court a citation setting forth the provisions
violated, the amount of the fine and the date.
Offer such testimony and proof as is necessary to satisfy the provisions of this section.
Violations. Failure to secure a permit when required or operating after suspension or revocation of
a permit by the Board of Health of the Borough of Tamaqua shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. When written notice of a violation of any of the health-related provisions of the Borough
has been served upon any person, such violation shall be discontinued immediately.
§ 15-15. Effective date.
This article shall be effective upon passage in accordance with the requirements of the Borough Code.
Chapter 24. Fire Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and protection — See Ch. 157.
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 30.
Open burning — See Ch. 116.
Solid-fuel-burning equipment — See Ch. 267.
Article I. Fire Companies Recognized
[Adopted 12-7-1993 by Ord. No. 489]
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 19/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
§ 24-1. Fire companies recognized by the Borough of Tamaqua.
The Citizens Fire Company, South Ward Fire Company, American Hose Fire Company, and East End
Fire Company duly organized and existing in the Borough of Tamaqua, County of Schuylkill, and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, are hereby designated as the officially recognized fire companies of
the Borough of Tamaqua.
§ 24-2. Authorized activities of the fire companies.
The fire companies recognized by the Borough are hereby authorized to provide such services to
the Borough as may be necessary for the protection of property and persons situate therein, which
include, by way of example, and not of limitation, the extinguishment of fire and the prevention of
loss of life and property from fire, automobile accidents, hazardous materials incidents, and other
dangerous situations.
The fire companies may also provide nonemergency and public-service functions, including, but
not limited to, removal of water from property after storms, and assisting in the removal,
abatement and prevention of injury or damage to persons or property, whether through natural
causes or man-made disasters or situations.
The fire companies may also conduct and participate in such training activities, exercises and
drills, either within or outside of the geographical limits of the Borough, as may be deemed
necessary and appropriate by the officers of the company to maintain necessary proficiency in
providing service.
The fire companies may also respond to calls and provide services to municipalities outside of the
Borough's geographical limits.
§ 24-3. Authorized activities of the members of the fire
companies.
In addition to the fire companies participating in the activities authorized above in § 24-2 of this article,
or in going to or returning from any authorized activity, the members of the fire companies are also
authorized to conduct the following activities:
Engage in any type of drill, training, practice, test, parade, ceremony when such activities are duly
called for or authorized by an officer(s) of the fire companies subject to the approval of the Fire
Chief;
Engage in any type of fund-raising activity for the fire companies, when authorized by an officer(s)
of the fire companies, and the Council of the Borough of Tamaqua.
§ 24-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to recognize the Citizens Fire Company, South Ward Fire Company,
American Hose Fire Company, and East End Fire Company as the official fire companies of the
Borough of Tamaqua and to define the additional authorized activities for firefighters for liability and
workers' compensation purposes.
Article II. Administration of Fire Department
[Adopted 4-7-2015 by Ord. No. 678]
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 20/244
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
A.
§ 24-5. Chief of Department.
Council of the Borough of Tamaqua shall appoint a Chief of the Fire Department:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be selected in the order of Chief rotation from each
individual fire company in order of Assistant Chief Seniority. The Chief of the Fire Department
shall be appointed to serve a term of five years. At the expiration of that five-year term, that
individual may be appointed to a second five-year term; however, the Chief of the Fire
Department cannot serve for more than two consecutive terms (10 years).
The following minimum qualifications must be met to be appointed Chief of the Fire
Department:
Pennsylvania State FFI Certification recognized by IFSAC, NFPBQ.
Hazmat Operations with current refresher.
Applicable NIMS ICS 700 or equivalent sixteen-hour state-recognized IC.
Must reside within Borough limits.
In the event a Chief of the Fire Department candidate is appointed and who does not meet the
minimum requirements at the time of the appointment, he or she will be given six months to
complete the applicable requirements. If the applicable requirements are not met, the Chief will be
removed and will remain eligible to serve as an Assistant Chief. His or her name will be placed at
the bottom of the seniority rotation. These provisions shall apply to any company appointed or
elected company Chief who does not meet the requirements at the time of a Department Chief
appointment.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall continue his or her fire service training each year by
successfully completing no less than eight hours of fire service training from an accredited agency.
All required course documentation must be submitted to the Borough at the end of each calendar
year.
The Chief of the Fire Department can be removed from office at any time by the Borough for just
cause or if the Chief of the Fire Department does not meet the required continuing education
requirements set forth above.
§ 24-6. Assistant Chiefs.
The Borough of Tamaqua shall recognize three Assistant Chiefs of the Fire Department,
The Assistant Chief of the Fire Department is selected by each of the respective five
companies and will present their name to the Borough on a yearly basis. The seniority
rotation of the Assistant Chief of the Fire Department will be based on the seniority rotation in
place.
The following minimum qualifications must be met to be appointed Assistant Chief of the
Department:
Pennsylvania State FFI Certification recognized by IFSAC, NFPBQ.
Hazmat Operations with current refresher.
Applicable NIMS ICS 700 or equivalent sixteen-hour state-recognized IC.
Must reside within Borough limits.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 21/244
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
If an Assistant Chief of the Fire Department candidate is appointed and does not meet the
minimum requirements at the time of the appointment, he or she will be given six months to
complete the applicable requirements. If the applicable requirements are not met, the Assistant
Chief of the Fire Department will be removed and the fire company will have the opportunity to
present another name to the Borough that meets the stated qualifications. The newly appointed
Assistant Chief of the Fire Department will go to the bottom of the seniority rotation.
Since the Borough has no control over the internal protocols, procedures, or bylaws of each
company, in the event that a company cannot present an Assistant Chief of the Fire Department
candidate with the qualifications, that company's unsuccessful designee may carry the title of
Company Chief. Under this classification, the Company Chief title will be equivalent to a Captain
rank within the chain of command of the department. The Company Chief is not entitled to any
compensation or recognition as an Assistant Chief of the Fire Department, and will not be
considered in any chain of command or seniority rotation. If at such time the Company Chief
obtains Assistant Chief of the Fire Department qualifications, they may be then presented to the
Council for appointment and, if successfully appointed, will enter at the bottom of the seniority
rotation as outlined above.
The Assistant Chiefs of the Fire Department shall continue their fire service training each year by
successfully completing no less than eight hours of fire service training from an accredited agency.
All required course documentation must be submitted to the Borough at the end of each year.
Any Assistant Chief of the Fire Department can be removed from office at any time by the
Borough if they feel there is legitimate just cause to do so or they do not meet the required
continuing education stipulation.
Chapter 30. Firemen's Relief Association
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 10-13-1930 (Ch. I, Part 6, of
the 1971 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 24.
§ 30-1. Recognition of Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association.
The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in providing fire protection
and/or emergency services in the Borough of Tamaqua: Fireman's Relief Fund Association of
Tamaqua. It represents the Citizens Fire Company, South Ward Fire Company, American Hose
Fire Company, and East End Fire Company, which are the officially recognized fire companies of
the Borough. The association has been formed for the benefit of its members and their families in
case of death, sickness, temporary or permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
The above-named Association of the Borough is designated the proper association to receive
such funds as are due and payable to the Borough Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of
Pennsylvania from the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 30-2. Certification of Auditor General.
The Borough Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the Commonwealth, the name(s)
of the active associations and the percentage of service they contribute to the protection of the
Borough. Such certification shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 22/244
A.
§ 30-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Borough Treasury all such sums of money that may hereafter
be paid into the Borough Treasury by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes
paid on premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of the Act of December 18, 1984,
No. 205, Section 701 et seq. as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania. Such monies received by the Borough Treasurer from the State
Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association(s) within 60 days of receipt. The funds
shall be distributed on the basis of the percentage of service established in the certification to the
Auditor General and with other provisions of the Act.
Chapter 41. Manager
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 9-28-1961 by Ord. No. 251
(Ch. I, Part 2, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 41-1. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of Tamaqua.
§ 41-2. Appointment and removal.
[Amended 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(10)]
The Manager shall be appointed by a majority of all the members of the Council and he shall serve at
the pleasure of the Council. He may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all its members. At
least 30 days before such removal becomes effective, the Council shall furnish the Manager with a
written statement setting forth its intention to remove him and the reasons therefor.
§ 41-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative abilities, with
special reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the
duties of his office as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the Borough or of the
State of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment, but as soon as possible thereafter he shall
become and during his tenure shall remain a resident of the Borough.
§ 41-4. Manager's bond.
[Amended 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(10)]
The Manager shall give bond, in such sum as the Council shall direct, with surety approved by the
Council.
§ 41-5. Manager's compensation.
[Amended 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(10); 3-18-1975 by Ord. No. 345]
The compensation of the Manager shall be fixed by the Council from time to time.
In the event the Borough Manager finds it necessary to take a leave of absence, with the consent
and approval of Council, for a period of more than two weeks, he shall receive reasonable
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 23/244
B.
A.
(1)
(a)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
B.
compensation for any services that may be rendered in an advisory or consultant capacity.
In the event the Borough Manager should become ill or disabled and be unable to perform the full
services of the Manager's office for a period of more than two weeks, he shall receive disability
pay in an amount and for a period of time which is deemed fair in the discretion of Council,
provided he has been employed in the capacity as Borough Manager for a period of one year or
more.
§ 41-6. Powers and duties of Manager.
[Amended 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(10)]
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough and he shall be responsible
to the Council as a whole for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough.
His powers and duties shall relate to the general management of all Borough business not
expressly by statute imposed or conferred upon other Borough officers.
Subject to recall by ordinance of Council, the powers and duties of the Borough Manager shall
include the following:
He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal departments.
He shall hire and, when necessary for the good of the service shall suspend or discharge all
employes under his supervision, provided that persons covered by the civil service provisions
of the Borough Code shall be hired, suspended, or discharged in accordance with such
provisions; provided further, that the Manager shall report, at the next meeting thereafter of
Council, any action taken by authority of this subsection.
He shall not increase the number of employes over the present number at the time of
adoption of this amendment without the approval of Council.
He shall prepare and submit to Council before the close of the fiscal year, or on such alternate
date as Council shall determine, a budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget
message. In preparing the budget the Manager, or an officer designated by him, shall obtain
from the head of each department, agency, board, or officer, estimates of revenues and
expenditures and other supporting data as he requests. The Manager shall review such
estimates and may revise them before submitting the budget to the Council.
He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption by the Council.
He shall hold such other municipal offices or head one or more of the municipal departments
as the Council shall from time to time direct.
He shall attend all meetings of Council and its committees with the right to take part in the
discussion and he shall receive notice of all special meetings of Council or its committees.
He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of Council and supply facts pertinent thereto.
He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough affairs; submit periodic
reports on the condition of the Borough finances and such other reports as the Council,
requests; and make such recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
He shall submit to Council, as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year, a complete
report on the financial and administrative activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits, and privileges granted by
the Borough are observed.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 24/244
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
He may employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and consultants to perform work
and to advise in connection with any of the functions of the Borough.
He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he shall supervise the
performance and faithful execution of the same except insofar as such duties are expressly
imposed upon some other Borough officer by statute.
He shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and that proper proceedings
are taken for the security and collection of all the Borough's claims.
He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the Borough and he shall purchase, in accordance with
the provisions of the Borough Code, all supplies and equipment for the various agencies,
boards, departments, and other offices of the Borough; provided, however, that he shall not
make any purchase over the total amount of $500 without the prior approval of Council. He
shall keep an account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or when directed by
Council, make a full written report thereof. He shall also issue rules and regulations, subject to
the approval of Council, governing the requisition and purchasing of all municipal supplies
and equipment.
All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall be referred to the office of
the Manager. He, or an officer designated by him, shall investigate and dispose of such
complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to Council.
§ 41-7. Mayor's powers and duties.
[Amended 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(10)]
With approval of the Council, the Mayor may delegate to the Manager any of his nonlegislative powers
and duties.
§ 41-8. Limitation on Council's powers.
Neither the Council nor any of its committees or members thereof shall dictate or attempt to dictate the
hiring of any person to, or his discharge from, employment by the Manager, or in any manner take part
in the hiring, suspending or discharging of employees in the administrative service of the Borough
except as required to do so by the civil service provisions of the Code. Except for the purpose of
inquiry, the Council, its committees, and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely
through the Borough Manager and neither the Council nor any of its members shall give orders,
publicly or privately, to any subordinates of the Manager.
§ 41-9. Disability or absence of Manager.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough, he shall designate one qualified
member of his staff who shall perform the duties of the Manager during his absence or disability. The
person so designated shall not perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without the
approval of the Council.
Chapter 48. Officers and Employees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Secretary and Treasurer
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 25/244
[Adopted 2-6-2001 by Ord. No. 535]
§ 48-1. Offices combined.
The offices of the Borough Secretary and Borough Treasurer may be held by the same person
pursuant to 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1104, as amended.
Chapter 55. Pensions
[The current pension plans of the Borough, as amended, are on file in the Borough office.]
Chapter 62. Police Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 4-13-1971 by Ord. No.
304(16) (Ch. I, Part 5, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 62-1. Police Department established.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of Tamaqua. The Chief of Police
shall be the chief executive of the Police Department. He shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in
charge of the Police Department and have supervision over its members, in the exercise of their
powers, duties and authority. The existing police force of the Borough is hereby established and
confirmed as the Police Department established by this chapter.
§ 62-2. Subordinate classifications.
[Amended 11-18-1975 by Ord. No. 351]
Subordinate to the Chief of Police in the Police Department the following classifications are hereby
established: Corporal and Patrolman. The priority of authority among such subordinate classifications
shall be in the order above listed. The number of persons to serve as patrolmen, on a full-time and/or
part-time basis, and the compensations of each, shall be as determined by the Borough Council from
time to time. The number of persons to serve as Corporals shall be three.
§ 62-3. Special policemen.
Nothing herein shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint special policemen during emergencies.
Chapter 70. Records Disposition
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 500;
amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 70-1. Government schedules of retention and disposition.
The Borough of Tamaqua desires to provide for the orderly retention, disposition and storage of those
records created and received by the Borough. The General Assembly has enacted the Municipal
Records Act[1] and established the Local Government Records Committee to promulgate schedules for
the retention and disposition of public records to aid municipalities in their management of public
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 26/244
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
records. It is the intent of the Borough Council to follow the schedules for the retention and disposition
of public records promulgated by the Local Government Records Committee as authorized by the
Municipal Records Act.
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 1381 et seq.
Chapter 77. Salaries and Compensation
[Current salary information for the Mayor and Council is available in the Borough offices.]
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 96. Alcoholic Beverages
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 4-6-1982 by Ord. No. 406.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
Includes intoxicating liquors of any type, such as, but not by way of limitation, beer, wine, whiskeys
and distilled spirits, and all other intoxicants.
PUBLIC PLACE
Includes sidewalks within the Borough, Borough owned property, and the streets and highways
within the corporate limits of the Borough.
§ 96-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted under the authority of the Borough Code, the Act of February 1, 1966,
Pamphlet Law (1965) No. 581, § 1202; 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202(5) which authorizes the Borough to make
regulations as may be necessary for the health, safety, morals, general welfare, cleanliness, and the
beauty, convenience, comfort and safety of the Borough.
§ 96-3. Unlawful acts.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to:
Consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place within the Borough of Tamaqua.
Carry or possess any opened vessel containing any alcoholic beverage while in, or about, a public
place within the Borough of Tamaqua.
Consume any alcoholic beverage on the property of another (not including an establishment
licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board) except with the consent of the owner(s) or
legal occupant(s) thereof.
Carry or possess any open vessel containing any alcoholic beverage on the property of another
(not including an establishment licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board) except with
the consent of the owner(s) or legal occupant(s) thereof.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 27/244
§ 96-4. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by
summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 102. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Keeping of Certain Animals
[Adopted 5-10-1966 by Ord. No. 277 (Ch. III of the 1971 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety
8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 709]
§ 102-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
AFRICANIZED HONEYBEE
Hybrids of the African honeybee with various European honeybees that are aggressive compared
to the European subspecies.
ANIMAL
Any living member of the animal kingdom, excluding humans.
APIARY
Any place where one or more colonies or nuclei of bees are kept.
BAT HOUSE
Any device, either stand-alone or designed to be attached to a structure, for the sole purpose of
housing native bats.
BEE
Any stage of the common honeybee (Apis mellifera) or other species of the genus Apis.
BEE DISEASE
Any American or European foul brood, sac brood, bee paralysis or other diseases or abnormal
condition of eggs, larval, pupal or adult stages of the honeybee.
BEEKEEPER
An owner of an apiary or a person who has charge of an apiary or one or more colonies of bees in
the Borough.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 28/244
The policies, procedures and methods contained in the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture's
Compliance Agreement for Beekeepers.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania.
BROOD
The embryo and eff, larva, and pupa stages of a bee.
CARRIER PIGEON
Homing and racing pigeons which have the name of the owner stamped upon the wing or tail or
are banded upon the leg with the name or initials of the owner or with an identification or
registration number stamped on the band.
COMB
The assemblage of cells containing a living stage of a bee at a time prior to emergence as an
adult.
DEPARTMENT
The Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture.
DOMESTIC FOWL
Domesticated breeds/varieties of chickens, excluding roosters; quail; pheasant; pigeons; and
doves. Also, domesticated varieties of Muscovy ducks (Carina moschata), excluding drakes (male
ducks), are herein included.
ENCLOSURE
A coop, cage or hutch that is designed to house domestic fowl or domesticated rabbits and is
covered, predator-proof, well-ventilated, has at least two solid sides, is designed for easy cleaning
access and complies with § 102-6 of this Code.
FLY-AWAY ZONE
An unobstructed area to allow for the natural ingress and egress behaviors of mammalian bats.
FLYWAY
A barrier composed of dense vegetation or man-made materials which directs bees quickly into
the sky.
HIVE
A container intended for the housing of a colony of bees.
KENNEL
Any property and/or establishment wherein domesticated pets (and not livestock as defined in this
article) are kept, transported to, transported from, or seen by appointment for the purposes of
breeding, boarding, grooming, obedience training, sale, or show purposes. For the purpose of this
definition, the production of more than two litters in any calendar year shall be considered
"breeding"; and the keeping of more than five dogs or more than five cats on any property located
with the ESP Region shall be considered to be a "kennel" operation.
LOFT
Any structure in which carrier pigeons are housed.
NATIVE BAT
Those species of bats that are native to Pennsylvania.
PERSON
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other entity.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 29/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
PETS, KEEPING OF
The keeping of domesticated animals of types that are normally considered to be kept by the
residents of a dwelling for the pleasures of the resident family. These types of animals can include,
but are not necessarily limited to, dogs, cats, small birds, gerbils, rabbits and other animals
commonly sold by pet shops; however, no more than five dogs, cats, small birds, gerbils, rabbits
and other animals commonly sold by pet shops may be kept upon any property, unless said
property is a lawfully established "kennel" under the terms of this article.
RACING PIGEON
Any pigeon registered with any national pigeon racing organization.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING
A single-family attached dwelling, a single-family detached dwelling or a single-family
semidetached dwelling, each as defined in the Borough Zoning Ordinance, as amended from time
to time.
§ 102-2. General regulations.
Except as provided in this article, no person shall import into the Borough, possess, display, offer for
sale, trade, barter, exchange or adopt, or give as a household pet to any person, to be maintained
within the Borough, any animal except the following, which require the providing of adequate housing
and proper care:
Domestic dogs, excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes, or jackals;
Domestic cats, excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays;
Domesticated rodents;
Captive-bred species of common cage birds;
Nonpoisonous snakes not to exceed six feet in total length;
Fish;
Small reptiles, including turtles and lizards;
Small amphibians, including newts, frogs, and salamanders, traditionally kept in the home for
pleasure rather than for commercial purposes;
Carrier pigeons and racing pigeons, when kept in compliance with permit requirements;
Domesticated rabbits;
Bees, when kept in compliance with permit requirements;
Native bats.
§ 102-3. Residence of owner; applicable law.
Each person responsible for keeping an animal in the Borough shall reside on or adjacent to the
designated site on which the animal is kept. The person keeping the animal must be the owner or
permitted lessee of the site where the animal is kept.
In addition to the applicable provisions contained in this article, each person keeping an animal in
the Borough shall comply with all other applicable provisions of the Borough of Tamaqua Code of
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 30/244
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
(1)
A.
Ordinances, the Borough Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and all other state and
federal laws, statutes, rules and regulations, as amended from time to time.
§ 102-4. Animal numbers limited.
No residential housing unit in the Borough shall contain at any one time more than five permitted
domestic dogs or five permitted domestic cats, or any combination thereof; or four of any other
caged or uncaged permitted animals, unless otherwise permitted herein. This limit shall not
include litters of young permitted animals who have not yet been weaned or who have been
weaned for fewer than six weeks.
Animals which occasionally birth litters of young shall not be used for the sole intent to provide
income to the animal's owner or constitute a business based on the raising of animals.
There shall be no limit on the number of fish and small amphibians which any residential unit in
the Borough may maintain.
§ 102-5. Housing types allowed.
Single-family dwelling. All single-family dwellings shall be permitted to keep all animals permitted
to be kept pursuant to § 102-2.
All residential housing units which are not single-family dwellings are limited solely to the keeping
of the following animal types:
Domestic dogs, excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals;
Domestic cats, excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays;
Domesticated rodents;
Captive-bred species of common cage birds;
Nonpoisonous snakes not to exceed six feet in length;
Fish;
Small reptiles, including turtles and lizards;
Small amphibians, including newts, frogs and salamanders;
Domesticated rabbits.
§ 102-6. Domesticated rabbits.
Enclosures. Enclosures shall provide at least three square feet of space per animal, and shall
provide access to a clean water source. Each enclosure shall comply with the required height
restrictions for accessory structures as set forth in the Borough Zoning Ordinance, as amended
from time to time.
Each enclosure shall be enclosed on all sides, and shall have a roof and doors. Access doors
must be able to be shut and locked at night. Openings, windows and vents must be covered
with vermin, predator and bird-proof wire of one-half-inch hardware cloth.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 31/244
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
Materials used for making an enclosure shall be uniform for each element of the enclosure,
such that the walls are made of the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other
covering, and each window and opening is constructed using the same materials. The use of
scrap, waste board or similar material is prohibited.
Each enclosure shall be painted or stained; the color shall be uniform around the enclosure
and shall be in harmony with the surrounding area.
Each enclosure shall be designed to provide safe and healthy living conditions for
domesticated rabbits and shall provide shade in the warm weather, suitable protection from
inclement weather, and adequate ventilation.
Each enclosure shall be kept in good repair and must be capable of being maintained in clean
and sanitary condition, free of vermin and obnoxious odors.
Each enclosure must reasonably prevent domesticated rabbits from running at large.
Each enclosure shall be open at all times for inspection by the Borough.
No enclosure shall be located in the front yard of any lot.
Setbacks. Each enclosure shall be kept at least 25 feet from each door and window of any
dwelling or occupied structure other than the owner's dwelling. No enclosure shall be located
within five feet of a side yard or rear yard lot line.
§ 102-7. Sanitation.
Proper sanitation shall be maintained for each animal at all times to prevent any condition which
may be dangerous or detrimental to the health of the public or the animal, or constitute a
nuisance. Proper sanitation includes but is not limited to:
Disposing of animal waste matter and not allowing it to accumulate, in accordance with
Subsections B and C of this section.
Ensuring odors resulting from each animal are not detectable beyond property lines.
Storing all animal food in metal or other rodent-proof containers.
Compost endeavors containing animal waste matter shall be located at least five feet from all
property lines and be within a container or bin enclosed on all sides and covered to deter
rodents, flies and other pests.
Fecal matter deposited on public and private property. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person
to permit any animal owned by or under the custody, supervision or control of such person to
deposit fecal matter upon the public streets, alleys or sidewalks in the Borough or upon property of
another, including the property of the Borough or of any school district, without immediately
removing the same and disposing of the same in a sanitary manner.
Fecal matter remaining on personal property. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit fecal
matter of any animal owned by or under the custody, supervision or control of such person to
accumulate or remain on property owned or occupied by such person for a period of 24 hours
without removing the same and disposing of the same in a sanitary manner.
§ 102-8. Harvesting.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 32/244
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
Harvesting of animals shall occur only on the property on which the animals are kept, and shall not
occur in view from any public area or any adjacent property owned by another person.
Harvesting of animals shall be done in a humane and sanitary manner.
No commercial slaughterhouse shall be allowed in the Borough.
§ 102-9. Bees.
Beekeeping. It shall be unlawful to keep any bees in the Borough except as provided in this
section.
Registration, certification and permits.
No beekeeper may own or maintain an apiary within the Borough without first registering each
apiary with the Department, as required by the Pennsylvania Bee Law, 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 2101 et.
seq., as amended.
No beekeeper may own or maintain an apiary within the Borough without first obtaining a best
management certification from the Department and executing the Department's Compliance
Agreement for Beekeepers. A beekeeper owning or maintaining an apiary in the Borough
shall promptly notify the Borough Zoning Officer without unnecessary delay, and in no event
longer than 48 hours from such, revocation, if the Department revokes said beekeeper's best
management certification.
No beekeeper may own or maintain an apiary within the Borough without first obtaining an
annual beekeeper permit from the Borough Zoning Officer. An application for an annual
beekeeper permit shall be made, in writing, to the Borough upon such form or in such format
as established by the Borough from time to time, and shall be accompanied by the prescribed
beekeeper permit fee in the amount established by resolution of the Borough from time to
time. The application shall be accompanied by a lot plan that includes the size of the lot, the
location and number of each hive, the location of each water source, the distance of each
hive from the property lines, and, if required, the location of any flyway barriers. The
application shall also be accompanied by written evidence that the applicant has completed a
certified beekeeping educational program. The issuance of a zoning permit shall not obviate
the necessity for compliance with all other Borough ordinances.
Non-property owners who wish to own or maintain an apiary on property that the non-property
owner is leasing must include written permission from the property owner or landlord that
explicitly indicates that the non-property owner has permission to own and maintain an apiary
on the subject property. Such written permission shall be supplied to the Borough as part of
the annual beekeeper permit application.
Maximum number of colonies. For a property containing a minimum of 2,000 square feet of lot
area, a beekeeper is permitted to keep two hives. For every additional 2,000 square feet of lot
area, the beekeeper is permitted to keep two additional hives.
Hive type. No beekeeper shall keep or maintain bees in any hive other than a Langstroth-type or
top-bar-type hive with removable combs and with adequate space in the hive to prevent
overcrowding and deter swarming.
Location of hives. The location of each hive must comply with the following criteria:
No hive shall be located within 10 feet of any side or rear property line.
No hive shall be located within the front yard of a lot.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 33/244
(3)
(4)
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
K.
L.
M.
No hive shall be located within 50 feet of a swimming pool or permanently kenneled animal.
Apiaries may be located in any zoning district in the Borough.
Hive orientation. Hive entrances shall face away from neighboring properties and in such direction
that bees fly across the beekeeper's property at sufficient distance to gain a height of at least six
feet at each property line. The use of barriers may be employed to redirect the bees flight pathway
and establish bee flight pathways above six feet. Should the flight path not be able to be obtained
as set forth in this subsection, then a flyway barrier shall be placed at least six feet in height, shall
be placed along the side of each hive that contains the entrance to the hive, shall be located within
five feet of the hive, and shall extend at least two feet on either side of the hive. A flyway barrier
shall consist of a solid fence, dense vegetation, dense hedge, or combination thereof. No flyway is
required for a hive that is located on a porch or balcony at least 10 feet above grade, except
where such porch or balcony is located less than five feet from a property line.
Water. All beekeepers in the Borough shall ensure that a convenient source of fresh water is
available to the bees from April 1 through November 1 of each year and is located closer to the
apiary than any other water source.
Best management practices. All beekeepers owning or maintaining an apiary in the Borough shall
practice all best management practices as established by the Department from time to time.
Maintenance. All beekeepers shall ensure that no bee comb or other materials are left upon the
ground of the apiary site. Upon removal from the apiary, all such materials shall promptly be
disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.
Inspection. The Borough, the Department and any apiary inspector appointed by the Borough
shall have free access, ingress, and egress to and from each apiary, premises, building, or other
place, public or private, in which bees, wax, honey, hives, or appliances may be kept or stored. No
person shall deny any such access, or hinder or resist any inspection.
Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any beekeeper to keep any hive in such a manner as to cause
any unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life, or
interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any property surrounding the property on which the
bees are kept. The Borough, with or without the guidance of an apiary inspector, may seize and/or
destroy each hive or bee receptacle that is a public nuisance pursuant to this article without
remuneration to the beekeeper. By way of example and not of limitation, the following activities are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and are, therefore, unlawful:
Multiple bees stinging, attacking, or otherwise molesting others, including but not limited to
pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle passengers and domestic animals;
The use of any apiary or receptacle for bees that does not comply with Subsection D of this
section.
Hive placement and related bee movement such that any bee, without provocation, interferes
with the freedom of movement of any person in a public right-of- way, or the location of bees
poses a threat to the general safety, health, and welfare of the general public.
The keeping of any overcrowded, bee-diseased or abandoned hive.
Prohibitions. Africanized honeybees may not be kept on any property in the Borough.
Sale of honey. The sale of honey must comply with all state and federal laws, statutes, rules and
regulations.
§ 102-10. Native bats.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 34/244
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
General provisions. To encourage native bat populations in the Borough, residents may install two
bat houses on their property.
Each bat house may be installed as either stand-alone or attached to an existing structure.
Each bat house must be at least 10 feet above ground level. Each stand-alone bat house
shall not be located more than 20 feet above ground level.
Each stand-alone bat house must provide for a fly-away zone of at least 10 feet.
The placement of a bat house in the front yard of any lot is strictly prohibited.
Any waste products or fecal matter must be cleaned as required by § 102-7, Sanitation.
§ 102-11. Carrier pigeons and racing pigeons.
Permits.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough shall issue an annual carrier pigeon permit to
the owner of any carrier pigeons upon application therefor by said owner if:
Identification marks stamped on each carrier pigeon or band are recorded with the
Borough;
Each loft is found upon inspection to be in compliance with all of the regulations
prescribed by the Borough and is maintained in a clean, orderly condition and kept in
good repair; and
The construction of each loft complies with the Borough's Building Code regulations.
The requirements of the Borough's Zoning Ordinance relating to restrictions on the location of
stables and poultry enclosures shall not apply to a loft for which a permit has been issued.
The owner of any carrier pigeons shall pay an annual fee for an annual carrier pigeon permit
in an amount to be established by resolution of Borough Council of the Borough from time to
time, and no permit as required by this article shall be issued until the prescribed fee shall
have been paid. The Borough shall keep a record of all permits issued pursuant to this article.
Issuance of permit authorizing loft construction. Any person to whom the Code Enforcement
Officer has issued a carrier pigeon permit may erect and maintain a loft of carrier pigeons or
racing pigeons in the Borough.
Exercise and training. Any owner of carrier pigeons to whom the Code Enforcement Officer has
issued a carrier pigeon permit, or person acting for him or her, having in his or her charge or
possession and under restraint and control carrier pigeons, shall be allowed to fly the carrier
pigeons for necessary exercise and training, but not more than 25 pairs at any one time.
Inspection of pigeons and lofts. Any owner of carrier pigeons to whom the Code Enforcement
Officer has issued a carrier pigeon permit shall permit employees or officials of the Borough to
enter upon such owner's property for the purpose of making inspections of carrier pigeons and
lofts at all reasonable times and from time to time.
§ 102-12. Animals at large.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to permit any animal owned by or under the custody,
supervision or control of such person to be at large without controlled restraint, either upon the public
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 35/244
streets, alleys or sidewalks in the Borough or upon property of another, including the property of the
Borough or of any school district.
§ 102-13. Sound or noise by animals.
Owning, possessing, harboring, supervising or controlling any animal or bird which howls, barks,
meows, squawks or makes other sounds continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or
makes such noise intermittently for 30 minutes or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of
the day or night, regardless of whether the animal or bird is situated in or upon private property;
provided, however, that at the time the animal or bird is making such noise, no person is trespassing or
threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal or bird is situated or for any
other legitimate cause which teased or provoked the animal or bird.
§ 102-14. Violation of state or federal law.
Any violation of this article that would also violate any state or federal law, statute, rule or regulation
shall be prosecuted under such state or federal law, statute, rule or regulation, as applicable, and not
under this article.
§ 102-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine not to exceed $600, and in default of payment, to undergo imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 102-16. Severability.
If any provision, sentence, clause, section, subsection or portion of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, subsections or portions of this
article. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Borough Council of the Borough that this article would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision, sentence, clause, section,
subsection or portion thereof not been included herein.
§ 102-17. (Reserved)
Article II. Feral and Homeless Cats
[Adopted 3-6-2012 by Ord. No. 655]
§ 102-18. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
FEEDING
The provision of food, water, or other substance left outside of any building or structure.
FERAL OR HOMELESS CATS
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 36/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
One that exists in an untamed state or one that has returned to an untamed state is no longer
considered domesticated, or one that was previously residing in a domesticated home and has
been abandoned by its prior owner.
SHELTERING
The provision of any type of shelter, whether temporary or permanent, that a cat may enter.
§ 102-19. Feeding or sheltering prohibited.
The feeding and/or sheltering of feral or homeless cats is hereby prohibited on any public or private
property within the Borough of Tamaqua.
§ 102-20. Penalties and enforcements.
This article shall be enforced by the Tamaqua Code Enforcement Officer, Tamaqua Borough Police,
the Tamaqua Board of Health, and their agents.
Any person found to be feeding and/or sheltering a feral or homeless cat shall immediately be
issued a cease and desist order by the enforcement officer set forth above.
In the event any person fails to comply with a cease and desist order, the Board of Health, the
Tamaqua Borough Police, the Animal Control Officer and their agents have the right to seize and
remove any feral or homeless cats from their property.
Unless otherwise provided for herein, any person who fails to comply with a cease and desist
order, other written order, or any other provision of this section shall be guilty of a summary
offense, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against
any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the
Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. In addition to any civil or
criminal penalties, any license to keep animals may be revoked.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
In the event that animals are removed from a property, the property owner shall be fined the sum
of $100 per animal removed and the costs of removal may also be placed as a lien on the
property.
Chapter 116. Burning, Open
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 637.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and protection — See Ch. 116.
Recycling — See Ch. 273, Art. I.
§ 116-1. Purpose.
This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health,
comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Tamaqua due to the air
pollution and fire hazards of open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 37/244
A.
B.
C.
§ 116-2. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all outdoor burning and refuse burning within the Borough of Tamaqua.
This chapter does not apply to grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in
cooking or grilling appliances.
This chapter does not apply to burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace, solid fuel burning appliances,
external heating devices or other heating devices within a building used for human or animal
habitation unless the material being burned includes refuse as defined in § 116-3, Definitions, of
this chapter.
This chapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in
a device intended for heating, construction or maintenance activities.
§ 116-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CAMPFIRE
A small outdoor fire intended for recreation or cooking, not including a fire intended for disposal of
waste wood or refuse.
CLEAN WOOD
Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a similar material, has not
been pressure-treated with preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or
other composite wood products.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
Building waste materials, including, but not limited to, waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated
wood, painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from construction,
remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a house, commercial or industrial building, or
other structure.
FIRE CHIEF
The Chief of the Borough of Tamaqua Fire Department or other person authorized by the Fire
Chief.
OUTDOOR BURNING
Open burning or burning in an outdoor wood-fired furnace.
OPEN BURNING
Kindling or maintaining a fire where the products of combustion are emitted directly into the
ambient air without passing through a stack or a chimney from an enclosed chimney.
PATIO WOOD-BURNING UNIT
A chimney, patio warmer, or other portable wood-burning device used for outdoor recreation
and/or heating.
REFUSE
Any waste material except clean wood.
§ 116-4. General prohibition on open burning, outdoor burning
and refuse burning.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 38/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
General prohibition on outdoor burning and refuse burning. Open burning, outdoor burning and refuse
burning are prohibited in the Borough of Tamaqua unless the burning is specifically permitted by this
chapter.
§ 116-5. Materials that may not be burned.
The following materials may not be burned in an open fire, incinerator, burn barrel, furnace, stove or
any other indoor or outdoor incineration or heating device. The Borough of Tamaqua will not issue a
permit for burning any of the following materials without air pollution control devices and a written copy
of an approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
Rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, food wastes, food wraps, packaging, animal
carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition
debris or other household or business wastes.
Waste oil or other oily wastes except used oil burned in a heating device for energy recovery
subject to the restrictions in Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Code.
Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
Treated or painted wood, including, but not limited to, plywood, composite wood products or other
wood products that are painted, varnished or treated with preservatives.
Any plastic material, including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam,
and synthetic fabrics, films and containers.
Rubber, including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper and other materials that must be
recycled in accordance with the Borough of Tamaqua Recycling Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 273, Solid Waste, Art. I, Recycling.
§ 116-6. Open burning of leaves, brush, clean wood and other
vegetative debris.
Open burning of leaves, weeds, brush, stumps, clean wood and other vegetative debris is allowed only
in accordance with the following provisions:
All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free manner, when wind and
weather conditions are such as to minimize adverse effects and not create a health hazard or a
visibility hazard on roadways, railroads or airfields. Open burning shall be conducted in
conformance with all local and state fire protection regulations.
Except for barbecue, gas and charcoal grills, no open burning shall be undertaken during periods
when either the Fire Chief, or the County of Schuylkill, or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
issues a ban applicable to the area.
Open burning shall be conducted only on the property on which the materials were generated or at
a facility approved by and in accordance with provisions established by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Fire Chief.
Unless explicitly allowed elsewhere in this chapter, a commercial enterprise other than an
agricultural or silvicultural operation may open burn only at a facility approved by and in
accordance with provisions established by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the Fire Chief.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 39/244
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Open burning of weeds or brush on agricultural lands is allowed if conducted in accordance with
other applicable provisions of this chapter.
Fires set for forest or wildlife habitat management are allowed with the approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
Outdoor campfires and small bonfires for cooking, ceremonies or recreation are allowed, provided
that the fire is confined by a control device or structure such as a fire ring or fire pit. Bonfires are
allowed only if approved by and in accordance with provisions established by the Fire Chief.
Burning of trees, limbs, stumps, brush or weeds for clearing or maintenance of rights-of-way is
allowed if approved by the Fire Chief and if in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
Burning in emergency situations such as natural disasters is allowed if approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
Except for campfires, open burning under this section shall only be conducted at a location at least
50 feet from the nearest building that is not on the same property.
Except for campfires and permitted bonfires, open burning shall only be conducted from the hours
of dawn to dusk.
Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent person of at least 18
years of age until the fire is extinguished and is cold. The open burning, bonfires or recreational
fires shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire
extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment,
such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate
utilization.
No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk or on the ice of a lake, pond,
stream or water body.
Except for barbecue, gas and charcoal grills, no burning shall be undertaken within 50 feet from
any combustible material, combustible wall or partition, exterior window opening, exit access or
exit unless authorized by the Fire Chief.
§ 116-7. Burn barrels.
A burn barrel may not be used in the Borough of Tamaqua.
§ 116-8. Patio wood-burning units.
A patio wood-burning unit may be installed and used in the Borough of Tamaqua only in accordance
with all of the following provisions. The patio wood-burning unit:
Shall not be used to burn refuse.
Shall burn only clean wood.
Shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest structure which is not on the same property as
the patio wood-burning unit.
Shall be at least 10 feet from adjoining property land.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Shall be in approved containers.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 40/244
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Shall be located on a noncombustible base surface at least four feet by four feet.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 116-9. Outdoor fireplaces.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Outdoor fireplaces constructed and generally intended for recreational use as defined in this chapter
for residences and small commercial application may be considered as approved for contained burning
tinder. Such fireplaces shall have an essentially contained fire chamber in which all burning takes
place, and a flue or chimney through which exhaust, gas, smoke and emissions escape. The flue or
chimney must have a spark arrester or screen covering, if said chimney or flue is of insufficient length
or construction as to prevent the emissions of sparks and ash. A screen covering will be required over
any fire chamber which has an open top surface which may allow spark and ash emissions. A permit
fee as set by resolution of Borough Council is required.
§ 116-10. Fire Department practice burns.
Notwithstanding § 116-4, General prohibition on open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning,
and § 116-5, Materials that may not be burned, of this chapter, the Borough of Tamaqua Fire
Department may burn a standing building if necessary for firefighting practice and if the practice burn
complies with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 116-11. Burning permits.
No person shall start or maintain any open burning outdoor fireplace without obtaining a burning
permit at a fee set by the Tamaqua Borough Council by resolution and issued by the Borough of
Tamaqua Fire Chief or his designated representative.
An outdoor campfire does not require a permit, provided that the fire complies with all other
applicable provisions of this chapter.
Any person responsible for burning leaves, brush, clean wood or other vegetative debris under
§ 116–6, Open burning of leaves, brush, clean wood and other vegetative debris, of this chapter
shall obtain a one-time burning permit before starting the fire. There is no fee for a one-time
burning permit.
When weather conditions warrant, the Fire Chief or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection may declare a burning moratorium on all open burning and temporarily
suspend previously issued burning permits for open burning.
A burning permit issued under this section shall require compliance with all applicable provisions
of this chapter and any additional special restrictions deemed necessary to protect public health
and safety.
A permit shall be required for an outdoor fireplace. In addition, the applicant shall submit prior to
the issuance of a permit a site plan, that is required, showing the location of the proposed
appliance on the property, location and height of all existing structures on the property, and
distances from the appliance to existing structures on the property. The Tamaqua Borough Fire
Chief or his designated representative shall conduct an inspection of the proposed installation and
location. The manufacturer's specifications and instructions shall also be furnished to the Borough
before a permit can be issued.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 41/244
G.
H.
A.
B.
Any permit issued by the Borough Zoning/Code Enforcement Officer for the installation and
operation of the appliance may be revoked to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Borough of Tamaqua.
Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Any
violation of this chapter or the burning permit shall void the permit.
§ 116-12. Liability.
A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and
any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire.
§ 116-13. Right of entry and inspection.
Any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of the Borough of Tamaqua, including the
Fire Chief or his designated representative, may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 116-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Code Enforcement Officer and the Fire Chief or his designated representative, or authorized
officer, agent, or representative of the Borough of Tamaqua is authorized to enforce any provisions
of this chapter.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense
and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against
any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the
Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated
shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section,
the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill
County.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Chapter 129. Construction Codes, Uniform
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 585.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 24.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 164.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 192.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 246.
Rental property — See Ch. 253.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 286.
§ 129-1. Election to administer and enforce.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 42/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
This municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from
time to time, and its regulations.
§ 129-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as amended
from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building
code of this municipality.
§ 129-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within this municipality shall be undertaken in any of the
following ways as determined by the governing body of this municipality from time to time by
resolution:
By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as the municipal Code
Enforcement Officer to act on behalf of the municipality;
By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party agencies to act on behalf
of the municipality;
By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint administration and enforcement of
this Act through an intermunicipal agreement;
By entering into a contract with another municipality for the administration and enforcement of this
Act on behalf of this municipality;
By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry for plan
review, inspections and enforcement of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling
units and utility and miscellaneous structures.
§ 129-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body of this municipality in
conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time,
and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken
jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action
of the participating municipalities.
§ 129-5. Effect on other provisions.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted by this municipality on
or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in
full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum
requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in effect as of the effective date of
this chapter and whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the Code are
hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the Code.
All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not governed by the Code
shall remain in full force and effect.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 43/244
A.
§ 129-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to
this chapter and the Code shall be established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 136. Curfew
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 136-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Tamaqua Borough Curfew Ordinance."
§ 136-2. Legislative findings and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public from nocturnal mischief of minors, for the reduction
of incidence of juvenile criminal activity, for furtherance of family responsibility, and promotion of public
good, health, safety and welfare of the residents of Tamaqua Borough.
§ 136-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings
except where the context or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH
The Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania.
ESTABLISHMENT
Any privately owned place of business carried on for a profit, or any place of amusement or
entertainment in which the public is invited.
MINOR
Any person under the age of 18 years of age.
OPERATOR
Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing or
conducting any establishment; and whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the
term "operator," as applied to associations or partnerships, shall include members or partners
thereof, and, as applied to corporations, shall include officers thereof. The term "operator"
shall also include the manager or any employee in charge of the operation of the
establishment.
PARENT
Any natural parent of a minor, as herein defined, or a guardian, or any adult responsible for
the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE
Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, sidewalk, vacant lot, or other area
generally open to the public, including a parked vehicle and any of the said locations in
Tamaqua Borough.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 44/244
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
REMAIN
To stay behind; to stay unnecessarily.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter gender.
§ 136-4. Curfew established.
Unless accompanied by a parent/guardian, it shall be unlawful for any minor to be or remain in or
upon any public place between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 6:00 a.m.
No owner or operator of an establishment shall permit any minor to remain upon the premises of
said establishment between the hours of midnight (12:00 a.m.) and 6:00 a.m., unless
accompanied by a parent.
No parent shall allow or permit a minor to violate the provisions of this chapter without legal
justification therefor.
Exceptions:
Approved adult chaperones, coaches, mentors, etc., may substitute for a parent/guardian in
situations where the minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious, nonprofit,
government, athletic, or similar organization.
Circumstances wherein minors are legally employed or serving as junior firefighters or
ambulance personnel shall constitute exemptions from Subsection A and/or B above.
Minors possessing a senior driver's license and legally operating a vehicle for the purposes of
Subsection D(1) and/or (2) above shall be exempt from Subsection A above.
Minors possessing a written document dated that same day and signed by a parent/guardian,
specifying the starting/ending times, places, purpose, and necessity of the minor being in a
public place shall constitute exemption from Subsection A and/or B above.
§ 136-5. Police discretion in age determination.
Police officers shall use their discretion when taking minors into custody in determining age. In any
doubtful case, police may require positive proof of age, and until such proof is furnished, the judgment
of the police officer shall prevail.
§ 136-6. Violations and penalties.
Minors and/or negligent parents/guardians who shall violate this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine as follows:
First offense: not more than $100.
Second or subsequent offenses: not more than $300.
Operators/owners of establishment who knowingly or negligently violate § 136-4B above shall,
upon conviction, pay a fine of not more than $300 for each minor found to be upon their premises
in violation of § 136-4A above.
All offenders convicted of violating this chapter shall also pay the costs of prosecution and, in
default of said payment of fines and costs, shall undergo imprisonment for a period not to exceed
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 45/244
D.
A.
B.
C.
30 days, or the period provided by law for summary offenses, whichever is less.
The Court may authorize diversionary and/or other alternative penalties (community service,
counseling, educational classes, etc.) in lieu of imposed fines for minors, parents/guardians or
business owners.
Chapter 143. Disorderly Conduct
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 3-14-1950 by Ord. No. 213
(Ch. VII, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 143-1. Disorderly conduct; disturbance of the peace prohibited.
[Added 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(17)]
Disorderly conduct is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Tamaqua. Any person who shall
willfully make or cause to be made any loud, boisterous and unseemly noise or disturbance to the
annoyance of the peaceable residents nearby, or near to any public street or alley, or public
ground within the Borough, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public
annoyed, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct.
Disturbance of the peace is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Tamaqua. Any person who
shall be guilty of any willful act causing or tending to cause a disturbance of the peace and good
order of the Borough, or causing or tending to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to
inhabitants of the Borough or to users of any of the public streets or alleys in the Borough; or who
shall fight or quarrel or incite others to fight or quarrel; or who shall publicly make use of obscene
or indecent language; or who shall loaf or loiter or congregate upon any of the public streets or
alleys or public grounds in the Borough, to the annoyance of peaceable residents nearby or
traveling upon any street or alley or being lawfully upon any of the public grounds in the Borough,
whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public annoyed shall be guilty of
disturbance of the peace.
Violations and penalties. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
Upon judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on
default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be
sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period not exceeding
30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section
of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of
enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Chapter 148. Environmental Impact Statements
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 3-2-2004 by Ord. No. 579.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 148-1. Name.
The name of this chapter shall be the "Borough Environmental Policy Act."
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 46/244
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 148-2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted and enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the Borough of Tamaqua by
all relevant state and federal laws, including, but not limited to, the following:
The general authority granted by the Constitution of Pennsylvania and the Pennsylvania Borough
Code to make and adopt all such ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations as may be deemed
expedient or necessary for the proper management, care, and control of the Borough of Tamaqua
and its finances and the maintenance of the health, safety, peace, good government, and welfare
of the Borough of Tamaqua;
The Constitution of Pennsylvania, Art. 1, Section 2, which provides that all power is inherent in the
people, and that all free governments are founded on their authority and instituted for their peace,
safety, and happiness;
The Constitution of Pennsylvania, Art. 1, Section 27, which guarantees a clean and safe
environment for the people of Pennsylvania; and
Pennsylvania Statutes, Title 53, Municipal and Quasi-Municipal Corporations, Section 46202,[1]
which authorizes the Borough of Tamaqua to enact ordinances necessary for the proper
management, care, and control of the Borough and its finances and the maintenance of peace,
good government, safety, health and welfare of the Borough and its citizens, trade, commerce,
and manufacturers.
Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202.
§ 148-3. Findings and general purpose.
The Tamaqua Borough Council recognizes that:
A corporation is a legal fiction created by the express permission of the people of the Borough of
Tamaqua as citizens of this state;
A corporation is a limited liability entity, and its officers, directors, and investors are shielded from
liability for harms caused by the corporation;
If a corporation causes harms to the residents of the Borough of Tamaqua, the corporation's
structure as an incorporated entity, and the limited liability of the individuals that control the
corporation, make it more difficult to obtain redress and compensation from a corporation than
from a natural person or unincorporated association or partnership;
Protection of the natural environment and the residents of this Borough is a fundamental obligation
of the Tamaqua Borough Council in their role as elected representatives of the residents of the
Borough of Tamaqua; and
This Borough has experienced serious environmental degradation from projects commenced by
corporations. This Borough finds that prior degradation has diminished the quality of life of the
residents of the Borough, and that this chapter protects that quality of life by requiring a
corporation to select the most environmentally sound alternative for particular projects.
§ 148-4. Specific purpose.
The specific purpose of this chapter is to require all corporations planning to undertake certain
activities within the Borough of Tamaqua to prepare an environmental impact statement (EIS) to
examine the environmental and community impacts resulting from major corporate projects, to analyze
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 47/244
A.
B.
C.
alternatives to the proposed projects, and to select the most environmentally sound alternative for
those projects.
§ 148-5. Statement of law.
Corporations planning significant corporate actions within the Borough of Tamaqua shall prepare a
detailed statement known as an environmental impact statement (EIS) for all significant corporate
actions within the Borough. By law, corporations shall be required under this chapter to select the most
environmentally sound alternative for any project undertaken by the corporation.
§ 148-6. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to words used within this chapter:
ALTERNATIVES
Alternatives to the proposed significant corporate action which fully examine a range of all
possible approaches to a particular project, including the total abandonment of the project. A
corporation shall not artificially narrow the goal of the project to narrow the range of alternatives
considered for the project. The consideration of alternatives must rigorously explore and
objectively evaluate all alternatives to the project.
CONNECTED ACTIONS
Actions which are closely related and which depend on other actions which are taken previously or
simultaneously, or are interdependent parts of a larger action.
CORPORATION
Any corporation organized under the laws of any state of the United States or any country. The
term "corporation" shall include all entities that possess limited liability characteristics, including
limited partnerships, limited liability partnerships, business trusts, and limited liability corporations
organized under the laws of any state or the United States or any country. This term shall not
include general partnerships, except general partnerships in which corporations are partners.
MOST ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND ALTERNATIVE
The alternative to the proposed corporate action that has the least impact on the natural
environment and communities within the Borough of Tamaqua, of the range of alternatives
examined to the proposed significant corporate action.
SIGNIFICANT CORPORATE ACTION
Any action entirely or partly financed, assisted, conducted, controlled, or approved by a
corporation which has more than a minor impact within the Borough. The aggregate impact of
multiple actions, each having minor impacts within the Borough, shall be considered a significant
corporate action if the multiple actions are connected actions or similar actions and have
cumulative impacts that are greater than minor impacts.
§ 148-7. The environmental impact statement.
The environmental impact statement shall include a detailed explanation and analysis of the following:
The environmental impact of the proposed action;
Any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided should the proposal be implemented;
Alternatives to the proposed action;
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 48/244
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
The most environmentally sound alternative to the proposed action;
The purpose and need for the project.
§ 148-8. Activities requiring preparation of environmental impact
statement.
The following activities, if undertaken by a corporation, shall require the preparation of an
environmental impact statement:
Any corporate activity which requires a permit or other form of approval from the Borough Council;
Any corporate activity which will cause more than a minor impact to the Borough's natural
environment or its communities;
Any corporate activity similar to activities in other localities that have previously caused more than
a minor impact to the natural environment or communities.
§ 148-9. Process for development of environmental impact
statement.
The environmental impact statement shall be developed through the following process:
Scoping phase. The corporation shall engage in a scoping process, through which the corporation
shall invite the participation of state and local agencies, interested persons within the community,
community nonprofit organizations, and other interested entities to determine the scope of the
project and the significant issues to be analyzed in depth within the statement. The scoping phase
shall be performed after the publication of a scoping notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Borough in which the project is being pursued. The scoping notice shall invite interested
persons to participate in the scoping process and will announce at least one public meeting to be
held at the Borough building after 6:00 p.m. on a non-holiday weekday.
Production of a draft environmental impact statement (DEIS). The corporation shall prepare and
release a DEIS following the completion of the scoping phase. Notice of the availability of the
DEIS shall be advertised in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the affected Borough.
The DEIS shall contain several sections, including the following:
Cover sheet identifying the corporation, a brief description of the proposed corporate activity,
and contact information for the corporation;
A description of the corporation, including a listing of its board of directors and officers, and
including, as an attachment, a copy of the corporation's articles of incorporation and bylaws;
Summary of the significant corporate action which is the subject of the DEIS;
Table of contents;
Purpose of, and need for, the activity;
Alternatives, including proposed activity;
Affected environment;
Environmental consequences of proposed activity;
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 49/244
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
F.
List of preparers; list of agencies, organizations, and persons to whom copies of the
statement were sent;
The selection of a "selected alternative" and an explanation of why the selected alternative is
the most environmentally sound alternative for the proposed activity;
Full responses to all public comments submitted at the public scoping hearing;
The DEIS shall contain a signature page, containing the signature of an official of the
corporation swearing to the accuracy of the material within the document.
Invitation of comments to the draft environmental impact statement (DEIS). The corporation shall
distribute 20 copies of the DEIS to the Borough Council, mail one copy to any interested person
and organization, to the County Commissioners, and provide a copy of the DEIS to the libraries
within the county. There shall be at least 90 days provided for public comment, and such comment
period shall not begin until the corporation has distributed copies of the DEIS to the Borough
Council, to all persons and organizations participating in the scoping process, to the County
Commissioners, and to the libraries within the county.
Responding to comments on the draft environmental impact statement (DEIS). The corporation
shall respond to all comments submitted on the DEIS. Possible responses include:
Modifying the alternatives;
Developing and evaluating alternatives not previously given serious consideration by the
corporation;
Supplementing, improving, or modifying its analyses;
Making factual corrections; or
Explaining why the comments do not warrant further corporate response, citing the sources,
authorities, or reasons which support the corporation's position.
Preparation and release of a final environmental impact statement (FEIS). The corporation shall
publish and distribute an FEIS, which identifies the most environmentally sound alternative to the
activity pursued by the corporation. The FEIS shall analyze that alternative and defend the
corporation's selection of that alternative. The FEIS shall also contain contemporary, updated
information and explain the impacts of that new information on the selection of the most
environmentally sound alternative.
Preparation and release of a final decision. The corporation shall prepare and distribute a final
decision, in which the corporation shall commit itself to pursuit of the project as outlined in the final
environmental impact statement (FEIS). The final decision shall be issued no earlier than 60 days
after the release of the FEIS and no later than 90 days after the release of the FEIS.
§ 148-10. Citizen suits.
This chapter hereby creates and vests a right in all citizens of the Borough of Tamaqua adversely
affected by the failure of a corporation to comply with this chapter, to sue to compel compliance with
this chapter. Such suit may challenge a corporation's failure to apply this chapter to a particular action,
or may challenge the inadequacy of the corporation's compliance with sections of this chapter. An
action challenging the inadequacy of the corporation's compliance with the chapter shall be filed within
60 days of the preparation and release of the final decision by the corporation. An action challenging
the failure of a corporation to apply this chapter to a particular action shall be brought at any time. All
actions shall be filed in the Court of Common Pleas for Schuylkill County. Citizen-plaintiffs shall notify
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 50/244
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
the Borough Council of their intent to sue, and shall give the Borough Council 30 days to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 148-11. Corporate actions pending litigation review period.
The corporation shall not commence, or commit resources to, corporate actions examined under this
chapter until 60 days have passed from the date of the issuance of the final decision by the
corporation.
§ 148-12. Supplemental environmental impact statements.
EISs prepared for projects that do not commence within 12 months after the issuance of the FEIS
under this chapter must be revised and supplemented to reflect updated, contemporary information.
Draft and final SEISs shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter, and the process for publication
and release of those documents shall be identical to the process required for a draft and final EIS, and
issuance of a final decision.
Chapter 154. Firearms
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 4-13-1971 by Ord. No.
304(18) (Ch. VII, Sec. 4, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 154-1. Use of firearms restricted.
No person shall fire or discharge any gun or other firearm within the limits of the Borough of
Tamaqua except:
In necessary defense of person or property;
On a rifle range established for the purpose and approved as such by the Mayor of the
Borough; and
While hunting game where allowed by the game laws of Pennsylvania.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense
and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against
any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the
Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated
shall also constitute a separate offense.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, Art. I, Adoption of Code)]
Chapter 157. Fire Prevention and Protection
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 24.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 164.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 51/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Open burning — See Ch. 116.
Article I. Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 644]
§ 157-1. Title.
This article shall be titled and may be referred to as the "Fire Code of the Borough of Tamaqua."
§ 157-2. Adoption by reference.
Tamaqua Borough hereby adopts, as amended below, the International Fire Code, as published by the
International Code Council, 2009 edition, as the Fire Code of Tamaqua Borough as authorized by 8
Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 32A.
§ 157-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following amendments are hereby made to the following sections of the International Fire Code as
said Code shall be applicable in Tamaqua Borough:
Section 101.1. Insert: Borough of Tamaqua.
Section 109.3. (page 12, sixth and seventh lines). Insert: Summary offense.
Section 109.3. (page 12, seventh line). Insert: $1,000.
Section 109.3 (page 12, eighth line). Insert: 30 days.
Section 111.4. Insert: "$50" and "$1,000"; "Geographic Limits."
Section 3404.2.9.6.1 of the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, in which storage of Class I and
Class II liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited are hereby established as
follows: As set forth in § 164-24 of Chapter 164, Floodplain Management.
Section 3406.2.4.4 of the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, in which storage of Class I and
Class II liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as follows: As set forth
in § 164-24 of Chapter 164, Floodplain Management.
Section 3506.2 of the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, in which storage of flammable
cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited are hereby established as follows: As set
forth in § 164-24 of Chapter 164, Floodplain Management.
Section 3804.2 of the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, in which storage of liquefied
petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas are hereby
established as follows: As set forth in § 164-24 of Chapter 164, Floodplain Management.
§ 157-4. Repealer.
All prior ordinances inconsistent with any provision of this article are repealed to the extent necessary
to give effect to the provisions of this article. Since this article is meant to consolidate all prior
ordinances relating to the International Fire Code, all other Fire Code Ordinances of the Borough of
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 52/244
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Tamaqua are specifically repealed; provided, however, that the provisions of this Code shall not be
deemed to nullify the provisions of local, state or federal law and Tamaqua Borough Code Chapter 116,
Open Burning, shall be deemed to supplement this code.
Chapter 159. Fireworks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 7-2-2019 by Ord. No. 707.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 159-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings given to them in
this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
APA 87-1
The American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1: Standard for Construction and Approval
for Transportation of Fireworks, Novelties, and Theatrical Pyrotechnics, 2001 edition, or any
subsequent edition.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS
Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances
which is intended to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, is suitable for use by
the public, complies with the construction, performance, composition and labeling
requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety Commission in Title 16 CFR
(relating to commercial practices) or any successor regulation and complies with the
provisions for "consumer fireworks" as defined in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the
sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted throughout this commonwealth.
The term does not include devices such as "ground and hand-held sparkling devices,"
"novelties" or "toy caps" in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale, possession and use
of which shall be permitted at all times throughout this commonwealth.
Consumer fireworks are "Class C" or "consumer-grade fireworks" that include firecrackers,
roman candles, bottle rockets, and similar fireworks that contain a maximum of 50 milligrams
of explosive material.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS
Large fireworks to be used solely by professional pyrotechnicians and designed primarily to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation. The term includes,
but is not limited to:
Salutes that contain more than two grains or 130 milligrams of explosive materials;
Aerial shells containing more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic compositions; and
Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for classification as
consumer fireworks and are classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 under 49
CFR 172.101 (relating to purpose and use of hazardous materials table).
ILLEGAL EXPLOSIVES
(For information purposes only) Illegal explosives associated with the fireworks season are
inherently dangerous because of their composition and unpredictability. Homemade explosives
can poses a particular risk for injury because the people making them often lack knowledge and
experience in manufacturing fireworks. Most law enforcement agencies consider devices such an
M-80s, M-100s, quarter stick, cherry bombs, silver salutes, etc., to be illegal because they exceed
the Consumer Product Safety Commission's (CPSC) limits for consumer fireworks, in addition to
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 53/244
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
C.
being banned by many states. These devices meet no safety standards and often have a coating
of dangerous explosive dust. Friction, heat, or being bumped can cause these devices to
detonate. The U.S. Department of Transportation classes these items as "forbidden explosives"
because they have not been submitted for appropriate testing evaluation.
MUNICIPALITY
A city, borough, incorporated town or township. For purposes of this chapter, Borough of
Tamaqua.
NFPA 1124
The National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation
and Storage of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 edition, or any subsequent edition.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE
A structure, vehicle or place adapted for overnight accommodation of persons or for conducting
business, whether or not a person is actually present.
OUTDOOR STORAGE UNIT
A consumer fireworks building, trailer, semitrailer, metal shipping container or magazine meeting
the specifications of NFPA 1124.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE
A structure, other than a permanent facility with fixed utility connections, which is in use or in place
for a period of 20 consecutive calendar days or less and is dedicated to the storage and sale of
consumer fireworks and related items. The term includes temporary retail sales stands, tents,
canopies and membrane structures meeting the specifications of NFPA 1124. The term shall not
include a facility that is not licensed to sell consumer fireworks under this chapter.
§ 159-2. Permits.
Permissible purposes. Display fireworks may be possessed and used by a person holding a
permit from the Borough of Tamaqua at the display covered by the permit or when used as
authorized by a permit for any of the following:
For agricultural purposes in connection with the raising of crops and the protection of crops
from bird and animal damage.
By railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination.
In quarrying or for blasting or other industrial use.
In the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater.
For signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports.
By military organizations or organizations composed of veterans of the armed forces of the
United States.
Age limitation. A display fireworks permit may not be issued to a person under 21 years of age.
Bond. The governing body of the municipality shall require a bond or insurance policy deemed
adequate by it from the permittee in a sum not less than $500,000, conditioned for the payment of
all damages which may be caused to a person or property by reason of the display and arising
from an act of the permittee or an agent, an employee or a subcontractor of the permittee.
§ 159-3. Extension of permit.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 54/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
[1]
A.
Authorization. If, because of unfavorable weather, the display for which a permit has been granted
does not occur at the time authorized by the permit, the person to whom the permit was issued
may, within 24 hours, apply for a request for extension to the municipality which granted the
permit.
Contents of request. The request for extension shall state, under oath, that the display was not
made, provide the reason that the display was not made and request a continuance of the permit
for a date designated within the request, which shall be not later than one week after the date
originally designated in the permit.
Determination. Upon receiving the request for extension, the Borough of Tamauqa, if it believes
that the facts stated within the request are true, shall extend the provisions of the permit to the
date designated within the request, which shall be not later than one week after the date originally
designated in the permit.
Conditions. The extension of time shall be granted without the payment of an additional fee and
without requiring a bond or insurance other than the bond given for the original permit, the
provisions of which shall extend to and cover all damages which may be caused by reason of the
display occurring at the extended date and in the same manner and to the same extent as if the
display had occurred at the date originally designated in the permit.
§ 159-4. Pennsylvania state law regulates use of consumer
fireworks.
Conditions. A person who is at least 18 years of age and meets the requirements of this chapter
may purchase, possess and use consumer fireworks.
Prohibitions. A person may not intentionally ignite or discharge:
Consumer fireworks on public or private property without the express permission of the
owner. (The Borough does not give permission for use of consumer fireworks on public
property.)
Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices within, or throw consumer fireworks or sparkling
devices from, a motor vehicle or building.
Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices into or at a motor vehicle or building or at another
person.
Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices while the person is under the influence of alcohol, a
controlled substance or another drug.
Consumer fireworks within 150 feet of an occupied structure.
§ 159-5. Use of display fireworks.
No display fireworks shall be ignited within 300 feet of a facility that meets the requirements of Section
2407 or 2410.[1]
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. §§ 9407 and 9410.
§ 159-6. Agricultural purposes.
Authorization. The governing body of a municipality may, under reasonable rules and regulations
adopted by it, grant permits for the use of suitable fireworks for agricultural purposes in connection
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 55/244
B.
C.
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
with the raising of crops and the protection of crops from bird and animal damage.
Duration of permit. A permit under this section shall remain in effect for the calendar year in which
it was issued.
Conditions. After a permit under this section has been granted, sales, possession and use of
fireworks of the type and for the purpose mentioned in the permit shall be lawful for that purpose
only.
§ 159-7. Rules and regulations by municipality.
Authorization. Permission shall be given by the governing body of a municipality under reasonable
rules and regulations for displays of display fireworks to be held within the municipality.
Conditions.
Each display shall be:
Handled by a competent operator; and
Of a character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the Chief of the
Fire Department or other appropriate officer as may be designated by the governing body
of the municipality, after proper inspection, to not be hazardous to property or endanger
any person.
After permission is granted under this section, possession and use of display fireworks for
display shall be lawful for that purpose only.
A permit shall not be transferable.
§ 159-8. Unlawful displays of display fireworks.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firms or corporations, amusement parks, fair associations,
farmer or agricultural operation, or any other organizations or groups of individuals, to have or to use
display fireworks, as that term is defined in the Act of October 30, 2017, P.L. 672, No. 43,[1] within the
limits of the Borough of Tamaqua unless a permit therefore is first granted by the Borough as hereafter
provided for a display of display fireworks with a professional pyrotechnician with a United States
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives permit and registration with the Pennsylvania
Attorney General's Office on the grounds designated by the Borough through the permit.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
§ 159-9. Exceptions; permit requirements.
Any person, persons, firms or corporations, churches, fire companies, fair associations, or any
other organizations or groups of individuals desiring to explode display fireworks, as defined in the
above-stated Act,[1] in public as display fireworks shall request permission from the Borough
Council to sponsor a display of display fireworks at a location approved by the Borough and obtain
a permit.
This chapter does not apply to devices such as "ground and hand-held sparkling devices,"
"novelties" and "toy caps" in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale, possession and
use of which shall be permitted at all times throughout this Borough.
The permit application will contain, as a minimum, the following:
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 56/244
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Name, address, telephone number, email address, and fax number (if applicable) of the
applicant and, if the applicant is an organization, the name, address, telephone number,
email address, and fax number (if applicable) of the contact person for the organization;
Name of the individual or organization that will be responsible for providing the fireworks
and detonation;
The operator must be registered with the Pennsylvania Attorney General's Office and
have a permit from the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives Office;
Proposed date, time and location of the fireworks display;
Number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged;
The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to display;
The applicant shall acknowledge the fireworks will only be displayed in the Borough
designated display area;
A display fireworks permit may not be issued to a person under 21 years of age;
The application must be submitted two weeks before the event;
The applicant shall acknowledge that, after the display, they will be responsible for
cleaning any debris and restoring the park grounds to their pre-fireworks condition,
including reimbursement to the Borough for any Borough cleanup.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
§ 159-10. Review and approval of Code Officer.
The Code Official, or his or her designee, shall designate the area where the display will originate
from and allow fireworks to be detonated from that area only.
The Code Official shall verify the applicant is, or has retained, an operator who is a professional
pyrotechnician for the display fireworks, with a registered permit from the United States Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives Office and registered with the Pennsylvania Attorney
General's Office.
Any and all holders of fireworks display permits will be required to notify the Tamaqua Borough
Police and Fire Chief at least two hours in advance of the display, notifying them when and where
fireworks will be displayed. The permit holders will also be required to notify the Tamaqua Borough
Police and Fire Chief at the conclusion of the display.
The Code Official will not allow fireworks displays if there is a ban on open burning and/or a
declared drought emergency or predicted dangerous weather conditions (high winds) in effect at
the time of the notification telephone calls.
The approval of the application by the Code Official will be required prior to the issuance of a
fireworks display permit from the Borough or for permissible purposes.
§ 159-11. Insurance and liability.
Applicant will be a professional pyrotechnician with registration with the Pennsylvania Attorney
General and a permit from the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 57/244
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Explosives and shall, at the time of the application, provide a certificate of insurance to the
Borough with a minimum limit of bond or insurance of $500,000 conditioned for the payment of all
damages which may be caused to a person or property by reason of the display and arising from
an act of the permittee or an agent, an employee, or a subcontractor of the permittee and naming
the Borough as an additional insured.
The permittee shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the Borough and of their officers, agents
and/or employees from any liability arising from the display for which the permit is issued. This
language shall appear on the permit as issued.
§ 159-12. Permit issuance.
The Borough Manager, or his or her designee, will issue fireworks display permits after approval
from the Code Official has been certified on the application, and the applicant has the required
insurance. Permits will be required for each separate event for the display of fireworks.
Cost of the permit will be set by resolution by Borough Council, payable to the Borough of
Tamaqua prior to the issuance of the permit. The Borough Council may waive all or a portion of
the fee if it is appropriate based on the permittee. The Council may change the amount of the fee
by resolution on their fee schedule. The initial fee for the application shall be $100 until changed
by Council resolution.
§ 159-13. Public notification.
The applicant shall be required to reimburse the Borough for a local newspaper advertisement
displaying the date and time and place of fireworks. The Borough shall utilize social media and the
Borough resources to publicize the date, time and place of the fireworks.
§ 159-14. Violations and penalties.
A person using consumer fireworks in violation of provisions of this chapter commits a summary
offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100 under the state
law.
Any person intentionally igniting or discharging display fireworks in violation of the provisions of
this chapter commits a summary offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $500.
Chapter 164. Floodplain Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 675.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. General Provisions
§ 164-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act of 1978,[1] delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of Tamaqua Borough does hereby order as follows.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 58/244
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 164-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize
flood damage in the future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its residents, by
preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
§ 164-3. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to
be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within the Borough of Tamaqua unless
a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures.
§ 164-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that
those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this
chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 164-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams
and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any
identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Tamaqua or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Article II. Administration
§ 164-6. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 59/244
A.
B.
A.
[1]
[2]
[3]
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is
referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may: fulfill the
duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations; delegate duties and responsibilities set
forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees; or enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or private
sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of
these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant
to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code
of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator duties are to
be fulfilled by the Borough Engineer.
§ 164-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is undertaken within any area of the
Borough of Tamaqua.
§ 164-8. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that the
proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the permit application
to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws have
been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537,
as amended)[1]; the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended)[2]; the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended)[3]; and the U.S.
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination
has been made.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall
inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to enter
any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the permit
application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and
report such fact to the Tamaqua Borough Council for whatever action it considers necessary.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with the requirements of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 60/244
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
(1)
C.
The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to FEMA
concerning community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/manager.
The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code and the 2009
IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
§ 164-9. Application procedures and requirements.
Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator on forms
supplied by the Borough of Tamaqua. Such application shall contain the following:
Name and address of applicant.
Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
Name and address of contractor.
Site location, including address.
Listing of other permits required.
Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of flood-related
cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred.
A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction as well as
any existing buildings or structures.
If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified
floodplain area, applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with
the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement;
Building materials are flood-resistant;
Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information as may
be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above determination:
A completed permit application form.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 61/244
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
(4)
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale, and date;
Topographic contour lines, if available;
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements,
including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
The location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas,
and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities;
All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed in
acres or square feet.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable scale
showing the following:
The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North
American Vertical Datum of 1988;
The elevation of the base flood;
Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC, the
2009 IRC, or the latest revisions thereof.
The following data and documentation:
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to show that
the cumulative effect of any proposed development within an AE Area/District without
floodway (see § 164-17A) when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point
within the community.
A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that
the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development.
Detailed information needed to determine compliance with § 164-23F, Storage, and
§ 164-24, Development which may endanger human life, including:
The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred to in
§§ 164-23F and 164-24 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the proposed
structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 164-24 during a base flood.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 62/244
(e)
(f)
D.
A.
B.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's "Planning
Module for Land Development."
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the Borough of Tamaqua based
upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the fee schedule
resolution in effect.
§ 164-10. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any
other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
§ 164-11. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to
the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for
consideration.
§ 164-12. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on
the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 164-13. Start of construction.
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of
issuance of the development permit. Work shall also be completed within 12 months after the date
of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing,
by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of a development permit does not refer to the
zoning approval.
The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 63/244
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, who sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request
and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
§ 164-14. Enforcement.
Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal representative
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing;
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the performance of any act it
requires;
Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however,
that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required by the laws of this state;
Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Penalties. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of
the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and
committed to the Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each
day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter
that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement
under this section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas
of Schuylkill County. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with
this chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a
reasonable time. Any development initiated or any structure or building constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared
by the Tamaqua Borough Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 164-15. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such
appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the
Floodplain Administrator.
Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the appeal in accordance
with the Municipalities Planning Code[1] and any other local ordinances.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 64/244
[2]
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
B.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief therefrom by
appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.[2]
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Article III. Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 164-16. Identification.
The identified floodplain area shall be:
Any areas of the Borough of Tamaqua classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated November 19, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the
Flood Insurance Study.
Any Community Identified Flood Hazard Areas.
The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments are
hereby adopted by the Borough of Tamaqua and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 164-17. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided.
AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the FIRM included
in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided but no
floodway has been determined.
No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any
AE Area/District without floodway unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development would not, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
No new construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's regional office.
The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA and for which no base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other Federal, State, or other acceptable sources shall be
used when available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the base flood elevation
shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu of the above, the Borough of Tamaqua may
require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers
or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Borough of Tamaqua.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 65/244
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
Community Identified Flood Hazard Areas shall be those areas where the Borough of Tamaqua
has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as delineated and adopted on a "Local Flood
Hazard Map" using best available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood
of record, historic high-water marks, soils or approximate study methodologies.
§ 164-18. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council of Tamaqua Borough where
studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision.
However, prior to any such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood
hazard area by submitting technical or scientific data. See § 164-21B for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
§ 164-19. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be
made by the Borough of Tamaqua and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the Tamaqua Borough Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 164-20. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to
boundary changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
Article IV. Technical Provisions
§ 164-21. General.
Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by
the Borough of Tamaqua, and until all required permits or approvals have first been obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection's regional office.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments: any development that
causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in
Zones A1-A30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a stream (including, but not
limited to, installing culverts and bridges) the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 66/244
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the encroachments
to occur.
Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map change and prior to approving
the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide as-built
certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications in
accordance with 44 CFR Part 67.
Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other
applicable federal, state, and local codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 164-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Residential structures.
In AE, A1-A30 Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest
floor (including the basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including the basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with § 164-
17B of this chapter.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405 as amended) shall be
utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Nonresidential structures.
In AE, A1-A30 Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a nonresidential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including the basement) elevated up to, or above, the
regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below
the regulatory flood elevation:
Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water; and
Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy:
In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including the basement)
elevated or completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined
in accordance with § 164-17B of this chapter.
Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the WI or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the
United States Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some
other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 67/244
(4)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
E.
states that the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405 as amended) shall be
utilized where they are more restrictive.
Space below the lowest floor.
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used solely
for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a
"substantial improvement" as defined in this chapter must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. Documentation
that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall be limited to the
parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the principal
use or activity.
Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
The structure will have a low damage potential.
The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow of
floodwaters.
Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory flood elevation or above.
Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as furnaces, heaters, washers,
dryers, etc., are prohibited.
Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 68/244
(a)
(b)
(c)
(8)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater
for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 164-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;
Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring, or
settling;
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying
steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater
runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and
provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be
located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration
of floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated
sewage into floodwaters.
No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified floodplain area
except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any such
system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from
it, during a flood.
The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No. 348, "Protecting Building
Utilities from Flood Damages" and the "International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be
utilized.
Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 69/244
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
flood.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below the
regulatory flood elevation.
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in § 164-24, Development which may
endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to
the maximum extent possible.
Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
Floors, walls and ceilings.
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without
causing structural damage to the building.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
made of metal or other water-resistant material.
Paints and adhesives.
Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of marine or
water-resistant quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or waterresistant
variety.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
Electrical components.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 70/244
M.
(1)
(2)
N.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
A.
Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
Uniform construction code coordination. The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa.
Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to
the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they are more
restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403,
1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Sections
R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix E and Appendix J.
§ 164-24. Development which may endanger human life.
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,[1] and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or, will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or, will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be subject to the provisions of this
section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances
are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone.
Ammonia.
Benzene.
Calcium carbide.
Carbon disulfide.
Celluloid.
Chlorine.
Hydrochloric acid.
Hydrocyanic acid.
Magnesium.
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
Phosphorus.
Potassium.
Sodium.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 71/244
(16)
(17)
(18)
[1]
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
Sulphur and sulphur products.
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
residential structure of the kind described in § 164-24A, above, shall be elevated to remain
completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation and built in accordance with
§§ 164-21, 164-22 and 164-23.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
nonresidential structure of the kind described in § 164-24A, above, shall be built in accordance
with §§ 164-21, 164-22 and 164-23, including: elevated, or designed and constructed to remain
completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation, and designed to prevent
pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base flood. Any such structure, or part
thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication
"Flood-Proofing Regulations" (United States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended
March 1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 164-25. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain areas where base flood elevation data are not available,
shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision and letter of map
revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 164-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Where permitted within identified floodplain areas, all manufactured homes and any improvements
thereto shall be:
Placed on a permanent foundation.
Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 1 1/2 feet above base
flood elevation; and
Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the
above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International Residential Building
Code" or the "U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto shall apply and 34 Pa. Code
Chapter 401-405.
Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or
the most recent revisions thereto, and 34 Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate and
applicable to units where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were
not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 72/244
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
§ 164-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-A30 and AE must either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 164-26.
Article V. Prohibited Activities
§ 164-28. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and
Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following
activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
Schools.
Motels and/or hotels.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
Article VI. Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 164-29. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully
existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of
§ 164-30 shall apply.
§ 164-30. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure
located within any identified floodplain area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any identified
floodplain area that would, together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase
the BFE more than one foot at any point.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 73/244
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure to
an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement
and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code, as amended, and the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to
an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
Article VII. Variances
§ 164-31. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an exceptional hardship to a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Borough of Tamaqua may, upon request, grant relief
from the strict application of the requirements.
§ 164-32. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Tamaqua in accordance with the
procedures contained in § 164-15 and the following:
No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any AE
Area/District without floodway that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE by more than one foot at any point in the community.
Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation requirement involved, no
variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to development
which may endanger human life (§ 164-24).
No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (Article V).
If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
In granting any variance, the Borough of Tamaqua shall attach whatever reasonable conditions
and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Tamaqua shall notify the applicant, in writing,
that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Tamaqua shall consider, at a minimum, the
following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
That the granting of the variance will:
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 74/244
(a)
(b)
H.
Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense;
Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other
applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the Borough
of Tamaqua. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to FEMA. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one-percent annual chance
flood.
Article VIII. Definitions
§ 164-33. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 164-34. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD
A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also
called the "one-hundred-year flood" or "one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE
The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it passes a given location within a given time,
usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE and A1-A30 that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall
be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials;
and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 75/244
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The Official Map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood
profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 76/244
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
This term is an umbrella term that includes all of the areas within which the community has
selected to enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special
flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study, but may include
additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 164-16 and 164-17 for the specifics on what
areas the community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including the basement). An unfinished, floodresistant,
partially enclosed area used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are
placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change
of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of
any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping,
electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after November 19, 2014, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after
November 29, 1989, and before November 19, 2014, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974,
or on or after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December 3, 1971,
whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 77/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31,
1974, or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December 3,
1971, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations
of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)
An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, A1-A30, AE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by
lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 78/244
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless
of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to
new construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the Code
adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain construction. For
coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the
IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)
(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Article IX. Enactment
§ 164-35. Adoption.
This chapter shall be effective on November 19, 2014, and shall remain in force until modified,
amended or rescinded by the Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania.
Chapter 171. Food Establishments
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 2-3-2009 by Ord. No. 633.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 171-1. License required.
Any person wishing to operate a food establishment in the Borough of Tamaqua on or after the
effective date of this chapter shall possess an unrevoked license from the Board of Health of the
Borough of Tamaqua. Said license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in such person's place of
business. Only persons who comply with requirements of the Board of Health of the Borough of
Tamaqua, and this chapter, shall be entitled to receive and maintain such a license. All licenses are
nontransferable. Any change in ownership of a food establishment will require the issuance of a new
license, subject to approval by the Borough Health Officer. Notice of any such change of ownership
shall be given within 10 days of the date of change; and failure to notify the Borough as aforesaid
during the continuance of the business of the food establishment shall be considered a violation of this
chapter.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 79/244
§ 171-2. Food establishment defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT
A public eating facility, including, but not limited to, restaurants, food stands, concession stands,
as well as food vendors and caterers, operated for profit or for nonprofit, within the Borough of
Tamaqua.
§ 171-3. License revocation.
A license may be suspended by the Board of Health, or revoked after an opportunity for hearing by the
Board of Health, upon violation by any owner of such license, of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or of the rules and regulations of the Board of Health of the Borough of Tamaqua, as well as applicable
rules and regulations of the United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 171-4. License reinstatement.
Any food establishment whose license has been suspended may, at any time, make application for
reinstatement of license. Within one week after receipt of a satisfactory application, accompanied by a
statement signed by the applicant to the effect that the violated item or items have been conformed
with, the Health Officer shall make a reinspection and thereafter as many additional reinspections as
he may deem necessary to make sure the applicant is complying with the requirements, and in the
case of compliance, the Board of Health shall reinstate the license.
§ 171-5. Annual commercial license fees.
Annual commercial license fees shall be charged by the Borough of Tamaqua and paid by any
commercial food establishment for a license as set by Tamaqua Borough Council from time to time by
resolution.
§ 171-6. Additional inspection fees.
Upon payment of the above-referenced license fees in § 171-5, all establishments are entitled to two
formal inspections annually, one initial inspection and one follow-up inspection to determine if any
listed deficiencies have been corrected. Any subsequent or follow-up inspections, whether the
establishment passes or fails the inspection, required as a result of the establishment's failure to
comply with this chapter, the Borough Code or other state law, will require payment of a fee as set by
the Tamaqua Borough Council on such inspection. This section does not include the investigation of
alleged violations. However, if allegations are founded, requiring a follow-up inspection, any required
subsequent inspections following the initial investigation and follow-up inspection, pass or fail, will
require payment of a fee as set by Tamaqua Borough Council for each such inspection.
§ 171-7. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor,
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil
action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 80/244
exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough
may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
Chapter 178. Graffiti
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 606.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 178-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER
Any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adopted or made
for the purpose of spraying paint capable of defacing property.
GRAFFITI
An inscription, drawing, or design, scratched, painted, sprayed, or placed on a surface, without the
consent of the owner of the property.
MARKER PEN
Any indelible marker or similar implement with a writing tip exceeding four millimeters in width that
contains a solution that cannot be removed with water after it dries.
§ 178-2. Graffiti prohibited; costs of removal.
It shall be unlawful to spray or create graffiti on any building or structure and any person doing the
same shall be liable for the cost of removal.
§ 178-3. Possession restricted.
Absent express permission to the contrary by the owner or other person having control thereof, it shall
be unlawful for any person to possess an aerosol paint container and/or marker pen in any public
building or upon any public facility or upon private property with the intent to use the same to deface
said building, facility or property. Any person who possesses an aerosol paint container and/or a
marker pen in any public building or upon any public facility or private property with no legitimate or
lawful purpose therefore shall be presumed to have possession of the same with the intention of using
such aerosol paint container and/or marker pen to deface said building, facility or property; however,
such a presumption shall be considered to be rebuttable.
§ 178-4. Removal of graffiti by owner or occupant.
Any person owning or occupying any building or structure which has been defaced with graffiti shall,
within 10 days after written notice to remove by the Borough of Tamaqua, cause such graffiti to be
removed or covered over. In the event that the time provided shall be insufficient, the affected person
may apply, in writing, for an extension of time to remove the graffiti, and the time to remove the graffiti
shall, in any event, be extended until the Code Enforcement Officer makes a decision of the extension
request. In no event shall the extension be for an additional period of more than 20 days.
§ 178-5. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 81/244
A.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by
summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce
this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
Chapter 185. Hazardous Materials
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Reimbursement for Expenses
[Adopted 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 462]
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES
Those expenses, and those related costs and fees that are incurred by the Borough, local, state or
federal department or agency, emergency services organization and from the private sector for
actual costs or charges for labor, materials, and any other costs associated with the use of
specialized extinguishing or abatement agent, chemical neutralizer or similar equipment or
material that is employed to monitor, extinguish, confine, neutralize, contain, clean, or remove any
hazardous material that is or may be involved in a fire, or release into the air, ground or water or
the potential threat of any release or fire, and any and all activities associated with the
implementation of a protective action (i.e., evacuation) to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
EXTRAORDINARY SERVICE
A service performed by any Borough departments or employees, or any public- or private-sector
organization, agency or company directly associated with mitigating the hazard or potential hazard
or involved in providing services to implement a protective action. "Extraordinary services" may
include, but is not limited to, the abatement and disposition of hazardous materials, spills,
releases, or the threat of spills or releases of hazardous materials, utility line breaks or leakages,
and other imminent or perceived or potential threats to the health, safety and welfare of the public
that may be detailed or contemplated in the definition of "extraordinary expenses" above. The cost
of labor shall include the actual wage rates, including fringe benefits paid by the Borough of
Tamaqua to its employees, and actual wage rates including benefits paid to volunteer firefighters
by their private employers.
§ 185-2. Administration.
The Council of the Borough shall collect all fees as follows:
Fees and costs (including overhead costs) shall encompass all personnel, equipment, materials
and maintenance expenses in such a form as to insure for full reimbursement for charges from
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 82/244
B.
C.
D.
both the public and private sectors actually rendered. A particular cost or fee schedule need not
be set forth in this section or elsewhere in the Borough ordinance or by further formal action by the
Borough Council. The Borough Council's approval of this section shall constitute authorization for
the Council to collect all such fees and costs (including overhead costs) pursuant to the receipt of
related expenditures or costs that are submitted to the Borough by affected public and private
bureaus, agencies, departments or companies.
Within 30 days of the date of the extraordinary or dangerous occurrence giving rise to the
extraordinary service, the affected public agencies, departments or private companies shall submit
its extraordinary-service-related costs, fees, charges and expenses to the Borough Council for
review. At such time as all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to the extraordinary service
have been collected and reviewed, but in any case not later than 60 days from the date of
determining the combined cost of rendering extraordinary services, the Borough Council shall
submit a bill for all costs, fees, charges and expenses, to the owner, agent or manager of the
vehicle or fixed facility which caused the need for extraordinary services, with a demand that a full
remittance be made within 30 days of receipt.
In cases of hardship, or where circumstances are such that a full remittance cannot be made to
the Borough within the thirty-day period, the Borough Council shall hereby authorized the Borough
Solicitor to enter into negotiations with the owner or his agent for an extended payback period of
time not to exceed six months.
All monies received under the provisions of this article shall be placed into the General Fund and
reimbursement be made to all public and private sector departments, agencies who had submitted
related costs, fees, charges and expenses for providing an extraordinary service as outlined
herein.
§ 185-3. Emergency conditions.
In the event of a spill, leak or fire involving petroleum, chemicals, and/or hazardous materials, if the
shipper, carrier or owner of said products does not have a contract with a professional hazardous
materials cleanup crew (DEP-EPA approved), and/or if such conditions warrant, the Borough of
Tamaqua Fire Chief, or designated deputy or assistant, shall have the authority to contact a private firm
for cleanup, control, extinguishment, and not limited to the disposal of said hazardous products or
substance.
§ 185-4. Litigation.
The Borough may enforce the provisions of this article by civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due hereunder plus attorneys' fees or for any other relief
that my be appropriate.
§ 185-5. Emergency services.
Nothing in this article shall authorize any Borough department, or personnel or staff members to refuse
or delay an emergency service to any person, firm, organization or corporation that has not reimbursed
the Borough for extraordinary services. Furthermore, nothing in this section shall be construed to
demand reimbursement to the Borough for those municipal services that are normally provided to
Borough residents and others as a matter of the Borough's general operating procedure, and for which
the levying of taxes, or the demand for reimbursement, is normally made.
Chapter 192. Historic Preservation
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 83/244
A.
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 5-22-2002 by Ord. No. 553.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 192-1. Legal authorization.
Pursuant to authority contained in the Act of June 13, 1961, P.L. 282, No. 167, as amended (53 P.S.
§ 8001 et seq.), there is hereby created an historic district within the Borough of Tamaqua. This
chapter shall be known and made be cited as the "Tamaqua Borough Historic Preservation
Ordinance."
§ 192-2. Purposes.
This district is created for the following purposes:
Pursuant to Article I, Section 27 of the Pennsylvania Constitution, which states:
"The people have a right to clean air, pure water, and to the preservation of the natural, scenic,
historic and esthetic values of the environment. Pennsylvania's public natural resources are the
common property of all the people, including generations yet to come. As trustees of these
resources, the Commonwealth shall conserve and maintain them for the benefit of all the
people."
Now, therefore, it is the purpose and intent of the Borough of Tamaqua to promote, protect,
enhance, perpetuate, and preserve historic districts for the educational, cultural, economic and
general welfare of the public through the preservation, protection and regulation of buildings,
structures in areas of historic interest or importance within the Borough of Tamaqua; to safeguard
the heritage of the Borough of Tamaqua by preserving and regulating historic districts which reflect
common elements of its cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history; to preserve
and enhance the environmental quality of neighborhoods; to strengthen the Borough's economic
base by the stimulation of the heritage tourism industry; to establish and improve property values;
to foster economic development; to foster civil pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the
Borough of Tamaqua's past; and to preserve and protect the cultural, historical and architectural
assets of the Borough of Tamaqua for which the Borough of Tamaqua has determined to be of
local, state and national, historical and/or architectural significance.
§ 192-3. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, all words used in the present tense include the future tense. All words
in the plural number include the singular number and all words in the singular number include the
plural number, unless the natural construction of the word clearly indicates otherwise. The word "shall"
is mandatory. The word "used" includes "designated, intended, built or arranged to be used."
§ 192-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALTERATION
Any act or process requiring a sign, building, or demolition permit.
BUILDING
Any enclosed or open structure that is a combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy and/or use for human or animal habitation and is permanently affixed to the land,
including manufactured homes.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 84/244
BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION
The request filed by any person with the Zoning Officer that seeks authorization to erect signage
or erect, alter, reconstruct, repair, restore, demolish, or raze all or a part of any building or
structure listed in the Tamaqua Borough within an historic district that requires a certificate of
appropriateness.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
The approval statement signed by the Tamaqua Borough Council which certifies to the historical
appropriateness of a particular request for the erection of signage or the erection, alteration,
reconstruction, restoration, demolition, or razing of all or a part of any building or structure within
an historic district and authorizes the issuance of a building permit for said request.
COMPLETED APPLICATION
A completed permit or certificate of appropriateness application which conforms to the submittal
criteria for specific historic preservation projects, as determined by the Historical Architectural
Review Commission (HARC).
DEMOLITION
The dismantling or tearing down of all or part of any building and all operations incidental thereto,
including neglecting routine maintenance and repairs which can lead to deterioration and decay.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT
The absence of routine maintenance and repair which can lead to a building's or structure's
structural weakness, decay and deterioration resulting in its demolition.
ERECTION
The result of construction such as a building, structure, monument, sign or object on the ground or
on a structure or building.
RECONSTRUCTION
The act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail of a vanished
building, structure, or object, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time but not
necessarily of original material.
SIGN/SIGNAGE
Any display, structure, device or object which is affixed or attached to the building or property
which incorporates lettering, logos, colors, lights or illuminated inert gas tubes visible to the public
from a building or structure, which either conveys a message to the public, or intends to advertise,
direct, invite, announce, or draw attention to goods, products, services, activities, or facilities,
excluding window displays, merchandise and temporary signs.
[Amended 5-17-2006 by Ord. No. 610]
SIGN, BUILDING OR DEMOLITION PERMIT
An approval statement signed by the Zoning Officer authorizing signage or the construction,
alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building
listed in the Tamaqua Borough's Historic Resource Inventory.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected, having a permanent or semipermanent location on another
structure or in the ground, including, without limitation, buildings, sheds, manufactured homes,
garages, fences, gazebos, freestanding signs, billboards, antennas, satellite sending or receiving
dishes, vending machines, decks, and swimming pools.
TAMAQUA BOROUGH HISTORICAL ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMISSION (HARC)
The agency that advises the Tamaqua Borough Council on any requests for authorization to erect,
alter, reconstruct, repair, restore, demolish all or part of any building within an historic district. This
agency is the Board of Historical Architectural Review authorized by the Act of June 13, 1961, P.L.
282, No. 167, § 3 (53 P.S. § 8003).
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 85/244
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
TEMPORARY SIGNS
A sign that is defined as a temporary sign by the Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region Joint
Zoning Ordinance.
[Added 5-17-2006 by Ord. No. 610; amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
ZONING OFFICER
The municipal employee or individual designated by the Borough of Tamaqua as the individual
who issues the permits for the erection of signage or the erection, alteration, reconstruction, repair,
restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building or structure within an historic
district.
§ 192-5. Delineation of historic districts.
The Tamaqua Borough Historic District shall be delineated on a map designated as the Historic
District Map of the Borough of Tamaqua.
The Historic District Map of the Borough of Tamaqua shall be located in the office of the Zoning
Officer and made available for public inspection.
§ 192-6. The creation and membership of the Historical
Architectural Review Commission.
An Historical Architectural Review Commission, hereinafter referred to as HARC, is hereby
established. HARC is to be composed of not fewer than five members nor more than seven
members appointed by the Tamaqua Borough Council. The membership of HARC shall be as
follows:
One member shall be a registered architect;
One member shall be a licensed real estate broker;
One member shall be the Zoning Officer;
The remaining members shall be persons of knowledge or of an interest in the preservation of
historic districts.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The initial terms of the members first appointed to the HARC shall be so fixed that no more than
three members shall be replaced or reappointed during any one calendar year. Vacancies on the
HARC shall be filled within 120 days by the Tamaqua Borough Council; however, every member
shall continue in office after expiration of term until a successor has been appointed. Successors
shall serve a term of three years. The position of any member of the HARC appointed to his or her
capacity, such as a registered architect, a licensed real estate broker, or the Zoning Officer, who
ceases to be so engaged shall be automatically considered vacant. An appointment to fill a
vacancy shall only be for the unexpired portion of the term.
It shall be the duty of each HARC member to remain conscious of and sensitive to any possible
conflict of interest (including, but not limited, to financial considerations) that may arise by virtue of
his or her membership on the Commission. A member, promptly upon his determining he has a
conflict himself relative to any matter brought, shall disqualify himself from participating in any
manner, publicly or privately, in the presentation, discussion or deliberation of and the voting on
any matter, including temporarily absenting himself from the room in which the discussion is being
held.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 86/244
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
D.
E.
F.
A.
§ 192-7. Powers and duties of HARC.
Advisory role. The HARC shall give recommendations to the Tamaqua Borough Council regarding
the advisability of issuing any certificate of appropriateness required to be issued in accordance
with the said Act of June 13, 1961, as amended, and this chapter.
Commission rule-making power. The HARC may make and alter rules and regulations for its own
organization and procedure, providing they are consistent with the laws of the commonwealth and
all provisions of this chapter.
Removal of members. Any Commission member may be removed for misconduct or wrongdoing,
unlawful execution of this Act, or failure to perform his or her responsibilities pursuant to this Act,
or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Tamaqua Borough Council, but not before he or
she has been given the opportunity of a hearing to defend to any alleged infractions of said Act.
Annual reports. The members of HARC shall make an annual report to the Tamaqua Borough
Council, which shall include:
Any recommendations for changes in this chapter;
The number and types of cases reviewed;
The number of cases for which a certificate of appropriateness was either approved or
denied;
Number of the HARC meetings which each member attended;
Historic-preservation-related training which each member attended;
A narrative summary describing the state of preservation in the Tamaqua Borough historic
district with recommendations in policy, goals, and objectives for the Tamaqua Borough
Council's consideration.
Compensation. The HARC may employ secretarial and professional assistance, and incur other
necessary expenses only with the express, written approval of the Tamaqua Borough Council.
Meetings. The HARC shall meet publicly at regularly scheduled intervals. Further, the HARC may
hold any additional meetings it considers necessary to carry out its powers and duties indicated in
this chapter. Such meetings shall be opened to the public. A majority of the HARC shall constitute
a quorum and action taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the
members present.
§ 192-8. Additional powers and duties of the HARC.
In addition to the above, the HARC shall have the following powers and duties, but only after specific
authorization by the Tamaqua Borough Council:
To conduct a survey of buildings, structures, objects and monuments for the purpose of
determining those of historic and/or architectural significance and pertinent facts about them;
action in coordination with the Tamaqua Borough Planning Commission, Tamaqua Borough
Zoning Hearing Board, and other appropriate groups and to maintain and periodically revise the
detailed listings (resource inventories) of historic resources and data about them, appropriately
classified with respect to national, state and local significance in accordance or consistent with the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission's "Cultural Resource Management in
Pennsylvania: Guidelines for Historic Resource Surveys."
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 87/244
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
F.
To propose, from time to time as deemed appropriate, the establishment of additional historic
districts and revisions to existing historic districts.
To formulate recommendations concerning the establishment of an appropriate system of markers
for selected historic and/or architectural sites and buildings, including proposals for the installation
and care of such historic markers.
To formulate recommendations concerning the preparation and publication of maps, brochures
and descriptive material about the Tamaqua Borough historical and/or architectural sites and
buildings.
To cooperate with and advise the Tamaqua Borough Council in matters involving historically
and/or architecturally significant sites and buildings (such as appropriate land usage, parking
facilities and signs, as well as adherence to lot dimensional regulations and minimum structural
standards).
To cooperate with and enlist assistance from the National Park Service, the National Trust for
Historic Preservation, Preservation Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission and other agencies, public and private, from time to time, concerned with the
preservation of historic sites and buildings.
To advise owners of historic buildings regarding rehabilitation, repairs, maintenance method and
technologies, adaptive use, economic and tax incentives and other historic preservation
strategies.
To promote public interest in the purpose of this chapter by carrying on educational and public
relations programs.
§ 192-9. Design guidelines.
In determining the recommendations to be made to the Tamaqua Borough Council concerning the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, the HARC shall consider only those matters that are
pertinent to the preservation of the historical and/or architectural aspect and nature of the building, site,
area, or district certified to have historical significance, including the following:
Broad historical values representing the cultural, political, economic, or social history of the
Tamaqua Borough.
The relationship of the building or structure to historic personages or events.
Significant architectural types representative of certain historical periods and a style or method of
construction.
The effect of the proposed change upon the general historical and architectural nature of the
district.
The appropriateness of the exterior architectural features which can be seen from a public street
or way.
The general design, arrangement, texture, and material of a building or structure and the relation
of such factors to similar features of buildings or structures in the district. Consideration shall be
given, but not limited, to the following:
Proportion of buildings from facades. Preserving the relationship between the width of the
front of the building and the height of the front of the building;
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 88/244
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
G.
H.
(1)
I.
Proportion of openings within the building. Preserving the relationship of width to height of
windows and doors;
Rhythms of solids to voids in the front facade. Preserving the relationship between a recurrent
alteration of strong and weak architectural elements thereby maintaining a rhythm of solids to
voids;
Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. Preserving the existing rhythm of recurrent or
repeated building masses to spaces between each building;
Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. Preserving the existing rhythm of entrances or
porch projections to maintain a pedestrian scale;
Relationship of materials. Preserving the predominant materials of the district, such as brick,
stone, stucco, wooding siding, or other material (other materials may be substituted which do
not compromise the spirit and intent of this chapter);
Relationship of texture. Preserving the predominant textures of the district which may be
smooth, such as stucco or rough such as brick with tooled joints or horizontal wood siding or
other textures;
Relationship of architectural details. Preserving character-defining features of buildings, such
as architectural details, including, but not limited to, cornices, lintels, arches, quoins,
balustrades and iron work, chimneys, etc.;
Relationship of roof shapes. Preserving compatible roof shapes such as gable, mansard, hip,
flat, gambrel, and/or kinds of roof shapes;
Walls of continuity. Preserving physical elements which comprise streetscapes such as brick
walls, wrought iron fences, building facades or combinations of these which form visual
continuity and cohesiveness along the street;
Directional expression of front elevation. Preserving the orientation of structural shapes, plan
of openings and architectural detail that reflect a predominantly vertical, or horizontal
character to the building's facade;
Scale. Preserving the scale of the built environment created by the size of units of
construction and architectural detail that relate to the size of persons. In addition, preserving
building mass its relation to open space;
Variations. The HARC may grant variations in a manner that will be in harmony with the
character of other buildings or structures on the street and/or districts.
The height of any new building or structure shall not exceed the height of the tallest adjacent
building or structure by 10%. This requirement shall also apply to any proposed modifications to
existing buildings or structures.
In such rare cases where the HARC recommends and the governing body approves demolition of
an historic building or structure, a good faith effort shall be made by the Borough of Tamaqua and
the owner(s) to move said building or structure to another site. If moving a building or structure
slated to be demolished is economically or practically infeasible, efforts shall be made to salvage
architectural features of said building or structure for use within the Tamaqua Borough.
Financial feasibility.
The HARC shall consider the financial feasibility of its recommendations in response to a
request for a certificate of appropriateness or building permit for the erection of signage or the
erection, reconstruction, alteration, and restoration of a building or structure. Financial
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 89/244
(2)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
feasibility shall be determined by the HARC on the basis of an unreasonable cost for repair or
replacement in-kind of whole or part of a building or structure.
The applicant shall submit a minimum of three estimates from bona fide contractors and or
vendors substantiating his or her claim that the financial feasibility of repair in-kind is
unreasonable. The Board shall determine as to the condition of said architectural feature
based on its inspection and photographs or report from the Zoning Officer. No substitute
material shall be approved which is inappropriate, incompatible, or is destructive or has the
potential to be destructive to the original fabric of the building or structure.
§ 192-10. Signs.
No sign or permanent external advertising display of any kind shall be erected, altered or used in
the historic district except for advertising informing the public of the service, business, occupation
or profession carried on in or about the property on which such sign or permanent external
advertising display appears. In conjunction with this, no such sign or advertising display of any
kind or for any purpose shall be erected or altered, notwithstanding zoning sign approval, until an
application for a permit to make such erection or alteration has been reviewed by the HARC for its
conformity in exterior material composition, exterior structural design, external appearance and
size with similar advertising or information media used in the architectural period of the district and
a permit granted thereon.
No sign that is internally illuminated shall receive a recommendation for approval from the HARC.
All other requirements of any Borough ordinance must be complied with. Historical markers may
be authorized by HARC subject to the provisions stipulated and such markers shall not be
considered as signs but are to be erected in accordance with the requirements established for
historic markers by the HARC.
§ 192-11. Application review procedure.
Upon receipt of a completed application for a building permit or a certificate of appropriateness for
work to be done in the district, the Zoning Officer shall act in accordance with the procedures
being followed in that office, except those procedures that are modified by the following
requirements:
The Zoning Officer shall forward copies of the completed application for a building permit
together with copies of any plot plan and building plans and specifications filed by the
applicant to the HARC;
The Zoning Officer shall not issue a building permit for any erection of signage or the erection,
alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration or demolition of all or part of any building in the
District until the Tamaqua Borough Council has issued a certificate of appropriateness. If the
Code Enforcement Officer issues a building permit without a certificate of appropriateness
due to an administrative or clerical error, said building permit shall be considered void;
The Zoning Officer shall require applicants to submit a sufficient number of additional copies
of material required to be attached to a completed application for a building permit or
certificate of appropriateness so that the information needed to make the determination set
forth in Subsection G(1) through (8) of this section will be available;
The Zoning Officer shall maintain in his office a record of all such applications and final
dispositions of the same.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 90/244
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
G.
Commission review of applications. Upon receipt of a completed building permit or certificate of
appropriateness application under the jurisdiction of this chapter, the HARC shall consider such at
its next regularly scheduled meeting or special meeting, provided that the application was received
by the HARC in sufficient advance of the meeting to allow the HARC reasonable and proper time
to complete the ten-day notification requirement as per Subsection C. Otherwise, the application
will be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting or special meeting.
[Amended 2-1-2005 by Ord. No. 600]
Notification of application of HARC meeting. The owner of record or his or her representative(s)
applying for a certificate of appropriateness and/or a building permit shall be advised of the time
and place of said meeting and be invited to appear to explain his or her reasons at least 10 days
before the HARC meeting. The HARC may invite such other persons as it desires to attend its
meeting.
Design guidelines. In determining both oral and written recommendations to be presented to the
Tamaqua Borough Council concerning the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness authorizing
a permit for the erection of signage or the erection, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration,
demolition, or demolition by neglect of all or a part of any building within the historic district, the
HARC shall consider the design guidelines set forth in §§ 192-9 and 192-10, and such design
guidelines developed by the HARC pursuant to and congruent with the objectives of this chapter.
Time frame for decision. The HARC shall render a decision and recommendation of any
application for a building permit under its review no later than 45 working days after the
hearing/meeting provided for in § 192-7 of this chapter and shall submit, in writing, to the Tamaqua
Borough Council recommendations concerning the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.
Application disapproval by HARC. If the HARC decides to advise against the granting of a
certificate of appropriateness, it shall so indicate to the applicant for a building permit. The
disapproval shall indicate to the applicant the changes in plans and specifications, if any, which
would protect the distinctive historical character of the historic district and the architectural integrity
of the building or structure. The HARC shall withhold its report for five days to allow the applicant
to decide whether or not to make the suggested changes in his plans and specifications. If the
applicant determines that he or she will make the necessary changes, he or she shall so advise
the HARC, which shall in turn advise the Tamaqua Borough Council.
Contents of written report. The written report to Borough Council concerning the HARC's
recommendations on the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall set out the findings of
fact that shall include, but not limited to, the following matters:
The exact location of the area in which the work is to be done;
The exterior changes to be made of the exterior character of the structure to be erected;
A list of the surrounding structures with their general exterior characteristics;
The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and architectural nature of the
district;
The appropriateness of exterior architectural features of the building which can be seen from
a public street or way;
The general design, arrangement, texture, and material of the building and the structure and
the relation of such factors to similar features of building or structures in the district;
The opinion of the HARC (including any dissent) as to the appropriateness of the work or
project proposed as it will preserve or destroy the historic character and nature of the district;
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 91/244
(8)
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
The specific recommendations of the HARC based on findings of fact as to the issuance by
the Tamaqua Borough Council or its refusal to issue a certificate of appropriateness.
Notification of applicant by the Tamaqua Borough Council of its consideration. Upon receipt of the
written report from the HARC as provided in Subsection G of this section, the Tamaqua Borough
Council shall consider, at the next regularly scheduled or special meeting, the questions of issuing
to the Zoning Officer a certificate of appropriateness authorizing a permit for work covered by the
application. The applicant shall be advised by the Tamaqua Borough Secretary of the time and
place of the meeting at which his application shall be considered. The applicant shall have the
right to attend this meeting and be heard as to the reasons for filing this said application.
Design guidelines. In determining whether or not to certify to the appropriateness of the proposed
erection of signage, or the erection, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration or demolition of
all or a part of any building within the historic district, the Tamaqua Borough Council shall consider
the report of the HARC.
The Tamaqua Borough Council shall not approve an application (and shall not issue a certificate of
appropriateness) for a sign that is internally illuminated.
Approval by the Tamaqua Borough Council. If the Tamaqua Borough Council approves the
application, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the Zoning Officer to issue a
building permit for the work covered.
Disapproval by the Tamaqua Borough Council. If the Tamaqua Borough Council disapproves the
application, written reason(s) shall be given to the Zoning Officer, the applicant, and to the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission. The disapproval shall indicate what changes in
the plans and specifications would meet the conditions for protecting the distinctive historical
character of the district and the architectural integrity of the building or structure. Upon receipt of a
written disapproval of the Tamaqua Borough Council, the Zoning Officer shall disapprove the
application for a building permit and so advise the applicant. The applicant may appeal this
disapproval to the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County within the time specified by law.
Final notification by Tamaqua Borough Council. In either case of approval or disapproval of the
application, the Borough of Tamaqua shall notify the applicant of its decision within five days of its
meeting, at which the application was considered.
§ 192-12. Unreasonable economic hardship.
When a claim of unreasonable economic hardship is made due to the effect of this chapter, the
owner of record must present evidence sufficient to prove that, as a result of the HARC's action,
he will be unable to obtain a reasonable return or a reasonable beneficial use from a resource.
The owner of record shall submit by affidavit to the HARC some or all of the information below at
the discretion of the HARC, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Date the property was acquired by its current owner.
Price paid for the property (if acquired by purchase) and a description of the relationship, if
any, between the buyer and the seller of the property.
Mortgage history of the property, including current mortgage and the annual debt service, if
any, for the previous two years.
Current market value of the property.
Equity in the property.
Past and current income and expense statements for the past two years.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 92/244
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
A.
B.
Past capital expenditures during ownership of current owner.
Appraisals of the property obtained within the previous two years.
Income and property tax factors affecting the property.
All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in connection
with purchase, offerings for sale, financing or ownership of the property, or state that none
was obtained.
All studies commissioned by the owner as to profitable renovation, rehabilitation or utilization
of any structures or objects on the property for alternative use, or a statement that none were
obtained.
Estimate(s) of the cost of the proposed erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,
demolition or razing and an estimate(s) of any additional cost(s) that would be incurred to
comply with the recommendations of the HARC for changes necessary for it to approve a
certificate of appropriateness.
Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or
nonprofit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other.
The HARC may require that an applicant furnish additional information relevant to its
determination of unreasonable economic hardship.
Should the HARC determine that the owner's present return is not reasonable, it must consider
whether there are other uses currently allowed that would provide a reasonable return and
whether such a return could be obtained through investment in the property for rehabilitation
purposes. The HARC may choose to recommend to the Tamaqua Borough Council that special
economic incentives be developed to assist the owner of the resource in maintaining it and
obtaining a suitable economic return or achieving a reasonable beneficial use.
The HARC may seek the assistance of appropriate local, statewide or national preservation
organizations in developing solutions which would relieve the owner's economic hardship. If the
HARC chooses to explore such options, the HARC may delay issuing a certificate of
appropriateness for demolition on the basis of economic hardship for a period of 90 days in
addition to time periods otherwise applicable.
Should the applicant satisfy the HARC that he will suffer an unreasonable economic hardship if a
certificate of appropriateness is not approved, and should the HARC be unable to develop with the
Borough of Tamaqua or appropriate local, statewide and national preservation organization a
solution which can relieve the owner's economic hardship, the HARC must recommend a
certificate of appropriateness for demolition.
§ 192-13. Demolition by neglect.
All buildings and structures located within the boundaries of the Tamaqua Borough historic district
shall be maintained in good repair and kept structurally sound and reasonably protected against
decay and decoration in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code/1998 as
adopted by the Borough of Tamaqua in Ordinance No. 524, enacted November 7, 1999, and as
may be further amended.[1]
Editor's Note: See now Ch. 246, Property Maintenance, Art. I, Adoption of Standards.
Any unresolved notice of violation to the property owner shall be considered prima facie evidence
of demolition by neglect.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 93/244
A.
B.
§ 192-14. Notice of violation.
The Zoning Officer shall serve a notice of violation on the person in violation of this chapter which
would result in, but not be limited to failure to apply for a certificate of appropriateness or a building
permit required for the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition, demolition by
neglect, or razing of any building or structure which can be seen from a public way; and failure to
comply with the HARC-approved work. Such notice shall direct the abatement of said violation.
§ 192-15. Enforcement.
The Zoning Officer or his designated representative shall have the power to institute any proceedings
at law or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 192-16. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor,
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil
action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough
may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
§ 192-17. Amendments.
The provisions of this chapter may be amended in the future by the Tamaqua Borough Council after
notice and hearing as provided by law.
§ 192-18. Effective date/certification by Pennsylvania Historical
and Museum Commission.
Immediately upon the adoption of this chapter, the Tamaqua Borough Secretary shall forward a copy
thereof to the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission. This chapter shall not take effect
until:
The said Commission has certified, by resolution, to the historical significance of the Tamaqua
Borough historical district; and
It has been duly advertised once in the newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of
Tamaqua as required by law.
Chapter 199. Insurance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Fire Insurance Claims
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 94/244
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
E.
[Adopted 6-3-2003 by Ord. No. 568]
§ 199-1. Designated official.
The Code Enforcement Officer or such official's designee is hereby appointed as the designated officer
who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 199-2. Applicable fire loss claims.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring agent") doing business in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a
structure located within the Borough of Tamaqua (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insuring
agent is furnished by the municipal treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(B) of
Act 98 of 1992 and unless there is compliance with Section 508(C) and (D) of Act 98 of 1992, as
amended,[1] and the provisions of this article.
Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b), (c) and (d).
§ 199-3. Payment of claim.
Where pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended,[1] the municipal treasurer
issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against real property and no costs incurred by the municipality for the removal, repair or
securing of a building or other structure on the real property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of
the named insured; provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the
insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the
building restructure, the following procedures must be followed:
The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the designated officer of the
municipality in the aggregate of $2,000 for each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that
amount of a claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the amount
transferred to the municipality shall be $2,000; or
If, at the time of a loss report agreed to between the named insured and the insuring agent, the
named insured has submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer to the municipality from
the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies, associations or exchanges
insuring the building or other structure.
After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure, and the designated officer shall
return the amount of the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the municipality has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or
other structure.
Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do the following:
The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total costs of removing, repairing, or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any
engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the municipality in connection with such
removal, repair or securing of the building or any proceedings related thereto; and
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 95/244
(2)
(3)
(4)
F.
G.
[1]
It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the proceeds to provide the
municipality with the name and address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred
funds and the name and address of the named insured, the designated officer shall contact
the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by the municipality and
notify the named insured that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed; and
When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure have been completed in
accordance with all applicable regulations and orders of the municipality and the required
proof of such completion received by the designated officer, and if the municipality has not
incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the named
insured. If the municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of the building
or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund and, if excess funds remain, the
municipality shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured; and
To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the municipality pursuant to this
section, and not returned to the named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality.
To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned on such
proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the municipality to recover any
deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the municipality
and the named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the
named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been
negotiated.
The written request for the certificate to the Municipal Treasurer shall include: the tax description
of the property, the name and address of the insurance company, association or exchange and the
date agreed upon by the insurance company and insured as to the date of the receipt of a loss
report.
Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 199-4. Fees.
The Council of the Borough of Tamaqua may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations to
implement Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and this article and may by resolution fix reasonable fees to
be charged for municipal activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and
this article, including, but not limited, to issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections
and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 199-5. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay
a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough
in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil action for
collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute
a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce
this article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
Chapter 206. Loitering
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 96/244
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 3-6-1979 by Ord. No. 382.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 206-1. Prohibited acts; duties of police.
For the purpose of this chapter, a person commits a violation if he loiters, lingers idly, or prowls about
in a public place, or street, or loiters in or around a public building, apartment building or place of
business, or obstructs corridors, stairways or doorways, so as to prevent free access to the buildings,
at a time, or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm
for the public safety or convenience of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances
which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor
refuses to identify himself, or explain his purpose for being in or about a public place, or in one of the
areas described hereinbefore, or refuses to move on without reasonable explanation upon request of a
police officer, or takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, or manifestly endeavors to conceal
himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police
officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this chapter, afford the actor an opportunity to
dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted by requesting him to identify himself and explain
his presence and conduct or by affording him the opportunity to move on. No person shall be convicted
of an offense under this chapter if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it
appears at trial that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the police officer at
the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
§ 206-2. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by
summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 213. Municipal Claims and Liens
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Collection Procedures; Charges, Interest and
Attorneys' Fees
[Adopted 11-16-2004 by Ord. No. 597]
§ 213-1. Administrative charge.
[Amended 2-1-2005 by Ord. No. 599]
Any administrative fee incurred for mailing the notice of delinquency, not to exceed $50, being a cost of
collection under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act,[1] shall be assessed.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et al.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 97/244
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
§ 213-2. Interest.
[Added 2-1-2005 by Ord. No. 599]
Interest will be assessed upon all delinquent real estate taxes at a rate of 10% per annum.
§ 213-3. Schedule of attorneys' fees.
The Borough hereby approves the following schedule of attorneys' fees for services in connection
with the collection of accounts, which is hereby determined to be fair and reasonable
compensation for the services set forth below, all in accordance with the principles set forth in
Section 3(a.1), added by Act No. 1 of 1996, of the Municipal Claims Law known as Act 20 of 2003
(the "Act")[1]:
Legal Services Fee for Services
Initial review and sending first demand letter $160
File lien and mailing second demand letter $175
Prepare writ of scire facias $175
Obtain re-issued writ $30
Prepare and mail letter under Pa.R.C.P. Section 237.1 $30
Prepare motion for alternate service $175
Prepare default judgment $175
Prepare writ of execution $800
Attendance at sale; review schedule of distribution and resolve
distribution issues
$400
Handling fee for returned check $25
Handling fee to issue refund check $20
Services not covered above At an hourly rate between
$60 and $225 per hour
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106(a)(1).
There shall be added to the above amounts the reasonable out-of-pocket expenses of counsel in
connection with each of these services, as itemized in the applicable counsel bills, which shall be
deemed to be part of the fees.
The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to the Borough's claim in each
account.
§ 213-4. Collection procedures.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance with the Act:
At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorneys' fees in connection with the collection of
an account, the Borough shall mail or cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice of such intention to the taxpayer or other entity liable for the account (the
"property owner").
If the certified mail notice is undelivered, then at least 10 days prior to the assessing or imposing
of such attorneys' fees, the Borough shall mail or cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second
notice to the property owner.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 98/244
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
All notices required by this article shall be mailed to the property owner's last known post office
address as recorded in the records or other information of the Borough, or such other address as
it may be able to obtain from the County Office of Assessment and Revision of Taxes.
Each notice as described above shall include the following:
The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due and the amount owed, including
penalty and interest;
A statement of the Borough's intent to impose or assess attorneys' fees within 30 days after
the mailing of the first notice, or within 10 days after the mailing of the second notice;
The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorneys' fees may be avoided by
payment of the account; and
The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone number of the Borough
representative designated as responsible for collection matters.
§ 213-5. Related action.
The proper officials of the Borough are hereby authorized and empowered to take such additional
action as they may deem necessary or appropriate to implement this article.
Chapter 220. Noise
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Engine Brakes
[Adopted 10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 572]
§ 220-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Tamaqua Borough Engine Brake Ordinance."
§ 220-2. Findings.
The Tamaqua Borough Council finds as fact that the operation of engine brakes on a gasoline-powered
or diesel-powered motor not equipped with exhaust mufflers, or equipped with defective or modified
exhaust mufflers, so as to create excessive noise through the use of said engine brakes, adversely
affects the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough of Tamaqua and is
therefore a nuisance in fact.
§ 220-3. Prohibition.
No gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle shall be operated on State Route 209 between
the Jamesway Plaza Driveway and the western Borough line or on State Route 309 between the
intersection of Schuylkill Avenue and State Route 309 and the southern Borough line in the Borough of
Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, utilizing an engine brake without exhaust mufflers, or with
defective or modified exhaust mufflers permitting excessive noise to be created by said motor vehicle.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 99/244
§ 220-4. Exception.
This article shall not apply to emergency driving situations which require utilizing in said operation of a
motor vehicle an engine brake without exhaust mufflers or equipped with inoperable exhaust mufflers
or equipped with exhaust mufflers which have been modified or which are defective to protect the
safety and property of the residents of the Borough of Tamaqua, other motor vehicle operators,
pedestrians, and the operator and passengers of the motor vehicle or vehicles involved in said
emergency situations.
§ 220-5. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by
summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 227. Parks and Recreation Areas
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Helmets Required at Skate Park
[Adopted 8-3-2004 by Ord. No. 592]
§ 227-1. Name.
The name of this article shall be the "Skateboard Park Helmet Act."
§ 227-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to words used within this article:
BICYCLE
A vehicle with two wheels in tandem, pedals connected to the rear wheel by a chain, handlebars
for steering, and a saddle-like seat.
ROLLER BLADES
A form of skate with four wheels placed directly behind each other in the form of a column.
ROLLER SKATES
A form of skate with four wheels placed in two rows of two.
SCOOTER
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 100/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A vehicle that has two or three wheels with a low footboard between them, is steered by a
handlebar, and is propelled by pushing one foot against the ground while resting the other on the
footboard, or propelled by placing both feet upon the footboards and shifting the rider's weight
back and forth.
SKATEBOARD
A device consisting of an oblong board mounted on large roller-skate wheels with the purpose of
supporting a rider.
§ 227-3. Findings and general purpose.
The Tamaqua Borough Council recognizes that:
The use of a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, a scooter, a bicycle, or other device mounted
on wheels can result in a accident that causes harm to the rider.
The use of a properly approved helmet by riders of said devices may greatly reduce the injury
suffered by riders of said devices during an accident.
Protection of the residents of this Borough is a fundamental obligation of the Tamaqua Borough
Council in their role as elected representatives of the residents of the Borough of Tamaqua; and
The use of helmets by residents of this Borough while riding said devices will assist in protecting
them from the injuries that they might otherwise incur.
§ 227-4. Specific purpose.
The specific purpose of this article is to require all riders of skateboards, roller skates, roller blades,
scooters, bicycles, or other devices mounted on wheels, in the Skateboard Park of the Borough of
Tamaqua, to wear properly approved helmets.
§ 227-5. Statement of law.
It shall be unlawful to ride a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, a scooter, a bicycle or any other
device mounted on wheels within the Skateboard Park of the Borough of Tamaqua without wearing a
properly approved helmet.
§ 227-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person found in violation of § 227-5 shall be subject to the penalties set forth below:
A first offense shall result in the confiscation of the skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter,
or bicycle for a period of 30 days.
A second offense shall result in the permanent confiscation of the skateboard, roller skates, roller
blades, scooter, or bicycle.
A third offense shall result in the imposition of an immediate fine defined at a minimum amount of
$25 and a maximum amount of $300, along with the permanent confiscation of the skateboard,
roller skates, roller blades, scooter, or bicycle.
Chapter 233. Pawnshops and Secondhand Goods Dealers
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 101/244
A.
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 12-4-2012 by Ord. No. 659.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 233-1. License required.
No person shall use, exercise or carry on the business, trade or occupation of buying or selling
scrap gold, old gold, silver jewelry; home electronics/audio and visual equipment, including
musical instruments, telephones and telephonic equipment, cell phones, scales, computers,
computer hardware and software, typewriters, word processors, scanners, sporting goods of all
kinds, antiques, silver, platinum, and all other precious metals, tools of all kinds, televisions,
VCRs/DVRs, camcorders, digital recorders, car stereos, firearms or other valuable articles,
hereinafter referred to as "secondhand goods or articles" or, being a secondhand dealer within the
Borough of Tamaqua without having first obtained a license from the Tamaqua Borough Code
Enforcement Officer as hereinafter provided. A "secondhand dealer" is defined as a person,
association, corporation or partnership, or other entity, who, wholly or in part, engages in or
operates the trade or business of buying or acquiring any goods or articles as mentioned above,
or other valuable goods or articles, except from a regularly established wholesale or retail dealer.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any business required by state law under the Pennsylvania Code,
Chapter 501, Purchase and Sale of Precious Metals (37 Pa. Code § 501.1, Part VII) will still be
required to obtain a permit through the Schuylkill County Sheriff's Department; and any business
required by state law under 63 P.S. § 281-1 et seq. will still be required to obtain a license from the
Secretary of Banking and conform to other requirements under that Act in addition to the
requirements in this chapter.
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 233-2. Application fee.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Borough of Tamaqua shall, from time to time, give and grant licenses to all proper persons, except
persons convicted of receiving stolen goods, theft or burglary, who may apply for the same to use,
exercise, and carry on the trade or business or occupation of buying secondhand goods or articles, or
being a secondhand dealer and/or pawnbroker, which said license shall state where said business is to
be carried on and shall continue in force for one year (unless sooner suspended or revoked) and no
longer. Each person applying for such license, if his/her application be approved, in writing, by the
Tamaqua Borough Code Enforcement Officer, shall pay to said official an annual fee as set from time
to time by resolution of the Borough Council, and receive from the said official a license to carry out the
said business. The license so granted shall only be valid for one place of business.
§ 233-3. Business on licensed premises only.
No person licensed as a secondhand dealer and/or pawnbroker in the Borough shall, by virtue of one
license, keep more than one place of business for receiving or taking goods in pawn; nor shall he, at
any time, take goods at any other place than the place for which the license was issued.
§ 233-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to nonprofit organizations receiving and selling
secondhand items.
§ 233-5. Rules and regulations.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 102/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
All licensees shall conduct their business in conformity with the following procedures:
Each and every person licensed shall carry said license on their person/business for inspection by
any law enforcement officer or other Borough Code Enforcement Officer. The licensee shall also
keep a log in which shall be legibly written in the English language the name of the person, his/her
address, date of birth, a valid driver's license, valid state identification card, valid passport or a
valid military identification. The licensee shall have a description of the article purchased (which
will include any serial numbers and/or service tag number), the date and time purchased, the
amount of money paid therefor and the signature of the seller. The log shall be available for review
by any Borough law enforcement officer and/or Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
All goods purchased by licensees under this chapter must be retained in the possession of the
licensee for 30 days.
No licensee shall purchase such secondhand goods or articles or other article of value from any
person under 18 years of age, or from any intoxicated person or any person known to be a thief or
associate of thieves, or receiver of stolen property, or any person whom the licensee has reason
to suspect or believes to be such.
The Chief of Police and/or Code Enforcement Officer are hereby authorized to make any other
rules and regulations necessary, in their opinion, for the proper conduct of the person or business
licensed and shall submit such rules to the Council of the Borough of Tamaqua for review and
approval.
§ 233-6. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by
summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce
this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
§ 233-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on December 4, 2012.
Chapter 240. Peddling and Soliciting
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Transient Retail Businesses
[Adopted 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(21) (Ch. XV of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 240-1. Definitions and interpretation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 103/244
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS
Includes the following:
Engaging in peddling, canvassing, soliciting or taking orders, either by sample or
otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise, upon any of the streets or alleys,
sidewalks or public grounds, or from house to house, within the Borough of Tamaqua;
and
Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, from a fixed
location within the Borough, on a temporary basis, which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, such activities conducted at the time of special occasions or celebrations, for
seasonal purposes, or for or in advance of specific yearly holidays.
In this article, the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter, the singular shall include
the plural and the plural shall include the singular.
§ 240-2. License required to engage in transient retail business.
[Amended 2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 516; 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 555]
No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the Borough of Tamaqua without
first having obtained from the Borough Manager a license, for which a fee as set from time to time
by resolution of Borough Council, which shall be for the use of the Borough, shall be charged.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
No license fee shall be charged under this section:
To farmers selling their own produce;
For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds
whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose; or
To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of milk or milk products, bread and bakery
products, or meat and meat products.
But all persons exempted by Subsection B(1) and/or (2) hereof from payment of the license fee
shall be required to register with the Borough Manager and to obtain a license without fee.
Any person dealing in one or more of the hereinabove-mentioned exempted categories, and
selling other goods, wares or merchandise not so exempted, shall be subject to the payment of
the license fee fixed by this section for his activities in connection with the sale of goods, wares
and merchandise not in such exempted categories.
The Borough Manager may similarly exempt from payment of the license fee, but not from
registering with him, persons working without compensation and selling goods, wares or
merchandise for the sole benefit of a nonprofit corporation.
Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall be issued on an individual basis to
persons engaging in such business; every individual shall obtain a separate license, issued to him
in his name, and the license fee hereby imposed shall be applicable to every such license.
This article shall not apply to a person or individual that is merely proselytizing for either religious
or political purposes, distributing religious or political handbills at no cost, or exercising the right to
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 104/244
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
anonymous religious or political speech without soliciting any funds and without selling any goods
or soliciting for contributions.
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 240-3. Tattoo and body piercing establishments ineligible.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 555]
No tattoo and/or body piercing establishment as defined by any ordinance hereinafter enacted shall be
eligible for a transient retail business license pursuant to the terms of this article.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 299, Tattooing and Body Piercing Establishments.
§ 240-4. Application for license.
Every person desiring a license under this article shall first make application to the Borough Manager
for such license. If such person shall also be required to obtain a license from any state or county
officer, he shall, when making such application, exhibit a valid state or county license. In such
application, such person shall give his name and address; his previous criminal record, if any; the
name of the person by whom he is employed; the type of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to
deal with in such transient retail business; the length of time for which such license is to be issued; and
the type of vehicle to be used, if any.
§ 240-5. Issuance of license; custody and exhibit thereof.
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Borough Manager, if he shall find such
application in order, shall issue the license required under this article. Such license shall contain the
information required to be given on the application therefor. Every license holder shall carry such
license upon his person, if engaged in a transient retail business from house to house or upon any of
the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, or shall display such license at the location where he
shall engage in such business, if doing so from a fixed location. He shall exhibit such license, upon
request, to all police officers, Borough officials and citizens or residents of the Borough.
§ 240-6. Prohibited acts by holders of licenses.
No person engaged in any transient retail business shall:
Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in the license;
Hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds in the Borough;
When selling from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the
Borough, for longer than necessary to sell therefrom to persons residing in the vicinity of such
parked vehicle;
Park any vehicle upon any street or alley in the Borough for the purpose of sorting, rearranging or
cleaning any of his goods, wares or merchandise or of disposing of any carton or wrapping
material or of any stock or wares or foodstuffs which shall have become unsalable through
handling, age or otherwise.
§ 240-7. Records and reports.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 105/244
The Borough Manager shall supervise the activities of all persons holding licenses under this article,
and he shall keep a record of all licenses issued hereunder, and shall make a report thereof each
month to the Borough Council.
§ 240-8. Suspension of licenses.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Manager is hereby authorized to suspend any license issued under this article when he deems
such suspension to be beneficial to the public health, safety or morals, or for violation of any provision
of this article, or for giving false information upon any application for a license hereunder. Appeals from
any suspension may be made to the Borough Council at any time within 10 days after such
suspension. No part of a license fee shall be refunded to any person whose license shall have been
suspended.
§ 240-9. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay
a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough
in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil action for
collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute
a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce
this article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
Chapter 246. Property Maintenance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental property — See Ch. 253.
Solid waste — See Ch. 273.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Article I. Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 9-15-2009 by Ord. No. 641]
§ 246-1. Title.
This article shall be titled and may be referred to as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of
Tamaqua.
§ 246-2. Adoption by reference.
Tamaqua Borough hereby adopts, as amended below, the International Property Maintenance Code,
as published by the International Code Council, 2009 edition, as the Property Maintenance Code of
Tamaqua Borough, as authorized by 8 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 32A.
§ 246-3. Amendments.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 106/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
The following amendments are hereby made to the following sections of the International Property
Maintenance Code as said Code shall be applicable in Tamaqua Borough:
Section 101.1. Insert: Borough of Tamaqua.
Section 103.5. Insert:
Schedule of permit fees: The fees for activities and services performed by this department in
carrying out its responsibilities under this Code shall be in accordance with the fee schedule as
established by the Borough of Tamaqua by resolution.
Section 104.1. Amend to read as follows:
Tamaqua Borough may appoint a Code Enforcement Officer from time to time by resolution to
enforce the provisions of this Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
render interpretations of this Code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the
application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this Code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of
waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code.
Section 106.2. Amend to read as follows:
Notice of violation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice of violation or order in
accordance with Section 107.
Section 106.3. Substitute "summary offense" for any reference to "misdemeanor."
Section 106.4. Amend to read as follows:
Enforcement of this article may be by action brought before a Magisterial District Justice in the
same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure. The Tamaqua Borough Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution. Any
person in violation of any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall pay a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $1,000 per violation, and/or be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
either upon conviction or for failure to pay court costs to include the municipal solicitor fees. Each
day on which a violation of this article exists shall be considered a separate violation.
Section 107.2. The notice form as stated in this section is adopted in its entirety except Subpart 5,
relating to informing the property owner of the right to appeal, which subpart shall only be required
when a condemnation is sought under Section 108 or a demolition is sought under Section 110.
Section 107.3. Amend to read as follows:
Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
1. Delivered personally.
2. Sent by certified and first class mail to the last known address; or
3. If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.
Section 108.6. Amend to read as follows:
The owner, operator or occupant of a building, structure, premises or equipment deemed unsafe
or unfit for human occupancy or use by the Code Enforcement Officer shall abate or cause to be
abated or corrected such conditions rendering the building, structure, premises or equipment
unsafe or unfit either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved action. If the owner,
operator or occupant fails to abate or correct such conditions within a reasonable time, the Code
Enforcement Officer may cause the abatement or correction to occur, either through an available
public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such abatement
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 107/244
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
or correction may be charged against the owner of the real estate upon which the building,
structure, premises or equipment is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
Section 111.1. Amend to read as follows:
Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or a notice or order
issued under this Code relating to a condemnation under Section 108 or a demolition under
Section 110 shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals, provided that a written
application for appeal is filed with the Borough Secretary within 20 days after the day the decision,
notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied
by other means.
Section 111.2. Amend to read as follows:
Membership of board. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the members of the Tamaqua Board
of Appeals. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be an ex officio member but shall have no vote on
any matter before the Board.
Section 111.2.1. Amend to read as follows:
The Tamaqua Borough Council may appoint two or more alternate members, from time to time by
resolution, who shall be called by the Board Chairman to hear appeals during the absence or
disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for
Board membership.
Section 111.2.4. Amend to read as follows:
The Tamaqua Borough Council shall designate, from time to time by resolution, a qualified person
to serve as secretary to the Board, who may be an employee of the Borough. The secretary shall
file a detailed record of all proceedings with the Tamaqua Borough Council.
Section 111.2.5. Amend to read as follows:
Compensation of members of the Appeals Board, the secretary of the Appeals Board, and the
solicitor to the Appeals Board, if any, shall be provided for by Tamaqua Borough Council from time
to time by resolution.
Section 111.4.1. Amend to read as follows:
The Appeals Board shall conduct a hearing consistent with requirements of due process, but strict
compliance with rules of evidence shall not be required.
Section 111.5. Amend to read as follows:
A hearing shall be scheduled before the Appeals Board within 60 days of the filing of the
application for appeal. Any party may request a reasonable continuance of the hearing for good
cause shown, and the Appeals Board shall decide any requests for continuance.
Section 111.6.1. Amend to read as follows:
Any hearing before the Appeals Board shall be stenographically recorded. The decision of the
Board shall be in writing with copies furnished to the appellant or his legal representative and to
the Code Enforcement Officer, and shall be filed with the Borough Secretary. The decision shall be
made within 30 days of the final hearing, but no later than 120 days from the date the appeal was
filed, unless extension of these dates are agreed upon by both the appellant or his legal
representative and the Code Enforcement Officer on the record at one of the hearings or in writing
addressed to the Appeals Board. Failure to file a timely decision shall constitute a granting or
sustaining of the appeal.
Section 111.6.2. Amend to read as follows:
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 108/244
[1]
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
X.
Y.
Z.
AA.
BB.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the
Board, subject to the rights specified in Section 111.7 below.
Section 111.7. Amend to read as follows:
Appeals from the decision of the Appeals Board shall be made pursuant to the Local Agency Law.
[1]
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
Section 112.4. Insert: $100 and $1,000.
Section 202, General Definitions. Definition of "owner" is amended to read: "A person, agent,
operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the
official records of the state, county, municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having
control of the property, including the principals of a limited liability company or officer, director or
shareholder of a corporation if that individual is responsible for the management and control of the
property; including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court."
[Added 11-15-2016 by Ord. No. 689]
Section 302.3. Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking
spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from
hazardous conditions.
Section 302.4. Insert: 10 inches.
Section 303.3. Amend to read as follows:
All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas for public use shall
be kept in a proper state of repair, free of all snow, ice, mud, overhanging trees, shrubs, and other
debris which obstruct walkways shall be maintained free of hazardous conditions. Removal of
snow and/or ice is to be accomplished so that a walkway of at least three feet in width shall be
cleared along the entire extent of such sidewalk within 24 hours after the same has ceased to fall
or to be formed.
Section 304.14. Amend to read as follows:
Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of food preparation areas,
food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen
door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Section 602.3. Insert:
From October 1st to May 15th.
Section 602.4. Insert:
From October 1st to May 15th.
Section 705. Addition of the following section:
Any residential rental unit as defined as any dwelling unit or structurally enclosed area including or
limited to be used as the living quarters for one or more individuals and not occupied by the owner
thereof shall have installed adjacent to any sleeping area a carbon monoxide (CO) detector. The
provisions relating to the source of power set forth in Section 704.3 above shall apply to carbon
monoxide detectors.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 109/244
A.
B.
§ 246-4. Repealer.
All prior ordinances inconsistent with any provision of this article are repealed to the extent necessary
to give effect to the provisions of this article. Since this article is meant to consolidate all prior
ordinances relating to the International Property Maintenance Code, all other Property Maintenance
Code Ordinances of the Borough of Tamaqua are specifically repealed.
Article II. Quality of Life Violations
[Adopted 12-4-2012 by Ord. No. 660]
§ 246-5. Purpose.
Lack of maintenance of properties, improper storage of trash and rubbish, storage of
inoperable/nonregistered vehicles, and accumulation of snow and ice are costly problems that
contribute to the deterioration of property values and general disorder in a community. These problems
degrade the physical appearance of the Borough, which reduces business and tax revenue, inhibiting
economic development. The quality of life and community pride of the citizens of Tamaqua are
negatively impacted by the occurrences and existence of these activities. Recognizing these are
community problems, the purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of
the Borough by helping to create a clean environment for the citizens of Tamaqua.
§ 246-6. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall be defined as follows, unless
context clearly indicates otherwise:
GARBAGE
The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption
of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Any waste material or a combination of solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material that,
because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:
Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating illness.
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE (HHW)
Waste which would be chemically or physically classified as a hazardous waste, but is excluded
from regulation as a hazardous waste because it is produced in quantities smaller than those
regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and because it is
generated by persons not otherwise covered as hazardous waste generators by those regulations.
Such HHW materials meet one of the following four classifications: toxic, flammable, reactive, or
corrosive. HHW consists of numerous products that are common to the average household such
as: pesticides and herbicides, cleaners, automotive products, paints, and acids.
INDOOR FURNITURE
Any and all pieces of furniture which are made for only inside use, including, but not limited to,
upholstered chairs and sofas, etc.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 110/244
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
JUNKED VEHICLE
Any vehicle which presents a hazard or danger to the public or is a public nuisance by virtue
of its state or condition of disrepair. The following conditions, if present, are examples of a
state or condition of disrepair:
Rusted and/or jagged metal on or protruding from the body of the vehicle.
Broken glass or windows on or in the vehicle.
Leaking of any fluids from the vehicle or deflated or flat tire(s).
Unsecured and/or unlocked doors, hood, or trunk.
Storage or placement of the vehicle in an unbalanced condition, on concrete blocks, or
other similar apparatus.
Harboring of rodents, insects, or other pests.
The foregoing examples are not inclusive of all conditions which may constitute a state or
condition of disrepair. See also the definition of "motor vehicle nuisance."
LITTER
Includes, but is not limited to, all waste material, garbage, trash, i.e., wastepaper, tobacco
products, wrappers, food or beverage containers, newspapers, etc., municipal waste, human
waste, domestic animal waste, furniture or motor vehicle seats, vehicle parts, automotive
products, shopping carts, construction or demolition material, recyclable material, and dirt, mud
and yard waste that has been abandoned or improperly discarded, deposited, or disposed.
LOCAL RESPONSIBLE AGENT
Any person residing or working within the Borough of Tamaqua designated to accept service on
behalf of a legal owner or operator of a rental dwelling unit.
MOBILE VENDOR
A vendor or seller of food and/or goods from a vehicle or other conveyance upon the public streets
or alleys of the Borough that does not typically remain stationary for more than approximately 10
minutes each hour.
MOTOR VEHICLE
Any type of mechanical device, capable or at one time capable of being propelled by a motor, in
which persons or property may be transported upon public streets or highways, and including
trailers or semitrailers pulled thereby.
MOTOR VEHICLE NUISANCE
A motor vehicle with one or more of the following defects:
Broken windshields, mirrors, or other glass, with sharp edges.
Broken headlamps, tail lamps, bumpers, or grills with sharp edges.
Any body parts, truck, fire wall, or floorboards with sharp edges or large holes resulting from
rust.
Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
Missing doors, windows, hood, trunks, or other body parts that could permit animal
harborage.
One or more open tires or tubes which could permit animal harborage.
Any vehicle suspended by blocks, jacks, or other such materials in a location which may pose
a danger to the public, property owners, visitors, or residents of the property on which said
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 111/244
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
vehicle is found.
Any excessive fluids leaking from a vehicle which may be harmful to the public or the
environment.
Disassembled body or chassis parts stored in, on or about the vehicle.
Vehicles that do not display a current valid license and registration.
Such other defects which the Fire Department determines to be a danger to the general
public or property.
Motor vehicles parked, drifted, or otherwise located which may interfere with the flow of
pedestrian or automobile traffic or impede emergency efforts.
MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom, or office waste, and other material, including solid,
liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial, or institutional establishments or from community activities, and which is not
classified as residual waste or hazardous waste as defined herein. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials or organic waste.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION
A written document issued to a person in violation of a Borough ordinance which specifies the
violation and contains a directive to take corrective action within a specified time frame or face
further legal action.
NUISANCE
Any condition, structure, or improvement which constitutes a danger or potential danger to the
health, safety, or welfare of citizens of the Borough, or causes a blighting effect in Borough
neighborhoods. See also the definition of "public nuisance."
OWNER
A person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property;
or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the principals of a limited liability
company or officer, director or shareholder of a corporation if that individual is responsible for the
management and control of the property; including the guardian of the estate of any such person,
and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real
property by the court.
PERSON
Every natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or institution.
PRIVATE PROPERTY
Any land and the improvements thereon owned by any person and includes front, side, and rear
yards; vacant lots, buildings, and other structural improvements; walkways and alleyways; and
parking areas, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential, industrial, or
commercial purposes, whether inhabited, temporary, continuously uninhabited, or vacant,
including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging to or
appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
PUBLIC OFFICER
Any police officer, authorized inspector, or public official designated by the Borough to enforce the
Borough ordinances.
PUBLIC NUISANCE
Any conditions or premises which are unsafe or unsanitary.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 112/244
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
The total width of any land used, reserved, or dedicated as a street, alley, driveway, sidewalk, or
utility easement, including curb and gutter areas.
RESIDUAL WASTE
Any discarded material or other waste, including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous materials
resulting from construction, industrial, mining, and agricultural operations, excluding municipal
water and sewer operations.
RUBBISH
Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the
residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust and other similar materials.
SIDEWALK AREA
The public right-of-way between the property line and the curbline or the established edge of the
roadway.
SOLID WASTE
Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal, residual, or hazardous wastes, including solid,
liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous materials.
VEGETATION
Any planting that is cultivated and managed for edible or ornamental purposes such as vegetable
gardens, trees, shrubs, hedges, flowers, etc.
VIOLATION TICKET
A form issued by a police officer or public officer to a person who violates a provision of this article.
The violation ticket is an offer by the Borough of Tamaqua extended to a person to settle a
violation by paying the fine in lieu of a citation being issued against the violator.
WEEDS
Shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants, and vegetation, which meet any of the
following criteria:
Exceed 10 inches in height.
Exhale unpleasant noxious odors or pollen such as ragweed, dandelion, and
miscellaneous other vegetation commonly referred to as weeds or brush.
May conceal filthy deposits or serve as breeding places for mosquitoes, other insects, or
vermin.
May cause a public nuisance.
Weeds shall not include cultivated and managed vegetation planted for edible or ornamental
purposes such as vegetable gardens, trees, shrubs, flowers, etc.
YARD
An open space on the same lot with a structure.
§ 246-7. Quality of life violations.
A person, owner, or responsible person commits a quality of life violation by any of the following:
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 113/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every
structure shall be free from any accumulation of waste, trash, rubbish, or garbage.
Animal maintenance and waste/feces cleanup. People owning, harboring, or keeping an animal
within the Borough of Tamaqua shall not permit any waste matter/feces from the animal to collect
and remain on the property so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous, or
offensive living condition. All waste from animals must be cleaned up on a daily basis.
High weeds, grass or plant growth. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from weeds or plant growth in excess of 10 inches (254 mm). All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants, and vegetation. Cultivated
flowers, gardens, trees, and shrubs shall not be included as a violation of this article.
Motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful to store, park, or place any unregistered, uninspected,
inoperative, unlicensed, or nuisance motor vehicle on any premises. No vehicle shall at any time
be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
Outside placement of indoor appliances/furniture. It is prohibited to store or place any/all
appliances or furniture, including, but not limited to, ranges, refrigerators, air conditioners, ovens,
washers, dryers, microwaves, dishwashers, mattresses, recliners, sofas, interior chairs, or interior
tables on the exterior of any property for the purpose of sale or any other reason, except for the
temporary purpose to perform maintenance on said property.
Snow and ice removal from sidewalks. Every owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, property agent, or
any other person who is responsible for any property within the Borough of Tamaqua, is required
to remove any snow or ice from their sidewalk within 24 hours of the cessation of said snow and
ice falling. Furthermore, they must create a path, free from any snow or ice, of three feet on said
sidewalk. Should any property be a place of business within the Borough of Tamaqua, all snow
and ice must be removed within four hours of the cessation of said snow and ice falling. Any
property that is deemed a business must have the entire sidewalk free from any snow and ice. If
and/or when the snow and/or ice cessation happens during the hours of darkness, the time limit of
removal of all snow and ice begins at daybreak.
Storage containers for waste or trash. The owner of every premises shall supply approved
containers for waste/trash, as well as be responsible for the removal of rubbish. All containers that
store waste or trash shall be durable, watertight, and made of metal or plastic. Containers must
have tight-fitting covers, and must be kept clean and odor free at all times. All containers must be
stored in a location on the owner's property not within the public right-of-way or readily visible from
the public right-of-way. The persons occupying any dwellings are limited to six containers not
exceeding 50 pounds each and one bulky item not exceeding 275 pounds each. Waste/trash
containers may only be placed in front of any property within 24 hours before the day of the
scheduled waste/trash pickup day. Once the licensed hauler removes the waste/trash from any
property, all containers must be stored so they are not on the public right-of-way or readily visible
from the public right-of-way within 24 hours after pickup.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 668]
§ 246-8. Authority for issuance of violation ticket.
Upon finding a quality of life violation, any public officer of the Borough of Tamaqua may issue quality
of life violation tickets to the owner and/or occupant of the property at issue or to the individual(s)
known to have violated this article.
§ 246-9. Enforcement.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 114/244
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by police officers or any other public officer
authorized to enforce ordinances.
Any violation of the provisions of this article may be cause for a citation, a violation ticket, and/or a
notice of violation to be issued to the violator.
§ 246-10. Service.
A violation ticket shall be served upon a violator by handing it to the violator, by handing it at the
residence of the person to be served to an adult member of the household or other person in charge of
the residence, by leaving or affixing the notice or violation ticket to the property where the violation
exists, by handing it at any office or usual place of business of the violator, to his/her agent or to the
person for the time being in charge thereof, or by mailing the notice to the violator's address of record.
§ 246-11. Separate offense.
Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue may constitute a separate offense for which
a separate fine may be imposed.
§ 246-12. Abatement of violation.
Any person or business violating this article is hereby directed to satisfy the Borough of Tamaqua
and its citizens upon issuance of a quality of life ticket, by correcting the violation in question. A
public officer is authorized and empowered to cause a violation to be corrected. The cost shall be
determined by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer in order that the Borough shall be
compensated for both direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred.
The Borough of Tamaqua and/or its contractor, per the direction of the Borough, reserves the right
to abate the violation in question at the expense of the owner. If the Borough has effected the
abatement of the violation, the cost thereof may be charged to the owner of the property, tenant,
or offending party. A bill/invoice will be generated to the violator for payment separate from the
quality of life ticket, which will also be paid separately.
In all instances where the Borough abates the violation, in addition to the fine set forth in the
quality of life ticket, the Borough is authorized to recover from the offending party, the owner of the
property, or tenant the abatement charges and such other charges established by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the rules and regulations.
Borough of Tamaqua cleanup. The Borough reserves the right to perform any necessary work to
abate any violation once 72 hours passes from the date of issuance of the quality of life ticket.
Should the violation at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer present imminent danger
and/or pose a health hazard and/or risk, the Borough reserves the right to perform the abatement
immediately. The Borough will perform this work at a rate of $60 per hour, per man, and forward
the cost of any material necessary for the abatement. The Borough reserves the right to charge an
additional 20% on all material purchases to cover all miscellaneous expenses, such as wear and
tear on equipment.
Contractor cleanup. The Borough reserves the right to direct a contractor to perform the
abatement of the violation in question once 72 hours passes from the date of issuance of the
quality of life ticket. Should the violation present imminent danger and/or pose a health hazard
and/or risk, the Borough reserves the right to direct the contractor to perform the abatement
immediately. The contractor will submit a bill for their work to the Borough of Tamaqua and the
Borough will forward these costs to the violator. The Borough reserves the right to add a 30%
processing fee in addition to the cost of the contractor.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 115/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
§ 246-13. Fines and penalties.
For the first of a violation of this article within a twelve-month period, violation tickets shall be
issued in the amounts of $25, as set forth on the chart below.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 668]
For the second offense of a violation of this article within a twelve-month period, violation tickets
shall be issued in the amounts of $50, as set forth on the chart below.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 668]
For the third offense of a violation of this article within a twelve-month period, violation tickets shall
be issued in the amounts of $100, as set forth on the chart below.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 668]
For each offense subsequent to three offenses of this article within a twelve-month period,
amounts of violation tickets shall increase in the amount of $100, accumulative for each
subsequent offense.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 668]
Any persons who receive a violation ticket for any violation of this article may, within 15 days,
admit the violation, waive a hearing, and pay the fine in full satisfaction.
Any person who violates this article shall pay a fine as set forth herein for each offense, plus all
direct and indirect costs incurred by the Borough for the cleanup and abatement of the violation.
Quality of Life
(QOL) Violation Description Fine 1 Fine 2 Fine 3+
QOL-001 Accumulation of rubbish or
garbage
$25 $50 $100
QOL-002 Animal maintenance and
waste/feces cleanup
$25 $50 $100
QOL-003 High weeds, grass or plant
growth
$25 $50 $100
QOL-004 Motor vehicles $25 $50 $100
QOL-005 Outside placement of indoor
appliances/furniture
$25 $50 $100
QOL-006 Snow and ice removal from
sidewalks
$25 $50 $100
QOL-007 Storing containers for waste or
trash
$25 $50 $100
§ 246-14. Increased fines for unpaid ticket penalties.
If the person in receipt of a $25 violation ticket does not pay the fine or request a hearing within 15
days, the person will be subject to a $10 penalty for days 16 through 30.
If the person in receipt of a $50 violation ticket does not pay the fine or request a hearing within 15
days, the person will be subject to a $25 penalty for days 16 through 30.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 668]
If the person in receipt of a $100, or higher, violation ticket does not pay the fine or request a
hearing within 10 days, the person will be subject to a $50 penalty for days 16 through 30.
[Amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 668]
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 116/244
D.
E.
[1]
Failure of the person to make payment or request a hearing within 30 days of a violation ticket
shall make the person subject to a citation for failure to pay.
If violations are continuous or egregious, Code Enforcement Officers have the right to issue
citations without first issuing tickets, provided notice has been given. Upon issuance of four tickets
for the same violation, right is reserved for the Code Enforcement Officers to issue citations for the
fifth and subsequent offenses.
§ 246-15. Citation fines.
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with any of the terms or
provisions of this article, or of any regulation or requirement pursuant hereto and authorized hereby
shall, upon conviction, be ordered to pay a fine of not less than $100, and not more than $1,000 on
each offense, the costs of prosecution including restitution of the fees of the Code Enforcement Officer,
or imprisoned no more than 90 days, or both.
§ 246-16. Restitution.
The Magisterial District Judge may order the violator to make restitution to said real or personal
property owner and to the Borough of Tamaqua for the costs of prosecution, including the fees of the
Code Enforcement Officer.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Sec. 13, Appeal, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-19-
2013 by Ord. No. 668.
§ 246-17. Collections.
At the discretion of the Borough of Tamaqua, all tickets for which payment is not received within 45
days of issuance of a ticket for which an appeal is not taken, and 45 days from denial of appeal and
monies paid by the Borough of Tamaqua for abatement of a violation not paid within 45 days of billing
may be turned over by the Borough to a collection agency for receipt.
§ 246-18. Liens.
At the discretion of the Borough of Tamaqua, liens may be placed upon a property against which
tickets were issued for which payment is not received within 45 days of issuance of a ticket for which
an appeal is not taken, and 45 days from denial of appeal and monies paid by the Borough of
Tamaqua for abatement of a violation and not paid within 45 days of billing.
§ 246-19. Nonexclusive remedies.
The penalty lien and collection provisions of this section shall be independent, non-mutually exclusive,
separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the Borough of Tamaqua as may be deemed
appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this article. The remedies and procedures provided in this
article for violation hereof are not intended to supplant or replace to any degree the remedies and
procedures available to the Borough in the case of a violation of any other Borough of Tamaqua code
or codified ordinances, whether or not such other code or ordinance is referenced in this article, and
whether or not an ongoing violation of such other Code or ordinance is cited as the underlying ground
for a finding of a violation of this article.
Chapter 253. Rental Property
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 117/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 4-2-1985 by Ord. No. 423; amended in its entirety 7-15-1986 by Ord. No. 425]
§ 253-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
LEASED AND/OR RENTED DWELLING UNIT
Any dwelling designed for permanent living quarters, including, but not limited to:
One-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings.
One-family semidetached dwellings.
Row dwellings.
Multifamily dwellings.
OCCUPANT
Any person or persons living and/or sleeping in a dwelling unit or having possession of a space
within a building.
OWNER
Person, persons, or entity which holds legal title to real estate in question, according to the
records in the Schuylkill County Recorder of Deeds Office.
SMOKE DETECTOR
A device which emits an audible signal when activated by smoke or fire, or which emits a visual
and audible signal for the hearing impaired. The smoke detector must meet or exceed the
standards set forth by Factory Mutual Research Corporation or Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
§ 253-2. Location of smoke detector within dwelling units.
The smoke detector shall always be installed on ceilings or walls per instructions of the manufacturer
but never closer than 12 inches from corners of interior walls. Although final determination of proper
location for placement and type of smoke detector within each dwelling unit shall be decided by the
Borough Fire Chief or Code Enforcement Officer, the general area in which the smoke detectors
should be installed are:
At the top of stairways;
At the doorways outside of sleeping areas;
Between sleeping areas and potential fire sources, i.e., kitchens.
§ 253-3. Responsibility of maintenance.
It shall be the owner's responsibility and duty to:
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 118/244
(1)
(2)
(1)
B.
Install smoke detectors;
Periodically inspect smoke detectors to ensure working condition;
It shall be the occupant's responsibility and duty to:
Maintain the smoke detector in a proper working condition or inform the owner of the dwelling
unit of any malfunctions of the smoke detector.
§ 253-4. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any owner or owners of a leased and/or rented dwelling unit or occupant of a dwelling unit who fails to
comply with the provisions of this article or any person who violates or permits a violation of this article
shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is
not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of
enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of Common
Pleas of Schuylkill County.
§ 253-5. Penalties for tampering with smoke detector.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person convicted of tampering with a smoke detector so as to render said smoke detector
inoperative shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by
summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may
be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30
days. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 253-6. Duty of Fire Chief to bring charges.
The Borough Council hereby authorizes the Borough Fire Chief and Code Enforcement Officer, upon
notice of any violation of this article, to bring charges before the Magisterial District Judge in
accordance with the penalties set forth in §§ 253-4 and 253-5 of this article.
Article II. Registration
[Adopted 9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 545]
§ 253-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
AGENT
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 119/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Any person, corporation, copartnership, association or fiduciary who, for monetary consideration,
aids in the rental of property as defined herein. When used in this article, in a clause prescribing
any activity or imposing a penalty, the term, as applied to partnerships and associations, shall
mean each partner and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
CODES
The Fire Prevention, Building, Housing, Mechanical Property Maintenance, Electrical and
Plumbing Codes, as adopted by the Borough of Tamaqua from time to time, and any rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
OWNER
Any person, agent, operator, firm, corporation, partnership, association, property management
group, or fiduciary having legal, equitable or other interest in any real property; or recorded in the
official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the
executor or administrator of such person's estate. When used in this article in a clause prescribing
any activity or imposing a penalty, the term, as applied to partnerships and associations shall
mean each partner and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT
Any dwelling unit or structurally enclosed area, including, or intended to be used as, the living
quarters for one or more individuals and not occupied by the owner thereof.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT REGISTRATION NUMBER
The district registration number assigned by the Code Enforcement Officer to a residential rental
unit.
§ 253-8. Registration.
No owner or agent shall own or operate a residential rental unit unless and until a current
registration license for each specific unit has been issued to the owner or the agent by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to this article.
The registration license required by Subsection A shall be valid for the calendar year for which it is
issued and if issued during the calendar year, for the remainder of such calendar year. The license
shall be renewable for successive calendar years when the licensed premises complies with all
applicable Borough ordinances and other applicable regulations. The license shall not be
transferable and may be revoked at any time for noncompliance with all applicable Borough
Codes.
Every owner or agent owning or operating any residential rental unit requiring a license under
Subsection A shall, on or before January 31 of each year, register such residential rental units
within the Borough on forms provided by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Tamaqua.
Any owner or agent who transfers legal title to and/or operational control over any residential
rental unit requiring a license under Subsection A shall give notice of such transfer, in writing, to
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Tamaqua within five business days after having
transferred ownership of or operational control over such residential rental unit by providing the
name, address and telephone number of such new owner or agent as the case may be.
Every owner or agent of a residential rental unit shall advise each occupant thereof, in writing,
either in the lease between the parties or otherwise, of the maximum number of occupants
permitted in the leased premises.
There shall be no fee for the registration of any residential rental unit as required by this section.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 120/244
G.
H.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
A.
No owner or agent may offer for rent or assist in offering for rent, by advertising or otherwise, any
residential rental unit without first ascertaining that valid registration license exists for such
residential rental unit. Any advertisement for rent of a residential rental unit, including, but not
limited to, newspaper, radio or television advertisement, placard advertisement or real estate
listing, shall include the residential rental unit registration number assigned by the Borough.
Failure to register the residential rental unit with the Code Enforcement Officer within 90 days of
the effective date of this article, or within 30 days following the purchase or conversion of a
structure to a rental property, shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 253-9. Prohibition of occupancy.
No residential rental unit shall be occupied by other than the owner thereof unless a registration
license has been obtained pursuant to § 253-8 hereof, and a certificate of compliance has been
obtained in accordance with the provisions of § 253-11 hereof. Both the registration license and
certificate of compliance shall be displayed at the structure in which the residential rental unit is
located.
§ 253-10. Inspection.
Each residential rental unit shall be inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee at
least one time in a four-year period and for such purpose and for any reinspection required
hereunder, the owner shall provide access to the Code Enforcement Officer and any other
Borough employees deemed necessary in the sole discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer.
As for any residential rental unit unoccupied or occupied by the owner on or after the effective
date hereof, the owner must obtain a registration license and certificate of compliance prior to
the occupancy of such residential rental unit by anyone other than the owner. Subsequent
inspections shall occur as set forth in Subsection A(2).
Subsequent inspections.
As for any residential rental unit occupied by other than the owner as of the effective date
hereof, and for all subsequent inspections, inspections required by this article shall be
completed and a certificate of compliance issued and displayed not later than December
31 of the year for which inspection is required. In no event shall such an inspection be
conducted prior to January 1 of the year for which inspection is required. For purposes of
these inspections, the Borough of Tamaqua shall be divided into four districts, the
boundaries of which are determined by the four quadrants created by the intersection of
Pennsylvania State Route 309 and Pennsylvania State Route 209 in the Borough of
Tamaqua. The northeastern quadrant shall be known as District I, the northwestern
quadrant shall be known as District II, the southeastern quadrant shall be known as
District III, and the southwestern quadrant shall be known as District IV.
Residential rental units subject to the inspections requirements of this article and located
in District I shall be inspected during the first calendar year after the year in which this
article shall become effective and every fourth year thereafter. Residential rental units
subject to the inspection requirements of this article and located in District II shall be
inspected during the second calendar year subsequent to the calendar year in which this
article shall become effective and every fourth year thereafter. Residential rental units
subject to the inspection requirements of this article and located in District III shall be
inspected during the third year subsequent to the calendar year in which this article shall
become effective and every fourth year thereafter. Residential rental units subject to the
inspection requirements of this article and located in District IV shall be inspected during
the fourth year subsequent to the calendar year in which this article shall become
effective and every fourth year thereafter.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 121/244
(3)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
No residential rental unit which would otherwise be subject to the inspection requirements of
this article shall be required to be inspected under this chapter within the four calendar years
subsequent to the year in which any certificate of occupancy required for new construction is
issued.
This inspection shall be for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of the
ordinances as in effect in the Borough of Tamaqua on the date of the inspection as required
hereunder.
Failure of the owner to permit access to conduct such inspection shall be deemed a violation of
this article.
For the purposes of enforcing this article, the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee may seek
to obtain a search warrant issued by a competent authority for the purpose of compelling an
inspection of a residential rental unit.
§ 253-11. Certificate of compliance.
If the inspection of a residential rental unit discloses no code violations, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a certificate of compliance to the owner within 14 days of the inspection. The certificate of
compliance shall be in such form as approved from time to time by the Code Enforcement Officer. The
certificate of compliance shall be displayed in plain view within the residential rental unit.
§ 253-12. Certificate of noncompliance.
If the inspection of the residential rental unit discloses code violations, the Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee shall issue a certificate of noncompliance within 14 days of said inspection. The certificate
of noncompliance shall set forth the following:
The street address or appropriate description of the subject property;
The date of inspection;
The identity of the inspector;
A statement of the zoning district applicable to the subject property, together with an extract of the
applicable ordinance(s) showing the uses permitted within that district;
A statement of any variances and use permits granted to the subject property, together with the
conditions and restrictions of such permits;
A statement as to whether there appears to be any nonconformity in the structures on the property
or the uses being made thereof. This statement shall also indicate whether the property has been
approved or designated as a nonconforming use;
A list of the code violations;
The number of days in which the owner is to accomplish repairs, including a provision allowing for
a reasonable time extension upon the owner's showing of good-faith compliance to the
satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer;
Notice that, if the conditions are not repaired within the time specified, the residential rental unit
may be placarded as "Unfit for Human Occupancy" in accordance with the UCC Codes adopted
by the Borough of Tamaqua.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 122/244
A.
B.
C.
§ 253-13. Reinspection.
Upon the expiration of the time specified to accomplish repairs or upon notice from the owner that
the repairs have been accomplished, whichever occurs first, the Code Enforcement Officer or
designee shall reinspect the subject residential rental unit.
In the event that such reinspection discloses that the owner accomplished the repairs, the Code
Enforcement Officer or designee shall issue a certificate of compliance to the owner in accordance
with § 253-11 of this article.
In the event that such reinspection discloses that the owner failed to accomplish the repairs, the
Code Enforcement Officer or designee shall issue a new certificate of noncompliance, in
accordance with § 253-12 of this article. Further, the owner shall pay a reinspection fee in an
amount equal to the initial application fee as set forth in § 253-14 of this article.
§ 253-14. Inspection fee schedule.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Upon application for a certificate of compliance and the payment to the Borough of Tamaqua a fee as
set by resolution of the Borough Council per residential rental unit, the Code Enforcement Officer or
designee shall review the pertinent Borough records and inspect the subject premises in accordance
with § 253-10 of this article. All inspection fees shall be paid prior to the inspection regardless of the
number of units. Failure to pay inspection fees shall be deemed a failure and/or refusal to comply with
the provisions contained herein and will be subject to the penalty contained in § 253-20.
§ 253-15. Nonliability of Borough.
The issuance of a certificate of compliance is not a representation by the Borough that the residential
rental unit and/or the building in which it is located is in compliance with the Fire Prevention, Building,
Mechanical, Property Maintenance, Electrical, or Plumbing Codes of the Borough. The issuance of a
certificate of compliance is an indication that the residential rental unit did not have any dangerous
conditions as of the date of inspection. However, neither the enactment of this article nor the issuance
of a certificate of compliance shall impose any liability upon the Borough for any errors or omissions
which resulted in the issuance of such certificate, nor shall the Borough of Tamaqua bear any liability
not otherwise imposed by law.
§ 253-16. Appeals.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The owner of a residential rental unit aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee pursuant to § 253-12 or 253-13 hereof, may, within 30 days or the time fixed for repair,
appeal the decision to the Uniform Construction Code Board of Appeals in accordance with the
appropriate Borough Ordinances.
§ 253-17. Code violations.
Nothing in this article shall preclude or prohibit the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee from
identifying any violations of the Fire Prevention, Building Mechanical, Property Maintenance, Electrical,
or Plumbing Codes which exist and noting the same on any inspection report.
§ 253-18. Notice requirement.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 123/244
A.
B.
A.
B.
Newspaper advertisement. The Code Enforcement Officer shall each year cause notice to be
published two times in a newspaper of general circulation within the Borough. The first notice shall
be published during January of each calendar year and the second notice shall be published
during October of each calendar year. The notice shall set forth the district for which inspection of
residential rental units occupied by other than the owner is required during the year of publication,
that inspection may be required before a residential rental unit is occupied other than by the
owner, that all residential rental units are required to be registered and where a copy of the
ordinance may be obtained.
Deeds and agreements of sale. Every deed and agreement of sale executed and delivered on or
after the effective date of this article with respect to any premises within the Borough which
includes one or more residential units shall include therein a notice substantially in the form which
follows:
"Residential rental units within the Borough of Tamaqua which are occupied other than by the
owner thereof are subject to registration and inspection requirements of the applicable ordinances
of the Borough of Tamaqua."
§ 253-19. Actions by Borough officials.
Appropriate Borough officials are authorized and directed to take such actions as are necessary to
effectuate this article.
§ 253-20. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor,
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil
action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated
shall also constitute a separate offense.
In addition to the placarding of the premises, and other civil remedies available to the Borough, the
Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
Article III. Tenant Lists
[Adopted 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 584]
§ 253-21. Tenant registration.
Every person owning any property within the Borough which is rented, in whole or in part, to one or
more persons for residential purposes shall certify to the Borough Secretary a list of all lessees and
tenants over 18 years of age and their respective addresses on or before February 1 and June 1 of
each year. The forms shall be provided by the Borough for the purpose of such registration.
§ 253-22. Penalty for neglecting registration.
Any person owning any property within the Borough which is rented to one or more persons for
residential purposes who willfully or negligently fails to submit tenant lists as required by § 253-21,
above, shall be liable for, in addition to other penalties herein provided, such sums as would have been
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 124/244
billed by the Borough if such tenant list had been provided less any sums actually received from such
tenants for the fiscal year for which the list was not provided.
§ 253-23. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Such person may
also face a license suspension for up to 30 days. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a
civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall
also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the
Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
Chapter 260. Sewers and Sewage Disposal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Corporate waste and local control — See Ch. 273, Art. III.
Environmental impact statements — See Ch. 148.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 185.
Solid waste — See Ch. 273.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 286.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Water — See Ch. 340.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Schedule A, Industrial Cost Recovery Payment Rate Determination
Article I. Sewer Connections
[Adopted 2-20-1964 by Ord. No. 262 (Ch. XX, Part 1, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 260-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article
shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
Tamaqua Borough Authority, a municipal authority of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, a municipal corporation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Council or, in appropriate cases, acting
by and through its authorized representatives.
BUILDING SEWER
The extension from the sewage drainage system of any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
COUNCIL
The group of elected officials acting as the governing body of the Borough.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 125/244
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT
The unit of measure by which a charge is assessed upon each improved property, which shall be
deemed to constitute the equivalent amount of wastewater discharged by an average single-family
dwelling unit.
[Added 9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 544]
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property located within this Borough upon which there is erected a structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy ejected or escaping in the course of any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course of the development, recovery
or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
LATERAL
That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the curbline or, if there shall be no
curbline, to the property line or, if no such lateral shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean that
portion of, or place in, a sewer which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property located in this
Borough.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, company, association, society, trust, corporation or other group or
entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE
The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any improved property.
SEWER
Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system and used or usable for collecting
and transporting sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.
SEWER SYSTEM
All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to this Borough, owned by the
Authority and leased to this Borough for operation and use.
STREET
Includes any street, road, lane, court, alley, public square or highway.
§ 260-2. Requirement to connect to public sewer.
[Amended 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 348; 9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 543]
All owners of improved property whose structure is within 150 feet of any public sewer line shall be
required to connect thereto for the purpose of discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes
from such improved property, subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Council
of the Borough of Tamaqua.
§ 260-3. Sewage and industrial waste discharge subject to
certain regulations.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 126/244
A.
B.
A.
B.
All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property, after connection of such
improved property with a sewer, as required under § 260-2 of this article, shall be conducted and
discharged into such sewer, subject to such rules, regulations, limitations and restrictions as shall be
established herein or otherwise shall be established by this Borough, from time to time.
§ 260-4. Unlawful discharge of sewage and industrial wastes.
No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited upon public or private
property within this Borough any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of § 260-2 of this
article.
No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet within this Borough any
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of § 260-2 of this article, except where suitable
treatment has been provided which is satisfactory to this Borough.
§ 260-5. Privy vaults, cesspools, sinkholes, septic tanks and
similar receptacles prohibited.
No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle shall be used or maintained
upon any improved property, after the expiration of the time specified in § 260-2 of this article,
from which improved property connection with a sewer shall have been made or shall be required
to be made; and it shall be unlawful for any owner of an improved property, after the expiration of
the time specified in § 260-2 of this article, to erect, construct, use or maintain thereon any privy
vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle for disposition of sanitary sewage
and/or industrial wastes or to discharge sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in any manner
other than into the sewer system.
Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle shall be abandoned
and, at the discretion of this Borough, shall be cleansed and filled at the expense of the owner of
such improved property, under the direction and supervision of this Borough; and any such privy
vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if required by
this Borough cleansed and filled, shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance may be abated,
as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such improved property.
§ 260-6. Certain receptacles not to be connected to sewer.
No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at any time shall be connected with
a sewer.
§ 260-7. Time of sewer connection notice.
The notice to be given by this Borough to the owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining
any street in which there is a sewer requiring such owner to connect such improved property to such
sewer shall be given by this Borough as soon as a sewer is in place which can receive sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes from the particular improved property and which can transport the same
for treatment and disposal.
§ 260-8. Content and service of sewer connection notice.
The notice to be given by this Borough to the owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining
any street in which there is a sewer requiring such owner to connect such improved property to such
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 127/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
sewer, which notice is referred to in § 260-2 of this article, shall consist of a written or printed document
requiring such connection in accordance with provisions of this article and specifying that such
connection shall be made within 60 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice shall be
served upon the owner of such improved property either by personal service or by registered mail or by
such other method as at the time may be provided by law.
§ 260-9. Time limit for making connections; authority for Borough
to connect at expense of property owner.
If the owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining any street in which there is a sewer,
after 60 days' notice from this Borough to connect such improved property to such sewer, in
accordance with the foregoing sections of this article, shall fail to connect such improved property to
such sewer, as required and in the manner provided in this article, this Borough may make such
connection and may collect from such owner the costs and expenses thereof by a municipal claim, an
action in assumpsit or by such other legal proceeding as may be permitted or provided by law.
§ 260-10. Permit required prior to opening or using sewer.
No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use, alter or disturb, in any manner,
any sewer or any part of the sewer system without first obtaining a permit, in writing, from this
Borough.
§ 260-11. Application for permit.
Application for a permit required under § 260-10 of this article shall be made by the owner of the
improved property to be served.
§ 260-12. Conditions to be met prior to making sewer
connections; fees.
No person shall make or shall cause to be made any connection of any improved property with a
sewer until such person shall have fulfilled each of the following conditions:
Such person shall have notified the Secretary of this Borough of the desire and intention to
connect to a sewer.
Such person shall have applied for and obtained a permit as required by § 260-10 of this article.
Such person shall have given the Secretary of this Borough at least 24 hours' notice of the time
when such connection will be made so that this Borough, by its authorized representatives, may
supervise and inspect the work performed in making such connection and can supervise the
testing thereof, if necessary.
All owners of improved property who are required to connect to the Tamaqua sewer system shall
pay to the Borough of Tamaqua a tapping fee of $550 for each equivalent dwelling unit situate on
the improved property which discharges sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes. The
aforementioned fee shall include an administration fee of $50, a $325 fee for sewer capacity and a
$175 fee for sewer collection.
[Amended 9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 544; 10-1-2002 by Ord. No. 557; 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 605; 3-1-
2016 by Ord. No. 683]
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 128/244
E. Such person shall have paid to this Borough a connection fee of $20, and, in addition, such
person shall have deposited with this Borough the sum of $25, the latter sum being repayable
upon such person complying with §§ 260-14 and 260-19 of this article.
§ 260-13. Separate connection required; exception.
Except as otherwise provided in this § 260-13, each improved property shall be connected separately
and independently with a sewer through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved
property on one building sewer shall not be permitted, except under special circumstances and for
good sanitary reasons or other good cause shown, but then only after special permission of this
Borough, in writing, shall have been secured and subject to such rules, regulations and conditions as
may be prescribed by this Borough.
§ 260-14. Responsibility for costs of constructing and connecting
building sewer.
All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs and expenses of connection of
a building sewer to a sewer shall be borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and
such owner shall indemnify and save harmless this Borough from all loss or damage that may be
occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of construction of a building sewer or of connection of a
building sewer to a sewer.
§ 260-15. Location and manner of making sewer connection.
A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated by this Borough and where the
lateral is provided. The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or a
higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection of
a building sewer to the lateral shall be made secure and watertight.
§ 260-16. Conversion of existing house sewer to building sewer.
Where an improved property, at the time connection to a sewer is required, shall be served by its own
sewage disposal system or device, the existing house sewer line shall be broken on the structure side
of such sewage disposal system or device and attachment shall be made, with proper fittings, to
continue such house sewer line as a building sewer.
§ 260-17. Inspection of building sewer.
No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved by this Borough. If any
part of a building sewer is covered before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for
inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property to be connected to a sewer.
§ 260-18. Maintenance of building sewer.
Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe operating
condition by the owner of such improved property.
§ 260-19. Excavations for building sewers.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 129/244
Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with barricades and lights to protect
all persons from damage and injury. Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the
course of installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and expense of the owner of the
improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to this Borough.
§ 260-20. Effect of failure to remedy unsatisfactory conditions.
If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice from this Borough, in writing, to remedy any
unsatisfactory condition with respect to a building sewer, within 60 days of receipt of such notice, this
Borough may refuse to permit such person to discharge sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the
sewer system until such unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of this
Borough.
§ 260-21. Certain substances not to be discharged into sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sewer, directly or indirectly, any
substance which could be detrimental to a sewer or the operation of the sewer system.
§ 260-22. Remedies to prevent discharge of harmful waste into
sewer.
This Borough reserves the right to refuse to any person the privilege of connection of any improved
property to the sewer system, or to compel the discontinuance of use of a sewer by any person, or to
compel the pretreatment of industrial wastes, in order to prevent the discharge into the sewer system
of any wastes which may be deemed by this Borough to be harmful to the sewer system or to have a
deleterious effect on sewage treatment processes.
§ 260-23. Additional rules and regulations authorized.
This Borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional rules and regulations as it shall
deem necessary and proper relating to connections with a sewer and the sewer system, which
additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be construed as part of
this article.
§ 260-24. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 605]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction before a Magisterial District
Judge, shall pay a fine not exceeding $600, together with costs of prosecution. Each violation
continuing throughout a twenty-four-hour period shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 260-25. Collection of fines and costs.
Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this article shall be enforceable and recoverable in the
manner at the time provided by applicable law.
§ 260-26. Purpose.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 130/244
It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of
the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this Borough.
Article II. Sewer Rentals and Regulations
[Adopted 2-20-1964 by Ord. No. 263 (Ch. XX, Part 2, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 260-27. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly and specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article
shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
The Tamaqua Borough Authority, a municipality authority of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BILLING UNIT
Includes, as applicable, each of the following: a "commercial establishment," a "dwelling unit," an
"industrial establishment" and an "institutional establishment."
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)
The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure for five days at 20° C., expressed in parts per million by weight.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, a municipality of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Council or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through
its authorized representatives.
COLOR
The platinum-cobalt standard result from using the Hach DR/2000 spectrophotometer DEPapproved
equivalent procedure to the Standard Methods 2120B test.
[Added 3-18-1997 by Ord. No. 508]
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Each room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure connected directly or indirectly to the
sewer system and used or intended for use in the operation of one business enterprise for the sale
and distribution of any product, commodity, article or service.
COUNCIL
The group of elected officials acting as the governing body of the Borough.
DWELLING UNIT
Each room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure connected directly or indirectly to the
sewer system and occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by a family or
other group of persons living together or by a person living alone.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property upon which there is erected a structure or structures intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure connected directly or indirectly to the sewer
system and used or intended for use in the operation of one business enterprise for
manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling any product, commodity or article.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 131/244
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy ejected or escaping in the course of any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course of the development, recovery
or processing of natural resources, and shall be considered distinct from sanitary sewage.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure connected directly or indirectly to the sewer
system which does not constitute a "commercial establishment," "dwelling unit" or "industrial
establishment."
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any improved property.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, company, association, society, trust, corporation or other group or
entity.
pH
The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution and is
an indication of acidity or alkalinity of a solution.
PHOSPHORUS
Elemental phosphorus in its combined or uncombined forms as determined by using standard
laboratory procedures.
[Added 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347]
PPM
Parts per million by weight.
[Amended 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347]
SANITARY SEWAGE
The normal, water-carried household and toilet wastes discharged into the sewer system from an
improved property.
SEWAGE
Both sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.
SEWER
Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used or usable for sewage
collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM
All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes situate in or adjacent to the Borough, owned by the
Authority and leased to the Borough for operation and use.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS
Solids that either settle to the bottom of, float on the surface of or are in suspension in water,
wastewater or other liquids and are largely removable by laboratory filtering.
[Amended 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347]
TOTAL SOLIDS
Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension or dissolved in water, sewage or
other liquids and which shall be determined by laboratory analysis.
WATER SYSTEM
All facilities and properties utilized in the supply of water to the public in and adjacent to this
Borough, whether such facilities and properties shall be owned and/or operated by the Authority,
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 132/244
[1]
A.
B.
[2]
C.
D.
A.
(1)
B.
this Borough or a private corporation.
§ 260-28. Sewer rentals or charges.
[Amended 2-9-1971 by Ord. No. 302]
Annual sewer rentals or charges for use of the sewers and sewer system hereby are fixed and
imposed upon and shall be collected from the owner of each improved property upon which shall
be located a billing unit or billing units, as defined herein,[1] irrespective of whether such use of the
sewers and sewer system or the connection thereto or the benefit resulting therefrom shall be
direct or indirect.
Editor's Note: See § 260-27 of this article.
Such sewer rentals or charges shall commence and shall be effective on March 1, 1971, or on the
date of connection of any such billing unit to the sewer system, or on the date when this Borough
first shall be capable of accepting sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from a billing unit for
transportation, whichever date last shall occur.
Such sewer rentals or charges shall be payable quarterly as hereinafter[2] in this article provided.
Editor's Note: See § 260-31 of this article.
Each billing unit, located on one improved property or in one building, shall be billed and
considered as a separate billing unit, irrespective of the fact that each such room, group of rooms
or enclosure on such improved property or in such building shall be owned by the same person
and irrespective of the fact that each such billing unit is not connected separately and
independently with the sewer system.
§ 260-29. Sewer rentals or charges.
Dwelling units. The sewer rental or charge for sewage discharged into the sewer system for each
billing unit constituting a dwelling unit shall be at the rate of $340 per annum, payable at the rate of
$85 per quarter annum, effective January 1, 2017, and $420 per annum, payable at the rate of
$105 per quarter annum, effective January 1, 2018.
[Amended 3-1-1974 by Ord. No. 333; 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347; 4-30-1991 by Ord. No. 466; 5-21-
2003 by Ord. No. 567; 2-17-2004 by Ord. No. 577; 11-15-2016 by Ord. No. 687]
Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, sewer rentals or charges for sewage discharged
into the sewers and sewer system from any billing unit constituting a commercial
establishment, industrial establishment or institutional establishment shall be based upon the
volume of metered water usage, adjusted, if appropriate, as provided in this article, or upon
the actual metered volume of sewage discharged into such sewers and the sewer system, as
applicable and as permitted in this article. Such sewer rentals or charges shall be computed
in accordance with the following metered rate schedule:
[Amended 3-1-1974 by Ord. No. 333; 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347; 4-30-1991 by Ord. No. 466;
3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 550; 2-17-2004 by Ord. No. 576; 11-15-2016 by Ord. No. 688]
Metered Rate Schedule[1]
Consumption of Water or Discharge of Sanitary
Sewage and Industrial Waste into the Sewer
System, as Applicable
(gallons per quarter) Rental Rate per Quarter
15,000 or less $105
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 133/244
[1]
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
Metered Rate Schedule[1]
Consumption of Water or Discharge of Sanitary
Sewage and Industrial Waste into the Sewer
System, as Applicable
(gallons per quarter) Rental Rate per Quarter
Next 85,000 $6.35 per 1,000 gallons
Next 100,000 $5.45 per 1,000 gallons
Over 200,000 $4.55 per 1,000 gallons
Editor's Note: Effective January 1, 2018.
Absence of water meter or sewer meter.
If any billing unit constituting a commercial establishment, industrial establishment or
institutional establishment shall not have installed therein a water meter or meters or, at
the option of this Borough, a sewer meter or meters for the purpose of making possible
the determination of sewer rentals or charges under provisions of this article, then and in
that event the sewer rentals or charges imposed upon any such establishment, until such
meter or meters shall be installed, shall be based upon water consumption or sewage
discharge, as estimated by this Borough; provided, however, that the minimum sewer
rental or charge imposed upon any such establishment shall be not less than $340 per
annum, payable at the rate of $85 per quarter-annum for calendar year 2017 and $420
per annum, payable at the rate of $105 per quarter annum, for calendar year 2018 and
every year thereafter until modified by the Tamaqua Borough Council by ordinance.
[Amended 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347; 4-3-1991 by Ord. No. 466; 3-5-2002 by Ord. No.
550; 2-17-2004 by Ord. No. 576; 11-15-2016 by Ord. No. 688]
The foregoing rates for sewer rentals and charges shall be applicable to all bills for sewer
services rendered for the calendar year specified therein.
[Added 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347; amended 4-3-1991 by Ord. No. 466; 3-5-2002 by Ord.
No. 550; 2-17-2004 by Ord. No. 576; 11-15-2016 by Ord. No. 688]
The owner of an industrial establishment discharging sanitary sewage and/or industrial
wastes to the sewer system having an average five-day BOD greater than 200 PPM, a
suspended solids content greater than 240 PPM, or a total phosphorus as P content greater
than 10 PPM shall pay a strength-of-waste surcharge, in addition to applicable volume
charges, equal to 2/10 of 1% for each PPM by which the BOD exceeds 200 PPM plus 1/10 of
1% for each PPM by which the suspended solids exceed 240 PPM, plus 1% for each PPM by
which the phosphorus exceeds 10 PPM. Surcharges shall be applicable to all sewer rental
billings. The strength of wastewaters to be used for establishing the amount of surcharges
shall be determined at least once annually either a) by suitable sampling and analysis of the
wastewaters for three consecutive days during a period of normal plant operation; or b) from
estimates made by the Borough; or c) from known relationships of products produced to
strengths of wastewaters for those industries where such factors have been established. In
establishing wastewater strengths for surcharge purposes by analysis, analyses shall be
made in accordance with procedures outlined in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health
Association, Inc. Owners of industrial establishments discharging sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes to the sewer system shall furnish the Borough upon request all information
deemed essential by the Borough for the determination of applicable sewer rental surcharges
for excess strength wastes. The cost of obtaining such information shall be borne by the
owner of the industrial establishment.
[Amended 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347]
§ 260-30. Time and method of payment.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 134/244
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[Amended 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 663]
All bills for sewer service shall be due and payable as of the date thereof. If bills for sewer services
shall not be paid within 30 days after such shall become due and payable, a penalty of 10% per
quarter shall be added. Payments mailed and postmarked on or before the 30th day shall be
deemed to be payments within the period allowed for payment without penalty. If such 30th day
shall be a legal holiday or a Sunday, payments made on or mailed and postmarked on the next
succeeding business day not a legal holiday shall be deemed to be payments within the period
allowed for payment without penalty.
[Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 702]
Every owner of improved property which is connected to the sewer system initially shall provide
this Borough with and thereafter shall keep this Borough advised of his correct address. Failure of
any person to receive bills for sewer rentals or charges shall not be considered an excuse for
nonpayment nor shall such failure result in an extension of the period of time during which such
bills shall be payable without penalty.
Whenever service to any billing unit shall begin after the first day or shall terminate before the last
day of any billing period, the sewer rental or charge for such period shall be prorated equitably for
that portion of the billing period during which service was provided by this Borough.
[Amended 2-20-1964 by Ord. No. 263]
§ 260-31. Liens for unpaid sewer rentals or charges; collection of
delinquent bills.
The sewer rentals or charges hereby imposed shall be a lien on the premises connected to and served
by the sewer system from the date such sewer rental or charge becomes due and payable under
provisions of this article. All sewer rentals or charges hereby imposed which shall not be paid after 15
days, as provided in § 260-30B of this article shall be entered as a lien against the premises connected
to and served by the sewer system, which lien shall be filed in the office of the Prothonotary of
Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, in the manner provided by law for the filing of municipal claims. All
delinquent bills shall be collected by this Borough in any manner permitted and authorized by law.
§ 260-32. Prohibited wastes.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage, or any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes,
unless otherwise specifically permitted, authorized or approved by this Borough, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any duly constituted board, commission or department thereof having jurisdiction in
the premises:
Having a temperature higher than 140° F.;
[Amended 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347]
Containing more than 100 PPM by weight of fat, oil, or grease;
Containing any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other inflammable or explosive liquid, solid
or gas;
Containing any unground garbage;
Containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing
obstruction or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage treatment plant where
such wastes are to be treated;
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 135/244
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
Having a pH (as determined by consulting engineers for this Borough) lower than 6.5 or higher
than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of said sewage treatment plant;
Containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard
in the receiving water of said sewage treatment plant. Toxic wastes shall include, but shall not be
limited to, wastes containing cyanide, copper, nickel and/or chromium ions;
Containing total solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required
to handle such materials for sewage treatment processes; or
Containing noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance;
Containing an average monthly color less than or equal to 2,000 platinum-cobalt units and an
average weekly color less than or equal to 2,500 platinum-cobalt units.
[Added 3-18-1997 by Ord. No. 508]
§ 260-33. Measuring volume of sewage.
Whenever the entire water supply of any commercial establishment, industrial establishment or
institutional establishment discharging sewage into the sewers and sewer system shall be
supplied by the water system, the volume of water furnished, as determined from meter readings
of the water system, shall be used as the volume of water consumed in computing sewer rentals
or charges, subject to adjustment, if appropriate, as provided in this article.
Whenever any commercial establishment, industrial establishment or institutional establishment
discharging sewage into the sewers and sewer system shall have a source or sources of water
supply in addition to or other than the water system, a meter shall be installed on such additional
or other source or sources of water supply. The total volume of water consumed, as determined
from the meter readings of the water system and the meter readings of the meter or meters on
such additional source or sources of water supply or the meter readings of the meter or meters on
such other source or sources of water supply, as appropriate, shall be used as the volume of
water consumed in computing sewer rentals or charges, subject to adjustment, if appropriate, as
provided in this article.
Whenever any commercial establishment, industrial establishment of institutional establishment
shall have installed, as required by this Borough, or as may be elected at the option of any
commercial establishment, industrial establishment or institutional establishment, a meter or
meters for measuring the volume of sewage discharged into the sewers and sewer system, sewer
rentals or charges shall be based upon the actual metered volume of sewage so being discharged
into the sewers and sewer system. Such sewer rentals or charges shall be computed at the
applicable rates set forth in § 260-29 hereof.
[Amended 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347]
Exclusion from the sewer system of noncontaminated wastewaters and waters used for cooling
purposes may be required by this Borough or such exclusion may be optional with the owner if not
required by this Borough. When such waters are excluded, the volume of water or other measure
to be used for computation of sewer rentals or charges shall be computed in one of the following
methods:
By installing a meter or other measuring device on the connection to the sewer system. The
readings from such meter or other measuring device shall be used as the measure of
discharge of sewage in computing sewer rentals or charges in accordance with the applicable
rates set forth in § 260-29 hereof.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 136/244
(2)
(3)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
By installing a meter or other measuring device to measure the volume of water not being
discharged into the sewer system. The readings from such meter or other measuring device
shall be deducted from the total water meter readings and the remainder shall be the volume
of water to be used in computing sewer rentals or charges in accordance with the applicable
rates set forth in § 260-29 hereof.
If it is not practical, in the opinion of this Borough, to install a meter or other measuring device
to determine continuously the volume of water not discharged into the sewer system, this
Borough may determine, in such manner and by such method as it may prescribe, the
percentage of metered water which is being discharged into the sewer system. The volume of
water to be used in computing sewer rentals or charges in accordance with the applicable
rates set forth in § 260-29 hereof shall be the percentage so determined of the volume of
water measured by the water meter or meters. Any dispute as to such estimated percentage
shall be submitted to this Borough, after notice of such estimate. The decision of this Borough
with respect to the matter shall be final for the then current calendar year.
The furnishing and installation of meters or other measuring devices which shall not be owned as
a part of the water system, but which shall be required or permitted under provisions of this article,
shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. The installation or use of such meters or other
measuring devices at all times shall be subject to the approval of this Borough and may be tested
and inspected by this Borough whenever necessary. The owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance, safekeeping and repair of any such meter, whether such repairs shall be made
necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other causes.
§ 260-34. Industrial waste regulations.
When directed by the Borough, owners of industrial establishments shall install, pay for, and
maintain a manhole and such other devices as may be approved by the Borough to facilitate
observation, measurement, and sampling of wastewaters discharged to the sewer system. The
Borough or its duly authorized representatives shall, at all reasonable times, be permitted to enter
upon any and all properties for the purpose of inspecting, observing, measuring, and sampling
wastewaters discharged to the sewer system. The owner of any industrial establishment that
desires to connect to the sewer system shall notify the Borough, in writing, at least 10 days before
making such connection.
[Amended 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347]
Industrial establishments shall install fine screens to remove husks, hulls, vegetable skins,
peelings, threads, lint, grease and other such nonsettleable and floating solids, or other organic or
inorganic substances, determined by this Borough to overload, impair the efficiency of or cause
difficulties in operation of the sewage treatment plant used to treat and dispose of the wastes or in
maintaining required quality of treatment plant effluent.
Any improved property discharging 50,000 gallons or more of sewage per day into the sewers and
sewer system and having large variations in the rate of discharge of such within a twenty-four-hour
period shall install suitable holding tanks for equalizing the rate of discharge uniformly over the
entire twenty-four-hour period. The average rate of discharge during any twenty-four-hour period
shall not be exceeded by more than 50% at any time during such twenty-four-hour period.
If the owner of any industrial establishment from which industrial wastes are discharged into the
sewers and sewer system shall propose to change methods of operation so as to alter the type of
industrial wastes then being discharged into the sewers and sewer system, such owner shall notify
this Borough, in writing, at least 10 days prior to such change, so that this Borough may sample
the industrial wastes immediately after such change takes place in order to make the
determinations provided for or required by this article.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 137/244
E.
F.
A.
B.
No provision of this article shall be construed as preventing any special arrangement or
agreement between this Borough and any person whereby industrial wastes of unusual strength
or character may be accepted into the sewers and sewer system, subject to equitable payment in
connection therewith by the person concerned.
Owners of industrial establishments desiring to discharge industrial wastes to the sewer system
shall obtain a permit from the Borough to do so upon notification by the Borough. Applications for
a permit to discharge industrial wastes shall be accompanied by all information requested by the
Borough for the determination of industrial wastes volumes, characteristics and constituents. The
cost for obtaining such information shall be borne by the industrial establishment.
[Added 5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 347]
§ 260-35. Right to refuse connection, discontinue or compel
pretreatment of industrial wastes.
This Borough reserves the right to refuse to any person the privilege of connection of any improved
property to the sewers and sewer system, or to compel the discontinuance of use of a sewer and the
sewer system by any person or to compel the pretreatment of any industrial wastes, in order to prevent
discharges into the sewer system of any wastes deemed to be harmful to the sewer system or to have
a deleterious effect on sewage treatment processes.
§ 260-36. Access.
Representatives of this Borough shall have access at all times to any improved property which shall be
connected to the sewers and sewer system and to any meters used for purposes of establishing or
determining water consumption, water excluded from the sewer system or sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes discharged to the sewers and sewer system for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with provisions of this article.
§ 260-37. Changes in sewer rentals or charges; additional rules
and regulations.
This Borough reserves the right to adopt and promulgate and, from time to time, this Borough may
adopt and promulgate, as it shall deem necessary, additional classifications and sewer rentals or
charges therefor, or modifications of the schedule of sewer rentals or charges as set forth in this
article, which additional classifications and sewer rentals or charges, or modifications, as the case
may be, shall be, shall become and shall be construed as a part of this article.
This Borough reserves the right to adopt and promulgate and, from time to time, this Borough may
adopt and promulgate such additional rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper
for the use and operation of the sewer system, which rules and regulations shall be, shall become
and shall be construed as a part of this article.
§ 260-38. Purpose.
It hereby is declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this Borough.
Article III. Individual or Community Sewage Disposal
Systems
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 138/244
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
[Adopted 7-11-1972 by Ord. No. 317]
§ 260-39. Permit required.
From and after the adoption of this article, no person shall install an individual or community sewage
disposal system or construct any building within the Borough of Tamaqua in which a disposal system is
to be installed without first obtaining a permit indicating that the site, plans, and specifications of such
system are in compliance with the provisions of the Sewage Facilities Act of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania[1] and the standards adopted pursuant to said Act.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 260-40. Permit applications.
Applications for permits shall be in writing to the Council of the Borough of Tamaqua, and shall be
made on forms provided by the Borough of Tamaqua or the Enforcement Officer and shall include such
data as shall be prescribed by the Sewage Facilities Act, including the site, plans, specification, and
technical standards for construction.
§ 260-41. Fees.
[Amended 12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 354]
No person shall install an individual or community sewage disposal system or construct any
building in the Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, in which an individual or
community sewage disposal system is to be installed, or make repairs to any sewage disposal
system without first obtaining a permit indicating that the site, plans, and specifications of such
system are in compliance with Act No. 537, entitled the "Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act," its
supplements and amendments, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to said Act. No.
537, its supplements and amendments.
The following fees for the services indicated are hereby established, said schedule of fees to
remain in force and effect until such time as the Council, by resolution, may adopt a new or
additional schedule of fees for applications, permits, licenses and approvals required by the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended.
A fee in the sum of $150 payable to the Borough of Tamaqua shall be paid to the Borough
Enforcement Officer at the time of making application for a single-family dwelling unit with a
conventional sewage disposal system.
A fee in the sum of $200 payable to the Borough of Tamaqua shall be paid to the Borough
Enforcement Officer at the time of making application for any sewage disposal system other
than a single-family dwelling unit. In the event that the actual cost to the Borough shall exceed
the fee paid by the applicant, then the applicant shall promptly pay such excess to the
Borough.
A fee in the sum of $25 payable to the Borough of Tamaqua shall be paid to the Borough
Enforcement Officer at the time of making application for repairs to any sewage disposal
system.
The current schedule of fees adopted by the Council of the Borough of Tamaqua shall be
maintained, at all times, at the office of the Borough.
§ 260-42. Issuance or denial of permit.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 139/244
Permits shall be issued or denied within seven days after the receipt of application unless the data
submitted on the application shall be incomplete, then the time for acting thereon shall be extended
seven days beyond the date of adequate supplementary or amendatory data. The denial of a permit by
an Enforcement Officer shall be supported by a statement, in writing, of the reasons therefor.
§ 260-43. Prior approval required to cover system or structure
from view.
No system or structure designed to provide individual or community sewage disposal shall be covered
from view until approval has been given by the Borough of Tamaqua or the Enforcement Officer;
provided, however, that if 48 hours has elapsed (Sundays and holidays excluded) since notice of the
completion of construction to the Borough of Tamaqua or the Enforcement Officer, then the applicant
may cover said system or structure unless permission has been refused by the issuing body.
§ 260-44. Right of hearing or appeal.
The right of a hearing or appeal from the denial or revocation of a permit shall be as prescribed and set
forth in the Sewage Facilities Act.
§ 260-45. Sewage disposal permits.
The applicant for a sewage disposal permit and for the issuance of a permit must in all respects
comply with the Sewage Facilities Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of all the rules and
regulations adopted by the Department of Health under and in pursuance of said Act.
§ 260-46. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 354]
Any person who shall install or construct an individual or community sewage disposal system or
construct any building in which an individual or community sewage disposal system is to be installed
without first obtaining a permit in accordance with this article and under the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any person who constructs a sewage disposal
system not in accordance with the standards prescribed under the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act
and rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Health, shall, upon conviction before a
Magisterial District Judge, Alderman, or Magistrate, pay a fine of not less than $300 and costs and not
more than $400 and costs or, in default thereof, shall be confined in the County Prison for a period not
in excess of 30 days.
Article IV. Industrial Cost Recovery System
[Adopted 5-18-1977 by Ord. No. 361]
§ 260-47. Industrial cost recovery charges.
All industrial users (any nongovernmental users identified in Divisions A, B, D, E, and I of the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, 1972) connected to and from which suitable process wastewaters are
discharged into the sewage system of the Tamaqua Borough Authority shall pay to the Borough of
Tamaqua the following industrial cost recovery charge:
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 140/244
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
3.5 cents per 1,000 gallons of actual water consumption, arrived at on the basis of the calculations
set forth in Schedule A.[1]
Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
3.1 cents per pound of five-day BOD, arrived at on the basis of the calculations set forth in
Schedule A.
1.4 cents per pound of suspended solids, arrived at on the basis of calculations set forth in
Schedule A.
13.9 cents per pound of phosphorus, arrived at on the basis of the calculations set forth in
Schedule A.
When noncontaminated wastewaters are excluded from the sewage system, or when any other
portion of water consumption does not reach the sewage system, the industrial cost recovery
charge shall be based upon total water consumption, less water excluded, as set forth under
Subsection A. Water excluded shall be determined from meters installed and maintained by the
industrial user as required and approved by the Borough, from estimates made by the Borough, or
the industrial user may elect to measure wastewater volumes actually discharged to the sewage
system as hereinafter provided. The Borough may require the industrial user, or the industrial user
may elect to install, pay for, and maintain a meter approved by the Borough for measuring
quarterly wastewater volumes discharged to the sewer system, in which case industrial cost
recovery charges under Subsection A shall be based upon the actual volume of wastewaters so
metered.
The strength of wastewaters to be used for establishing the amount of five-day BOD, suspended
solids, and phosphorus used to determine the charges for industrial cost recovery purposes as set
forth under Subsections B, C and D shall be determined at least once annually either (a) by
suitable sampling and analysis of the wastewaters for three consecutive days during a period of
normal plant operation; or (b) from estimates made by the Borough; or (c) from known
relationships of products produced to strengths of wastewaters for those industrial users where
such factors have been established. In establishing wastewater strengths for industrial cost
recovery purposes by analysis, analysis shall be made in accordance with procedures outlined in
the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published
by the American Public Health Association, Inc. Industrial users shall furnish the Borough, upon
request, all information deemed essential by the Borough for the determination of industrial cost
recovery charges under Subsections B, C and D. The cost of obtaining such information shall be
borne by the owner of the industrial establishment.
When industrial users discharge wastewaters to the sewage system from sanitary conveniences,
the industrial cost recovery charge shall be based upon total water consumption, less the
discharge volume from sanitary conveniences, as set forth under Subsection A. The discharge
volume from sanitary conveniences shall be determined from estimates made by the Borough.
Industrial cost recovery charges set forth herein shall be effective on June 1, 1977, and in effect
until June 1, 2007. All industrial cost recovery billings shall be rendered for calendar quarterly
periods on March 1, June 1, September 1, and December 1 of each year an industrial user is
connected to the sewage system. Billings in arrears shall be rendered quarterly for the quarterly
periods ending on the last days of February, May, August, and November of each year beginning
September 1, 1977. Industrial cost recovery billings under Subsections A, B, C and D and/or
Subsections E, F and G, as may be applicable, shall be based upon water consumed and
wastewater strength during the quarterly period immediately preceding the quarter in which the
billing is rendered. Industrial users connected to the sewage system for only a portion of the
calendar quarter shall pay a pro rata industrial cost recovery charge for the period of time actually
connected during the quarter. All industrial cost recovery billings shall be due and payable upon
presentation and, if not paid within 15 days from the date of billing, a penalty of 5% shall be
added. Payments mailed and postmarked on or before such 15th day shall be deemed to be
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 141/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
payments within the period allowed for payment without penalty. If such 15th day shall be a legal
holiday or a Sunday, payments made on or mailed and postmarked on the next succeeding
business day not a legal holiday shall be deemed to be payments within the period allowed for
payment without penalty.
§ 260-48. Access to sewage system.
Such industrial users shall be subject to the following:
The Borough or its duly authorized representatives shall, at all reasonable times, be permitted to enter
upon any and all properties for the purpose of inspecting, observing, and measuring process
wastewaters discharged to the sewage system.
§ 260-49. Additional regulations.
The industrial cost recovery system shall adhere to the following:
Industrial users are excluded from participation in industrial cost recovery if they discharge
primarily nonprocessed segregated domestic wastes, or primarily wastes from sanitary
conveniences, as determined by the Borough.
In accordance with Section 6.01 of the First Supplemental Agreement of Lease dated May 1,
1975, between the Tamaqua Borough Authority and the Borough of Tamaqua, the Borough agrees
to transmit any funds collected under this article to the Authority quarterly.
If the sewage system is upgraded or expanded, the basis of payment set forth in § 260-47A, B, C
and D will be adjusted accordingly.
In the event that an industrial user discharging process wastewaters to the sewer system or
anyone else affected by the industrial cost recovery system disagrees with the application of such
system or estimates made by the Borough of the quantities of process wastewaters discharged,
such person shall be entitled to a hearing. The industrial user and the Borough will, by mutual
agreement, with the assistance of the Borough's engineer, determine the correct quantities of
industrial process wastewater.
Article V. Acceptance of Trucked Waste
[Adopted 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 583]
§ 260-50. Purpose and policy.
This article sets forth the uniform requirements for acceptance and discharge of trucked wastes or
materials (pumped from a residential on-site wastewater treatment system or septic tank), to the
wastewater treatment facilities owned by the Tamaqua Borough Authority and operated by the
Borough of Tamaqua.
The objectives of this article are:
To provide a trial basis program for the environmentally sound and cost-effective disposal of
trucked wastes.
To provide an alternative opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and biosolids.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 142/244
(3)
C.
D.
E.
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment facilities which would
interfere with the operation of the treatment plant or contaminate the resulting biosolids.
This article defines certain terms and provides for the regulation of haulers and transporters of
liquid waters to the wastewater treatment facilities through the issuance of permits, authorizes
testing, inspection and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting
of fees for the reasonable costs resulting from the program established herein.
This article shall apply to the Borough of Tamaqua and to all persons who are, by contract, permit
or agreement with the Borough, users of this program.
Copies of the complete article are available by contacting the Secretary or Borough Manager of
the Borough of Tamaqua.
§ 260-51. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this
article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
DISCHARGE PERMIT
Permit on file and available from the Borough Manager or Secretary that each hauler or
transporter is required to obtain authorizing discharging wastes and establishing conditions for
discharging into the Borough of Tamaqua's sanitary sewer system.
DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
The application on file and available from the Borough Manager or Secretary that all haulers or
transporters must use to apply for a discharge permit.
GREASE TRAP WASTE
Any liquid or solid substance removed from a tank that has been specifically designed or installed
to capture grease and oils from a wastewater.
HAULER and TRANSPORTER
Any person discharging trucked waste at the Tamaqua Wastewater Treatment Plant.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER
Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance or waterborne wastes or forms of energy rejected or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or the development,
recovery or processing of any natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
MANIFEST FORM
Form all haulers and transporters are required to complete prior to initiating discharge.
POLLUTANT
Any solid or liquid waste, sewage, garbage, sludge, chemical waste, biological or radioactive
materials, heat, industrial, municipal, or agricultural waste discharged into water.
SAMPLING
Collection of a volume of trucked waste during the discharge to the sewer system for the purpose
of conducting certain laboratory analyses.
SANITARY SEWAGE
The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any improved property.
SEWER SYSTEM
All facilities and property owned by the Tamaqua Borough Authority as of any particular time,
including, but not limited to, facilities for collection, pumping, conveying, and treating sanitary
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 143/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
sewage and industrial wastewater.
TRUCKED WASTE
Any liquid or solid material removed from a septic tank that receives only sanitary sewage from a
residential establishment and is hauled by truck for disposal at the Tamaqua Wastewater
Treatment Plant.
WASTE FROM PORTABLE TOILET FACILITIES
Any liquid or solid substance removed from a portable watertight receptacle that receives and
retains sanitary sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of sanitary
sewage at another site.
WASTEWATER
Sanitary sewage or industrial wastewater or any combination thereof.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
The facilities owned by the Tamaqua Borough Authority used for the treatment of wastewater.
§ 260-52. Trucked waste.
Tank trucked waste discharges to the sewer system are prohibited, except as authorized
hereinafter.
Tank trucked waste may only be discharged at the Tamaqua Wastewater Treatment Plant upon
the issuance of a discharge permit by the Borough prior to discharge and after permit application.
Tank trucked waste authorized for discharge shall be discharged only at the location, time, and at
a rate fixed by the discharge permit.
Tank trucked waste discharges shall not include any industrial wastewater, grease trap waste, or
wastes from the portable toilet facilities.
Prior to initiating each discharge, the waste hauler or transporter shall be required to register at
the wastewater treatment plant and complete a manifest form. Both the hauler or transporter and
the wastewater treatment plant operator shall sign the manifest to verify the discharge.
Prior to discharge, the tank-trucked waste shall be subject to inspection and sampling by the
Borough.
Tank trucked waste discharges shall be subject to rates and charges in accordance with a
schedule established by the Borough, as amended from time to time.
The wastewater treatment plant operators may deny any and all tank trucked waste that, in their
sole discretion, may cause any inhibition, interference, pass-through or any other treatment
problems at the wastewater treatment plant.
§ 260-53. Schedule of fees and charges.
The Borough of Tamaqua shall establish a fee schedule by resolution, which the Borough may change
from time to time, as it deems necessary by resolution for the disposal of trucked waste at the
Tamaqua Wastewater Treatment Plant.
§ 260-54. Billing period, terms and conditions.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 144/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
[2]
F.
[3]
G.
H.
The billing period will begin with the first day of each new month and will end with the last day of the
month. Invoices will be for all deliveries made during a billing period. Payment in full will be due within
30 days of date of invoice. If invoice charges are not paid within 30 days after invoice date, finance
charges will be assessed at the rate of 1.5% per month.
Article VI. Sewage Sludge
[Adopted 9-19-2006 by Ord. No. 612]
§ 260-55. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Tamaqua Borough Sewage Sludge Ordinance."
§ 260-56. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to Tamaqua Borough by all relevant federal
and state laws and their corresponding regulations, and by the inherent right of the citizens of the
Borough of Tamaqua to self-government, including, without limitation, the following:
The Declaration of Independence, which declares that people are born with "certain unalienable
rights" and that governments are instituted among people to secure those rights;
The Pennsylvania Constitution, Article 1, Section 2, which declares that "all power is inherent in
the people, and all free governments are instituted for their peace, safety, and happiness";
The Pennsylvania Constitution, Article 1, Section 26, which declares that "neither the
Commonwealth nor any political subdivision thereof shall deny to any person the enjoyment of any
civil right";
The Pennsylvania Constitution, Article I, Section 27, which provides for the "preservation of the
natural, scenic, historic, and esthetic values of the environment";
The Borough Code, Article XII, § 1202(6)[1], which establishes the authority of borough
governments in the commonwealth to adopt ordinances "as may be necessary for the health,
safety, morals, general welfare and cleanliness and beauty, convenience, comfort and safety of
the borough";
Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202(5).
The Borough Code, Article XII, § 1202(28)[2], which establishes the authority of Borough
governments in the commonwealth to adopt Ordinances "to prohibit, within the Borough, the
carrying on of any manufacture, art, trade, or business which may be noxious or offensive to the
inhabitants";
Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202(20)(i)(A).
The Borough Code, Article XII, § 1202(74)[3], which establishes the general power of Borough
governments in the commonwealth to make and adopt Ordinances that "may be expedient or
necessary for the proper management, care and control of the borough and its finances and the
maintenance of peace, good government, safety and welfare of the borough and its trade,
commerce and manufactures";
Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1203.
The Solid Waste Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., which preserves the rights and
remedies of municipalities concerning solid waste within their borders;
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 145/244
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Municipal waste regulations, 25 Pa. Code §§ 271.1 et seq.; and
Land application of sewage sludge, 40 CFR Part 503.
§ 260-57. Findings and purpose.
In support of enactment of this article, the Borough Council of Tamaqua Borough finds and declares
that:
The land application of sewage sludge in Tamaqua Borough poses a significant threat to the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and environment of Tamaqua Borough.
In April 2002, the Inspector General of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which
oversees state sewage sludge regulations, issued a report in which it concluded, "EPA cannot
assure the public that current land application [of sewage sludge] practices are protective of
human health and the environment." Among the Inspector General's concerns were the following:
"failure to properly manage sludge may have adverse effects on human health and the
environment"; "EPA does not have an effective program of ensuring compliance with land
application requirements"; and state officials have criticized the lack of EPA oversight, staffing, and
commitment toward ensuring the safety of land applied sludge.
In 1994, eleven-year-old Tony Behun from Rush Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania, died
from a staph infection shortly after being exposed to sewage sludge. The following year,
seventeen-year-old Daniel Pennock from Reading, Pennsylvania, died from a staph infection
shortly after being exposed to sewage sludge. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
recognizes staph as a potential pathogenic component of sewage sludge.
In spite of these risks, Tamaqua Borough has been rendered powerless by the state and federal
government to prohibit the land application of sewage sludge by persons that comply with all
applicable laws and regulations.
In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Tamaqua Borough, the soil,
groundwater, and surface water, the environment and its flora and fauna, and the practice of
sustainable agriculture, the Borough finds it necessary to ban corporations and other limited
liability entities from engaging in the land application of sewage sludge. It is recognized that a
small number of waste management corporations control the vast majority of sludge hauling and
land application, and that corporate concentration enables those corporations to define waste
management practices at the state level to the detriment of municipal communities. It is also
recognized that limited liability shields prevent financial recovery (and accountability) for damages
caused by business entities because limited liability insulates the persons managing the
corporation from harms caused by their decisions. Finally, the Borough recognizes that
corporations wielding government-conferred constitutional powers against the municipal
government renders the Borough Council unable to guarantee to its citizens a republican form of
government in the Borough.
In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Tamaqua Borough, the soil,
groundwater, and surface water, the environment and its flora and fauna, and the practice of
sustainable agriculture, it is necessary to test each load of sewage sludge to be applied by
persons before it is land applied within the Borough to determine if the level of pollutants,
pathogens, or vector attractants exceeds the levels allowed under applicable laws and regulations.
DEP does not possess sufficient funding or personnel to ensure that persons land applying
sewage sludge in Tamaqua Borough are doing so in compliance with state laws and regulations,
so Tamaqua Borough must have the option of enforcing those laws and regulations itself.
Tamaqua Borough's cost of testing sewage sludge prior to land application shall be borne by those
persons land applying sewage sludge in the Borough.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 146/244
§ 260-58. Interpretation.
Anyone interpreting, implementing, or applying this article shall give priority to the findings and
purposes stated in §§ 260-56 and 260-57 over such considerations as economy, efficiency and
scheduling factors.
§ 260-59. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings defined in this section wherever they are used in this
article.
BENEFICIAL USE
Use or reuse of residual waste or material derived from residual waste for commercial, industrial,
or governmental purposes where the use or reuse does not harm or threaten public health, safety,
welfare, or the environment, or the use or reuse of processed municipal waste for any purpose
where the use or reuse does not harm or threaten public health, safety, welfare, or the
environment. (See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 271, Subchapter A, § 271.1.)
BOROUGH
Tamaqua Borough in Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, its Borough Council, or its representatives
or agents.
CORPORATION
Any corporation organized under the laws of any state of the United States or under the laws of
any country. The term shall also include any limited partnership, limited liability partnership,
business trust, or limited liability company organized under the laws of any state of the United
States or under the laws of any country, and any other business entity that possesses stateconferred
limited liability attributes for its owners, directors, officers, and/or managers. The term
shall also include a municipality or municipal authority. The term shall also include any business
entity in which one or more owners or partners is a corporation or other entity in which owners,
directors, officers and/or managers possess limited liability attributes.
DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
LABORATORY or QUALIFIED LABORATORY
A facility that tests sewage sludge samples for pollutants, pathogens, and vector attractants in
compliance with DEP regulations, including, without limitation, those regulations (see 25 Pa. Code
§ 271.906) that dictate approved methodologies for conducting such tests.
LAND APPLICANT or SEWAGE SLUDGE APPLICANT
Any person responsible for complying with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations
concerning the land application of sewage sludge.
LAND APPLICATION or LAND APPLY
The spraying or spreading of sewage sludge onto the land surface for beneficial use; the injection
of sewage sludge below the land surface for beneficial use; or the incorporation of sewage sludge
into the soil for beneficial use so that the sewage sludge can either condition the soil or fertilize
crops for vegetation grown in the soil. (See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 271, Subchapter J, § 271.907.)
The term shall also include the spraying, spreading, injection, or incorporation of sewage sludge
onto, into, or below the land surface for reclamation of previously mined lands.
ORDINANCE
The Tamaqua Borough Sewage Sludge Ordinance.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 147/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
PERSON
A natural person, or an association of natural persons that does not qualify as a corporation under
this article.
SEWAGE SLUDGE or SLUDGE
Liquid or solid sludge and other residue from a municipal sewage collection and treatment system,
and liquid or solid sludge and other residue from septic and holding tank pumpings from
commercial, industrial, or residential establishments. The term includes material derived from
sewage sludge. The term does not include ash generated during the firing of sewage sludge in a
sewage sludge incinerator, grit and screenings generated during preliminary treatment of sewage
sludge at a municipal sewage collection and treatment system, or grit, screenings, or inorganic
objects from septic and holding tank pumpings. (See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 271, Subchapter A,
§ 271.1.)
SEWAGE SLUDGE APPLICANT
See "land applicant."
SOUR
Specific oxygen uptake rate, which is the mass of oxygen consumed per unit time per unit mass of
total solids (dry weight basis) in the sewage sludge.
SUBSTANTIALLY OWNED OR CONTROLLED
A person, corporation, or other entity substantially owns or controls another person, corporation,
or other entity if it has the ability to evade the intent of § 260-65F of this article by using that
person, corporation, or other entity to land apply sewage sludge in Tamaqua Borough.
TRUCKLOAD
A load containing a maximum of approximately 23 tons of sewage sludge, based upon Tamaqua
Borough's understanding that sewage sludge for land application typically is delivered in tri-axle
trucks that can hold approximately that amount of sewage sludge.
§ 260-60. Adoption of state regulations.
Tamaqua Borough hereby adopts as local law the Pennsylvania regulations concerning the land
application of sewage sludge, including without limitation those codified at 25 Pa. Code Chapters 271
and 275, as amended, to the extent that those regulations permit persons, but not corporations, to
engage in land application of sewage sludge under those regulations.
§ 260-61. Statements of law.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or other entity to violate in Tamaqua Borough the
Pennsylvania regulations concerning the land application of sewage sludge, including, without
limitation, those codified at 25 Pa. Code Chapters 271 and 275, as amended.
It shall be unlawful for any person to land apply sewage sludge in Tamaqua Borough without first
complying with the requirements in § 260-62 of this article.
It shall be unlawful for any corporation to engage in the land application of sludge within the
Borough of Tamaqua. It shall be unlawful for any person to assist a corporation to engage in the
land application of sewage sludge within Tamaqua Borough.
It shall be unlawful for any director, officer, owner, or manager of a corporation to use a
corporation to engage in the land application of sludge within the Borough of Tamaqua.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 148/244
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
Within the Borough of Tamaqua, corporations engaged in the land application of sludge, dredged
material, or any other type of waste as defined under Title 25, § 271.1 of the Pennsylvania Code,
shall not be "persons" under the United States or Pennsylvania Constitutions, or under the laws of
the United States, Pennsylvania, or Tamaqua Borough, and so shall not have the rights of persons
under those constitutions and laws. In addition, within the Borough of Tamaqua, no corporation
engaged in the land application of sludge, dredged material, or any other type of waste as defined
under Title 25, § 271.1 of the Pennsylvania Code, shall be afforded the protections of the
Contracts Clause or Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, or similar provisions
from the Pennsylvania Constitution.
It shall be unlawful for any corporation or its directors, officers, owners, or managers to interfere
with the existence and flourishing of natural communities or ecosystems, or to cause damage to
those natural communities and ecosystems. The Borough of Tamaqua, along with any resident of
the Borough, shall have standing to seek declaratory, injunctive, and compensatory relief for
damages caused to natural communities and ecosystems within the Borough, regardless of the
relation of those natural communities and ecosystems to Borough residents or the Borough itself.
Borough residents, natural communities, and ecosystems shall be considered to be "persons" for
purposes of the enforcement of the civil rights of those residents, natural communities, and
ecosystems.
All residents of Tamaqua Borough possess a fundamental and inalienable right to a healthy
environment, which includes the right to unpolluted air, water, soils, flora, and fauna. All residents
of the Borough possess a fundamental and inalienable right to the integrity of their bodies, and
thus have a right to be free from unwanted invasions of their bodies by pollutants.
§ 260-62. Application and testing requirements.
Before each and every truckload of sewage sludge is land applied in Tamaqua Borough by a person,
the sewage sludge applicant must do the following:
Complete and submit to the Borough a written application in form and number provided by the
Borough and containing the name and address of the sewage sludge applicant, the name and
address of the landowner on whose land the sewage sludge is to be land applied, the location of
the land on which the sewage sludge is to be land applied, and a copy of all DEP and other
applicable state and federal permits pertaining to the land application.
Provide Tamaqua Borough with written proof of the class of sewage sludge to be land applied. If
the sludge is Class A, provide Tamaqua Borough with written proof of the Alternative in 25 Pa.
Code § 271.932(a) under which the sludge qualifies as Class A. If the sludge is Class B, provide
Tamaqua Borough with written proof of the Alternative in 25 Pa. Code § 271.932(b) under which
the sludge qualifies as Class B. For all classes of sludge, provide Tamaqua Borough with written
proof of the alternative in 25 Pa. Code § 933(b) under which the sludge purportedly satisfies DEP
vector attraction requirements. The purpose of this subsection is to confirm the class of sludge to
be applied and to identify the testing that Tamaqua Borough must conduct on the sewage sludge
and the requisite testing and collection fees under § 260-62D of this article.
Arrange for and allow Tamaqua Borough to collect the necessary sewage sludge samples from
the truckload to be land applied to have a qualified laboratory test the sludge for pollutants,
pathogens, and vector attractants regulated by DEP at 25 Pa. Code § 271.914 (pollutants),
§ 271.932 (pathogens), § 271.933 (vector attractants), and at all other applicable state and federal
regulations, as amended.
Pay Tamaqua Borough the testing and collection fees identified below and, when indicated,
provide Tamaqua Borough with the written proof requested below.
Pollutants. For all classes of sewage sludge, the testing fee for pollutants under 25 Pa. Code
§ 271.914(a)(1) will be determined based upon quotes from one or more qualified laboratories
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 149/244
(a)
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
E.
F.
G.
A.
at the time of testing.
Pathogens.
For Class B sludge under Alternative 1 of 25 Pa. Code § 271.932(b), the testing fee to
test seven samples for fecal coliform will be determined based upon quotes from one or
more qualified laboratories at the time of testing.
For Class B sludge under Alternatives 2 and 3 of 25 Pa. Code § 271.932(b), the sewage
sludge applicant shall submit written proof that the sludge to be land applied has been
treated as required under the applicable Alternative.
Vector attractants.
For sewage sludge that purportedly satisfies vector attraction requirements under 25 Pa.
Code § 271.933(b)(1), (2), or (3), the testing fee for mass of volatile solids will be
determined based upon quotes from one or more qualified laboratories at the time of
testing.
For sewage sludge that purportedly satisfies vector attraction requirements under 25 Pa.
Code § 271.933(b)(4), the testing fee for SOUR will be determined based upon quotes
from one or more qualified laboratories at the time of testing.
For sewage sludge that purportedly satisfies vector attraction requirements under 25 Pa.
Code § 271.933(b)(5), (6), (7), (8), (9), or (10), the sewage sludge applicant shall submit
written proof that the sludge to be land applied satisfies the requirements under the
applicable Alternative.
Collection. For all classes of sewage sludge, the administrative fee for collection and
transportation of the sewage sludge samples for testing, and for handling the application, is
$50 per truckload of sewage sludge to be land applied.
Store the sewage sludge pursuant to all applicable DEP, federal, and state regulations (including
without limitation those at 25 Pa. Code § 275.204 and 25 Pa. Code Chapter 285) until the Borough
notifies the sewage sludge applicant whether it may land apply the sewage sludge in Tamaqua
Borough. The sewage sludge applicant shall notify Tamaqua Borough of the location of the stored
sludge and the identity of the container storing the sludge, in a manner sufficient to enable the
Borough to verify that the stored sludge is the same sludge being considered for land application.
If the land applicant does not receive permission to land apply the sewage sludge in Tamaqua
Borough, it shall follow all applicable state and federal regulations for handling and disposing of
sewage sludge that may not be land applied.
If the land applicant receives notice that it is allowed to land apply the sewage sludge in Tamaqua
Borough, it shall do so in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations.
§ 260-63. Testing procedures.
When Tamaqua Borough receives all of the following — a complete application pursuant to § 260-62A
of this article; all information required under § 260-62B of this article; and all testing and collection fees
and written proofs required under § 260-62D of this article — it shall do the following:
Collect the necessary sewage sludge samples for testing by a qualified laboratory for compliance
with DEP's pollutant regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 271.914, pathogen regulations for Class B
sludge at § 271.932, vector attractant regulations at § 271.933, and all other applicable state and
federal regulations, as amended. The Borough shall instruct the laboratory to conduct the tests in
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 150/244
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
compliance with all DEP regulations for testing sewage sludge to be land applied under the
beneficial use program.
Inform the sewage sludge applicant of the results of testing conducted pursuant to Subsection A
within 72 hours after receiving the results.
If the testing reveals that the sewage sludge contains levels of pollutants, pathogens, or vector
attractants that violate DEP regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 271.914 (pollutants), § 271.932
(pathogens), § 271.933 (vector attractants), or any other federal or state laws or regulations, as
amended, the Borough shall deny permission for the sewage sludge to be land applied in
Tamaqua Borough. Otherwise, the Borough shall grant permission for the land application.
§ 260-64. Administration.
This article shall be administered by Tamaqua Borough. The Borough may, but is not required to,
administer and enforce, at Borough expense (except as provided in § 260-62D of this article), any and
all regulations that it has adopted pursuant to § 260-60 of this article.
§ 260-65. Enforcement.
Tamaqua Borough shall enforce this article by an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. [See 53 P.S. § 66601(c.1)(2).]
Any person, corporation, or other entity that violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction thereof by a Magisterial District Judge, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of $750 for first-time violations, $1,000 for second-time violations, and $1,000 for
each subsequent violation, and shall be imprisoned to the extent allowed by law for the
punishment of summary offenses. [See 53 P.S. § 66601(c.1)(2).]
A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation occurs and for
each section of this article that is found to be violated. [See 53 P.S. § 66601(c.1)(5).]
Tamaqua Borough may also enforce this article through an action in equity brought in the Court of
Common Pleas of Schuylkill County. [See 53 P.S. § 66601 (c.1)(4).] In such an action, Tamaqua
Borough shall be entitled to recover all costs of litigation, including, without limitation, expert and
attorneys' fees.
All monies collected for violation of this article shall be paid to the Treasurer of Tamaqua Borough.
Any person, corporation, or other entity that violates, or is convicted of violating this article two or
more times shall be permanently prohibited from land applying sewage sludge in Tamaqua
Borough. This prohibition applies to that person's, corporation's, or other entity's parent, sister, and
successor companies, subsidiaries, and alter egos, and to any person, corporation, or other entity
substantially owned or controlled by the person, corporation, or other entity (including its officers,
directors, or owners) that twice violates this article, and to any person, corporation, or other entity
that substantially owns or controls the person, corporation, or other entity that twice violates this
article.
Any Borough resident shall have the authority to enforce this article through an action in equity
brought in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County. In such an action, the resident shall
be entitled to recover all costs of litigation, including, without limitation, expert and attorneys' fees.
§ 260-66. Civil rights enforcement.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 151/244
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
Any person acting under the authority of a permit issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection, any corporation operating under a state charter, or any director, officer, owner, or
manager of a corporation operating under a state charter, who deprives any Borough resident,
natural community, or ecosystem of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by this article, the
Pennsylvania Constitution, the United States Constitution, or other laws, shall be liable to the party
injured and shall be responsible for payment of compensatory and punitive damages and all costs
of litigation, including, without limitation, expert and attorneys' fees. Compensatory and punitive
damages paid to remedy the violation of the rights of natural communities and ecosystems shall
be paid to Tamaqua Borough for restoration of those natural communities and ecosystems.
Any Borough resident shall have standing and authority to bring an action under this article's civil
rights provisions, or under state and federal civil rights laws, for violations of the rights of natural
communities, ecosystems, and Borough residents, as recognized by § 260-61F and G of this
article.
§ 260-67. Effective date and existing DEP permit holders.
This article shall be effective five days after the date of its enactment, at which point the Ordinance
shall apply to any and all land applications of sewage sludge in Tamaqua Borough regardless of the
date of the applicable DEP permits.
§ 260-68. People's right to self-government.
The foundation for the making and adoption of this article is the people's fundamental and inalienable
right to govern themselves, and thereby secure their rights to life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness. Any
attempts to use other units and levels of government to preempt, amend, alter, or overturn this article,
or parts of this article, shall require the Borough Council to hold public meetings that explore the
adoption of other measures that expand local control and the ability of residents to protect their
fundamental and inalienable right to self-government.
Chapter 267. Solid-Fuel-Burning Equipment
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 636.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 267-1. Title and scope.
This chapter shall be known as the "External Solid-Fuel-Burning and Heating Appliance
Ordinance."
This chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of Borough residents from
unreasonable dust, noxious odors, fumes, smells and unhealthy conditions caused by emissions
that cross property lines because smoke stays close to the ground and can easily reach humans
working and playing outdoors and even penetrate neighboring buildings. The low-lying smoke can
contribute to and worsen cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, and be an irritant to the eyes
and lungs.
§ 267-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all new outdoor solid-fuel-burning furnaces within Tamaqua Borough.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 152/244
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
This chapter does not apply to grilling, cooking using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in
cooking or grilling appliances.
This chapter does not apply to burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within
a building or structure used for human or animal habitation.
This chapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in
a device intended for heating, construction or maintenance activities.
§ 267-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHIMNEY
Any vertical structure enclosing a flue or flues that carry off smoke or exhaust from a solid fuel
fired outdoor heating appliance. An outdoor appliance utilizing a heat pump or one of the following
fuel sources: solar energy, electric, oil propane, gas or natural gas will not be included in this
definition and the same are exempt from the prohibitions provided for in this chapter.
EXTERNAL SOLID-FUEL-BURNING AND HEATING APPLIANCE
Hereafter called "appliance," any device including a furnace, stove or boiler designed and
constructed to burn solid fuels, including wood, coal, or other solid fuels and situated outdoors,
and not situated within a building intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals, which is
used for the primary purpose of combustion of solid fuel to produce heat for energy as a heating
system, or component thereof, which provides heat or hot water to the principal structure, to a
structure used for human or animal habitation, or to any accessory uses or structures, including,
but not limited to, greenhouses, swimming pools, out buildings, etc.
UCC
The Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
§ 267-4. Permit requirements and procedures.
A zoning permit and a Uniform Construction Code (UCC) permit shall be required for the
installation and operation of the appliance within the Borough of Tamaqua.
A zoning permit application shall be submitted to the Borough Zoning/Code Enforcement Officer
by the owner or authorized representative of the owner on a form provided by the Borough and
shall be accompanied by a fee established by the Borough.
A UCC inspection permit shall be filled out by the owner or authorized representative of the owner
on a form provided by the inspection company and shall be accompanied by the fees established
by the inspection service which will perform the required inspections on the installation and
operation of the appliance.
Before a permit can be issued, an inspection of the proposed installation shall be required. In
addition, a site plan is required showing the location of the proposed appliance on the property,
location and height of all existing structures on the property, and distances from the appliance to
existing structures on the property. The manufacturer's specifications and instructions shall also be
furnished to the Borough before a permit can be issued.
Any permit issued by the Borough Zoning/Code Enforcement Officer for the installation and
operation of the appliance may be revoked to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Borough of Tamaqua.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 153/244
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[1]
(7)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
§ 267-5. Regulations.
Any appliance shall only be permitted to burn fuels approved by the manufacturer of the outdoor
fuel-burning appliance.
The following materials may not be burned in any appliance:
Rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, food wasted, food wraps, packaging, animal
carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite shingles, demolition debris or other
household or business wastes.
Waste oil or other oily wastes.
Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
Treated or painted wood, including, but not limited to, plywood, composite wood products or
other wood products that are painted, varnished, or treated with preservatives.
Any plastic material, including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, polystyrene or urethane foam.
Rubber, including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper and other materials that
must be recycled in accordance with the Borough of Tamaqua Recycling Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 273, Solid Waste, Art. I, Recycling.
The appliance shall be permitted in any zoning district on not less than five acres and not less
than 200 feet from any lot line.
Any appliance shall have a minimum chimney height of 20 feet or the maximum height allowable
by the manufacturer. If less than 20 feet, you must provide the Borough with documentation from
the manufacturer confirming the restriction.
All appliances shall be installed, operated and maintained in strict compliance with the
manufacturers' instructions and guidelines for the said appliance. In the event that a conflict arises
between the manufacturers' instructions and regulations, and the regulations contained in this
chapter, the stricter instructions or regulations shall apply.
All appliances shall comply with emissions standards as required for outdoor solid-fuel-burning
appliances, as promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). For purposes of this
chapter, all emission standards currently required by the EPA are hereby adopted by reference as
well as any amendments or modifications made to them hereafter.
All ashes or waste may be disbursed on the property where the appliance is located. Any large
accumulation of ashes or waste must be disposed of in a manner approved by the Borough of
Tamaqua and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
All appliances shall be used for the sole purpose of furnishing heat and/or hot water to a dwelling
or other structure pursuant to a permit issued hereunder, including residential swimming pools.
Outdoor solid-fuel-burning appliances on lots less than 10 acres shall not be operated from May
15 to September 15. Any outdoor solid-fuel-burning appliance on lots of 10 acres or more may be
operated through out the calendar year.
In the event the appliance is damaged or physically deteriorated more than 50%, the appliance
must be removed and/or replaced with a new unit within 60 days of the date that notice is received
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 154/244
A.
B.
from the Borough of Tamaqua. In such event, all provisions of this chapter, including but, not
limited to, the permitting procedures shall be complied with.
§ 267-6. Liability.
A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor solid-fuel-burning appliance shall be responsible for all fire
suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused by a fire.
§ 267-7. Right of entry and inspection.
Any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of the Borough of Tamaqua may inspect any
property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If access is
defined, access shall be obtained pursuant to applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 267-8. Enforcement and penalties.
The Code Enforcement and Zoning Officer, authorized officer, agent, or representative of the
Borough of Tamaqua is authorized to enforce any provisions of this chapter.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 or less than $200, and in
default of payment of said fine, be subject to imprisonment for a term of not more than 30 days.
Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be deemed to be and shall constitute a
separate offense hereunder.
Chapter 273. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 116.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 246
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 260.
Article I. Recycling
[Adopted 5-22-1991 by Ord. No. 467]
§ 273-1. Definitions.
As used in the article, the following words are intended to include and be defined as follows:
RECYCLABLES
Solid waste consisting of glass, metals and/or plastic materials.
SOLID WASTE
Materials or substances discharged or rejected as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to
the owner at the time of such discard or rejection, except sewage and other highly diluted watercarried
materials or substances and those in gaseous form. Such waste shall include. but not be
limited to, garbage, sludge, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residue, street cleanings, dead animals,
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 155/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
offal, abandoned vehicles, agricultural waste, industrial waste, commercial waste, and
construction and demolition debris.
§ 273-2. Recyclables.
Recyclables shall be separated from all other solid waste.
Recyclables such as glass and plastic shall be placed in special containers supplied by the
Borough of Tamaqua. Caps shall be removed from glass and plastic recyclables and labels shall
be removed from metal recyclables prior to the collection, removal or disposal of the same.
Recyclables shall not be placed in the same garbage can as or otherwise mixed with other forms
of solid waste for collection, removal or disposal.
It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of solid waste which consists of
recyclables combined with other forms of solid waste.
Ownership of recyclables set out for collection shall thereupon vest in the Borough of Tamaqua. It
shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of recyclables which are property of
the Borough of Tamaqua without first having obtained a contract and/or license required by the
Borough of Tamaqua. A person who collects or removes recyclables which belong to the Borough
of Tamaqua shall deliver and dispose of same at such locations as the Borough Manager shall
designate for that purpose.
The Borough Manager is empowered to designate the day of the week on which recyclables shall
be collected, removed and disposed of from a particular area. Recyclables shall not be collected,
removed or disposed of from that area on any day of the week other than that designated by the
Borough Manager.
The condition of all recyclable containers supplied by the Borough shall be the sole responsibility
of the property owner of each dwelling, apartment, or dwelling unit. It shall be the responsibility of
the property owner to replace any recyclable container which is lost, or damaged to such an extent
that it can no longer serve the purpose for which it was intended. In the event of such loss or
damage, the Borough of Tamaqua shall replace the lost or damaged recyclable container in
accordance with a price schedule determined by the Borough Manager.
§ 273-3. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of § 273-2A, B, C, D or E shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any
person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or
penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill
County correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense.
Article II. Garbage and Refuse Collection
[Adopted 6-6-2006 by Ord. No. 611]
§ 273-4. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 156/244
A.
B.
C.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ASHES
The residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible material.
DISPOSAL
The storage, collection, disposal, or handling of refuse.
GARBAGE
All animal, fish, fruit, vegetable matter, and wastes resulting from handling, preparation, cooking or
consumption of foods.
HOUSEHOLD
A housing unit and shall include a room, rooms, apartment, house or houses when occupied or
intended to be occupied as living quarters with kitchen or cooking equipment therein.
PERSON
All natural persons, associations, partnerships, firms or corporations.
REFUSE
All solid wastes except body wastes and shall include garbage, ashes and rubbish.
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY
The Department of Sanitation of the Borough of Tamaqua as named by the Borough Council and
shall be authorized and directed to implement and enforce the provisions of this article either by
Department action or through their authorized agent or representative. If no Department of
Sanitation, then the Tamaqua Borough Council shall act.
RUBBISH
Glass, metal, paper, rags, plant growth or nonputrescible (i.e., not liable to undergo bacterial
decomposition when in contact with air or moisture at ordinary temperatures), solid wastes, or any
other organic substance subject to fermentation and decay, excelsior, cartons, old clothes and
shoes, straw, empty cans, plastics, grass, weeds, brick, tile, china, oyster and clam shells, lawn
trimmings, baskets, furniture and furnishings, and other waste materials which will result from the
ordinary conduct of house cleaning. Rubbish shall not include items required to be recycled as
defined by Article I, Recycling, of this chapter.
§ 273-5. Administration.
All refuse accumulated in the Borough of Tamaqua shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of
by the Borough of Tamaqua; provided, however, that the responsible authority may require any
person or persons owning or occupying any premises whose accumulated refuse at each time of
collection is in excess of six refuse containers not to exceed 50 pounds each, plus all ashes and a
maximum of one bulky item not to exceed 275 pounds, to personally collect, convey, and dispose
of such refuse in accordance with all regulations for collection, conveyance, and disposal
prescribed in this article or made by Borough Council or responsible authority, or to pay such
additional fees as may be required for the removal thereof.
The cost of the service for collection of refuse under this article as fixed from time to time by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua shall be borne and paid by the owner of the premises
from which refuse is accumulated and disposed of, and the person producing the refuse, or
responsible for the existence or disposal thereof, or for whom such refuse is removed, if such
person shall not be the owner, shall be jointly and severally liable with the owner for the payment
of said cost.
Borough Council is hereby authorized to contract for the performance of the services provided by
this article and to award a contract therefore from time to time for such period of time as shall be
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 157/244
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
determined by Borough Council, which contract shall require the contractor to assume all
responsibility of the collection of refuse in the Borough of Tamaqua in accordance with the
provisions of this article and regulations, orders, and specifications provided under the authority
thereof, and to convey, dump, and dispose of all such refuse at a place as shall be determined
and designated by the Borough Council and to fix and regulate in a manner not inconsistent with
the terms of this article, and the manner, method, and time of collecting and conveying refuse, the
type of equipment required for the purpose and the price to be paid for the performance of said
contract and the time or times for the payment thereof.
Residents with a home occupation that is registered with the Borough in compliance with local
zoning and applicable federal, state, and local regulations, shall be permitted a maximum of eight
refuse containers not to exceed 50 pounds each plus all ashes and a maximum of one bulky item
not to exceed 275 pounds each as defined in the then current contract entered into by the
Borough to dispose of the same shall be placed on sidewalks on regular garbage pickup days.
No receptacles, containers, bags or large items shall be placed on an alley, street, sidewalk or
other public place or in front of any building, residence or business establishment, except when
being placed for collection, and then, no earlier than the time established by resolution adopted
from time to time by the Borough of Tamaqua.
The collection and disposal of refuse in the Borough of Tamaqua shall be under the supervision of
the responsible authority. It shall have authority to make regulations concerning the days of
collection, type, and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the
collection and disposal as it may deem advisable, and to change and modify the same after notice
as required by law, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof. An
aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal against any regulation or order made by the
responsible authority to the Borough Council which may confirm, modify or revoke any such
regulation or order, provided, however, that no such appeal to Borough Council shall be permitted
as to any regulation covered by this article, or any regulation or order of the responsible authority
which shall have been approved by the Borough Council.
The responsible authority is authorized to arrange with the contractor, subject to the approval of
Borough Council, dates scheduled for the collection of refuse in the various categories and
sections of the Borough and shall give public notice thereof. Such schedules shall provide for one
collection for each and every week throughout the year. No collections shall be made on Sundays
or the following holidays: New Year's Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving and Christmas. All collections shall be made between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., provided that collections may be made after 5:00 p.m. to complete a day's schedule.
All persons within the Borough of Tamaqua, other than those excluded under Subsection A of this
section, shall dispose of refuse by the municipal collection service only and no person shall
transport or dispose of refuse by any means not approved by this article or by the responsible
authority.
The responsible authority is authorized to make regulations concerning the hauling of refuse over
the streets of the Borough of Tamaqua. No refuse shall be hauled over the streets of the Borough
of Tamaqua except in a watertight vehicle provided with a tight cover so as to prevent offensive
odors escaping there from and refuse from being blown, dropped, or spilled therefrom. No refuse
shall be dumped or disposed of within the limits of the Borough of Tamaqua except at a place as
shall be designated and determined by Borough Council.
Ownership of refuse set out for collection shall be vested in the Borough of Tamaqua.
§ 273-6. Precollection and storage practices.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 158/244
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
Separation of refuse. Garbage, ashes, rubbish and refuse shall be included in the regular
collection service and it shall not be necessary to separate these different types of refuse.
Preparation of refuse.
All garbage before being placed in garbage cans for collection shall have drained from it all
free liquids and may be wrapped in paper.
All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection.
All cans and bottles which have contained food shall be thoroughly rinsed and drained before
being deposited for collection.
Tree trimmings, hedge clippings, demolition debris and similar materials shall be cut to length
not to exceed five feet and tied in bundles not more than three feet thick before being
deposited for collection.
All rubbish should not be loose but packaged in a waterproof container.
Refuse containers.
Garbage receptacles shall be made of metal or plastic, must be watertight, and be provided
with a tight-fitting cover.
No person shall use for the reception of garbage any receptacle having the capacity of more
than 50 pounds.
All garbage receptacles shall be kept as sanitary as possible in view of the use to which they
are put, and shall be cleansed by the occupants after garbage is removed by the collector.
Ash receptacles shall be of metal and have a capacity of not more than 50 pounds.
Rubbish receptacles shall be of a suitable kind which can be easily handled by one man.
All refuse receptacles shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the
premises.
All refuse receptacles shall be maintained in good condition. Any receptacle that does not
conform to the provisions of this article or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other
defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly
replaced upon notice. Failure to comply may result in refusal to collect or the removal of the
defective receptacle as refuse.
§ 273-7. Collection practices.
Points of collection.
Refuse receptacles shall be placed for collection at ground level on the property, not within
the right-of-way of a street or alley, and accessible to and not more than 20 feet from the side
of the street or alley from which collection is made, provided that receptacles may be placed
for collection at other than ground level and at a distance of more than 20 feet when approved
by the responsible authority and an additional payment for the extra service is agreed upon by
both parties. Only one collection location shall be used for each individual property and in no
event shall the front and rear of the property be used as a collection location simultaneously.
Refuse receptacles shall be kept in the rear of the house, apartment building, storeroom,
restaurant, etc. At no time shall any vessels, receptacles or containers be placed or kept upon
an alley, street, sidewalk or other public place, or in front of any building, residence, or retail
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 159/244
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
or wholesale establishment, except when being placed for collection in accordance with
Subsection A(1) hereof, and then, in no event earlier than 24 hours prior to the time
scheduled for collection. Following collection, said vessels, receptacles or containers shall be
returned to the place or places as designated herein within 24 hours after pickup.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Frequency of collection.
Garbage, rubbish, ashes, and refuse shall be collected at least once each week.
Hotels, restaurants, and such other businesses and institutions as deem it necessary may
enter into an agreement for a greater frequency of collection. Where necessary to protect the
public health, the responsible authority may require that more frequent collections be made.
Limitation of quantity.
It is the intent of this article that the reasonable accumulation of refuse to each family for the
collection period will be collected for the standard charge. The responsible authority and
contractor may refuse to collect unreasonable amounts or may make an additional charge for
such amounts.
It is the intent of this article that large restaurants, hotels, apartments, and other businesses
and institutions shall have their reasonable accumulations of refuse for the collection period
collected at a fair charge based upon the average weight or volume.
§ 273-8. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the
Borough of Tamaqua or dispose of any refuse accumulated in said Borough in any manner not
approved of in this article or subsequent regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any refuse in any street, alley, or other public place or
upon private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the Borough except it be in
proper receptacles for collection. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or
other body of water.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any accumulation of refuse on any premises in the
Borough of Tamaqua other than for the purpose of collection in the manner provided by this article,
or by special regulation of Borough Council or the responsible authority. Any unauthorized
accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
Failure to remove unauthorized accumulation of refuse within 15 days of notice to either the
occupant or owner shall be deemed a violation of this article.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the occupants of the premises on which refuse
receptacles are stored, or the collector, to remove the covers of any of the refuse receptacles or to
remove the refuse stored in such containers.
It shall be unlawful to place in any containers for regular collection any wearing apparel, bedding,
or refuse from premises where highly infectious or contagious disease has prevailed, or any highly
inflammable or explosive refuse.
It shall be unlawful to dump, burn, bury, or destroy or otherwise dispose of refuse within the
jurisdictional limits of the Borough of Tamaqua other than at the Borough approved disposal site.
§ 273-9. Fees, penalties, discounts and delinquencies.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 160/244
A.
B.
The fees for the collection and disposal of refuse shall be determined each year by resolution of
Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua. Public notice of the fee schedule shall be made by
the responsible authority.
All bills for sanitation service shall be due and payable as of the date thereof. If bills for sanitation
services shall not be paid within 30 days after such shall become due and payable, a penalty of
10% per quarter shall be added. Payments mailed and postmarked on or before the 30th day shall
be deemed to be payments within the period allowed for payment without penalty. If such 30th day
shall be a legal holiday or a Sunday, payments made on or mailed and postmarked on the next
succeeding business day not a legal holiday shall be deemed to be payments within the period
allowed for payment without penalty.
[Amended 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 662; 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 703]
§ 273-10. Violations and penalties.
[Added 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 710]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by
summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense.
Article III. Corporate Waste and Local Control
[Adopted 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 620]
§ 273-11. Title.
The name of this article shall be the "Tamaqua Borough Corporate Waste and Local Control
Ordinance."
§ 273-12. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings defined in this section wherever they are used in this
article:
BENEFICIAL USE
Use or reuse of residual waste or material derived from residual waste for commercial, industrial
or governmental purposes. (See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 271, Subchapter A, § 271.1.)
BOROUGH
Tamaqua Borough in Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, its Borough Council, or its representatives
or agents.
CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC WASTE
Waste, defined under Title 25, § 271.1 of the Pennsylvania Code, which results from the
production or use of antineoplastic agents used for the purpose of inhibiting or stopping the growth
of malignant cells or killing malignant cells.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 161/244
A.
B.
COAL ASH
Waste, defined under Title 25, § 287.1 of the Pennsylvania Code, including fly ash, bottom ash or
boiler slag resulting from the combustion of coal, that is or has been beneficially used, reused or
reclaimed for a commercial, industrial or governmental purpose. The term includes such materials
that are stored, processed, transported or sold for beneficial use, reuse or reclamation. For
purposes of this article, the term also includes fly ash, bottom ash or boiler slag resulting from the
combustion of coal, that is not and has not been beneficially used, reused or reclaimed for a
commercial, industrial or governmental purpose. This definition explicitly does not include
individually generated residential coal ash on residential premises.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
Waste, defined under Title 25, § 271.1 of the Pennsylvania Code, which results from the
construction or demolition of buildings and other structures, including, but not limited to, wood,
plaster, metals, asphaltic surfaces, bricks, block and unsegregated concrete.
CORPORATION
Any corporation organized under the laws of any state of the United States or under the laws of
any country. The term shall also include any limited partnership, limited liability partnership,
business trust, or limited liability company organized under the laws of any state of the United
States or under the laws of any country, and any other business entity that possesses stateconferred
limited liability attributes for its owners, directors, officers, and/or managers. The term
shall also include any business entity in which one or more owners or partners is a corporation or
other entity in which owners, directors, officers and/or managers possess limited liability attributes.
DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DREDGED MATERIAL
Material, defined under Title 25, § 271.1 of the Pennsylvania Code, which is dredged or excavated
from waters for the direct or indirect purpose of establishing or increasing water depth, or
increasing the surface or cross-sectional area of a waterway and which includes sediment, soil,
mud, shells, gravel, or other aggregate.
ENGAGE IN THE DISPOSAL
A phrase that includes, but is not limited to, any activities associated with the disposal of wastes
within the Borough of Tamaqua.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Waste, defined under Title 25, § 271.1 of the Pennsylvania Code, which includes garbage, refuse,
or sludge from an industrial or other wastewater treatment plant; sludge from a water supply
treatment plant or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material, including solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from municipal, commercial, industrial,
institutional, mining, or agricultural operations, and from community activities; or a combination of
the above, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or increase in morbidity in either
an individual or the total population; or
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
INFECTIOUS WASTE
Waste, defined under Title 25, § 271.1 of the Pennsylvania Code, which is generated in the
diagnosis, treatment, immunization or autopsy of human beings or animals, in research pertaining
thereto, in the preparation of human or animal remains for interment or cremation, or in the
production or testing of biologicals.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 162/244
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
ORDINANCE
The Tamaqua Borough Corporate Waste and Local Control Ordinance.
PCB-CONTAINING WASTE
Waste, defined under Title 25, § 271.1 of the Pennsylvania Code, which contains polychlorinated
biphenyls in any measurable concentration.
PERSON
A natural person.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
Materials, as defined under Title 25, § 271.1 of the Pennsylvania Code, which spontaneously emit
alpha or beta particles or photons (gamma radiation) in the process of decay or transformation of
the atom's nucleus. This term shall include, but not be limited to, source, special nuclear or
byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.[1]
RESIDUAL WASTE
Waste, defined under Title 25, § 271.1 of the Pennsylvania Code, which includes solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, mining, and agricultural
operations; and sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply treatment facility,
wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control facility, if not hazardous. This definition
explicitly excludes "sewage sludge," or "sludge" as defined by Ch. 260, Sewers and Sewage
Disposal, Art. VI, Sewage Sludge.
SYNDICATE
Any limited partnership, limited liability partnership, business trust, or limited liability company
organized under the laws of any state of the United States or any country. A syndicate shall not
include general partnerships, except general partnerships in which corporations or other limited
liability business entities are partners.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 2011 through 2394.
§ 273-13. Authority.
This article is adopted and enacted pursuant to the right of self-government of the residents of
Tamaqua, and by the authority granted to the Borough by all relevant state and federal laws, including,
but not limited to, the following:
The Declaration of Independence, which declares that governments are instituted to secure
people's rights, and that government derives its just powers from the consent of the governed.
The Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which declares, "The enumeration in the
Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the
people."
The Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which declares, "The powers not
delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved
to the States respectively, or to the people."
The Pennsylvania Constitution, Article 1, § 2, which declares that "All power is inherent in the
people, and all free governments are founded on their authority and instituted for their peace,
safety, and happiness."
The Pennsylvania Constitution, Article 1, § 27, which declares that "The people have a right to
clean air, pure water, and to the preservation of the natural, scenic, historic and esthetic values of
the environment."
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 163/244
[1]
F.
G.
H.
A.
The Borough Code, Chapter 12, Section 1202(5),[1] which establishes the authority of Borough
governments in the commonwealth to adopt ordinances "as may be necessary for the health,
safety, morals, general welfare and cleanliness, and the beauty, convenience, comfort and safety
of the Borough."
Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202(5).
The Borough Code, Chapter 12, § 1202(20)(i)(A), which establishes the authority of Borough
governments in the commonwealth to adopt ordinances to prohibit, within the Borough, "the
carrying on of any manufacture, art, trade, or business which may be noxious or offensive . . . to . .
. the inhabitants."
The Borough Code, Chapter 12, § 1203, which establishes the general power of Borough
governments in the commonwealth to make and adopt ordinances that "may be expedient or
necessary for the proper management, care and control of the borough and its finances and the
maintenance of peace, good government, safety and welfare of the borough and its trade,
commerce and manufactures."
§ 273-14. Findings and purpose.
The general purpose of this article is to recognize that corporations engaged in certain types of waste
storage, "beneficial use" and/or waste disposal within the Borough constitute a threat to the health,
safety, welfare, and rights of the residents of Tamaqua Borough due to the limited liability of those
corporations, which may prevent full recovery for damages in the event of injuries caused to Borough
residents. That limited liability privilege shields and protects the individuals operating the corporation,
and thus serves to thwart any deterrent effect from lawsuits brought to remedy injuries caused by
those persons using the corporation to engage in waste disposal. The Borough of Tamaqua declares
that persons using corporations to store or dump dredged material, coal ash, sewage sludge,
construction and demolition (C&D) waste, radioactive material, and other waste deemed by the
Borough to be hazardous, toxic, or dangerous, place the residents of the Borough at increasing risk,
due to the harmful and dangerous composition of those wastes. The Borough of Tamaqua also
declares that corporations, engaging in waste disposal in any neighboring municipality, that causes
harm to residents of the Borough of Tamaqua, shall be held strictly liable for the migration of toxic and
hazardous contaminants across municipal borders. The Borough of Tamaqua also declares that waste
management, "beneficial use" of waste, waste disposal and mine "reclamation" corporations
increasingly determine waste policy in the commonwealth and that the Borough must take affirmative
steps to subordinate the powers of those corporations to the will of the majority within the Borough of
Tamaqua.
§ 273-15. Interpretation.
Anyone interpreting, implementing, or applying this article shall give priority to the findings and
purposes stated in § 273-14 over such accounting and business terms characterized as "economy,"
"efficiency" and "scheduling factors."
§ 273-16. Statements of law.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or other entity to use a corporation or syndicate to
engage in the storage, "beneficial use," land application, or disposal of hazardous waste, coal ash,
residual waste or materials derived from residual waste, dredged material, or PCB-containing
waste, as those terms are defined within Title 25, Chapter 271 et seq., and Chapter 287 et seq. of
the Pennsylvania Code, the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,[1] and the provisions of this article, within
the Borough of Tamaqua. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or other entity to use a
corporation or syndicate to engage in the "beneficial use," land application, or disposal of
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 164/244
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
construction and demolition (C&D) waste, chemotherapeutic waste, infectious waste, or
radioactive material as those terms are defined within Title 25, Chapter 271 et seq., of the
Pennsylvania Code, the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, and the provisions of this article, within the
Borough of Tamaqua.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 2011 through 2394.
It shall be unlawful for any person to assist a corporation to engage in the storage, "beneficial
use," land application, or disposal of hazardous waste, coal ash, residual waste or materials
derived from residual waste, dredged material, or PCB-containing waste, as those terms are
defined within Title 25, Chapter 271 et seq., and Chapter 287 et seq. of the Pennsylvania Code,
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, and the provisions of this article, within the Borough of Tamaqua. It
shall be unlawful for any person to assist a corporation to engage in the "beneficial use," land
application, or disposal of construction and demolition (C&D) waste, chemotherapeutic waste,
infectious waste, or radioactive material as those terms are defined within Title 25, Chapter 271 et
seq., of the Pennsylvania Code, the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, and the provisions of this article,
within the Borough of Tamaqua.
It shall be unlawful for any corporation to engage in the storage, "beneficial use," land application,
or disposal of hazardous waste, coal ash, residual waste or materials derived from residual waste,
dredged material, or PCB-containing waste, as those terms are defined within Title 25, Chapter
271 et seq., and Chapter 287 et seq. of the Pennsylvania Code, the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
and the provisions of this article, within the Borough of Tamaqua. It shall be unlawful for any
corporation to engage in the "beneficial use," land application, or disposal of construction and
demolition (C&D) waste, chemotherapeutic waste, infectious waste, or radioactive material as
those terms are defined within Title 25, Chapter 271 et seq., of the Pennsylvania Code, the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, and the provisions of this article, within the Borough of Tamaqua.
It shall be unlawful for any director, officer, owner, or manager of a corporation to use a
corporation to engage in the storage, "beneficial use," land application, or disposal of hazardous
waste, coal ash, residual waste or materials derived from residual waste, dredged material, or
PCB-containing waste, as those terms are defined within Title 25, Chapter 271 et seq., and
Chapter 287 et seq. of the Pennsylvania Code, the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, and the provisions
of this article, within the Borough of Tamaqua. It shall be unlawful for any director, officer, owner, or
manager of a corporation to use a corporation to engage in the "beneficial use," land application,
or disposal of construction and demolition (C&D) waste, chemotherapeutic waste, infectious
waste, or radioactive material as those terms are defined within Title 25, Chapter 271 et seq., of
the Pennsylvania Code, the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, and the provisions of this article, within
the Borough of Tamaqua.
Within the Borough of Tamaqua, corporations engaged in the storage, "beneficial use," land
application, or disposal of hazardous waste, coal ash, residual waste, dredged material, PCBcontaining
waste, or radioactive material as those terms are defined within Title 25, Chapter 271 et
seq. and Chapter 287 et seq., of the Pennsylvania Code, the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, and the
provisions of this article, shall not be "persons" under the United States or Pennsylvania
Constitutions, or under the laws of the United States, Pennsylvania, or Tamaqua Borough, and so
shall not have the rights of persons under those constitutions and laws. Nor shall they be afforded
the protections of the Contracts Clause or Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, or
similar provisions from the Pennsylvania Constitution, within the Borough of Tamaqua. Within the
Borough of Tamaqua, corporations engaged in the "beneficial use," land application, or disposal of
construction and demolition (C&D) waste, chemotherapeutic waste, infectious waste, as those
terms are defined within Title 25, Chapter 271 et seq. and Chapter 287 et seq. of the Pennsylvania
Code, the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, and the provisions of this article, shall not be "persons"
under the United States or Pennsylvania Constitutions, or under the laws of the United States,
Pennsylvania, or Tamaqua Borough, and so shall not have the rights of persons under those
constitutions and laws. Nor shall they be afforded the protections of the Contracts Clause or
Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, or similar provisions from the Pennsylvania
Constitution, within the Borough of Tamaqua.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 165/244
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any corporation or its directors, officers, owners, or managers to interfere
with the existence and flourishing of natural communities or ecosystems, or to cause damage to
those natural communities and ecosystems. The Borough of Tamaqua, along with any resident of
the Borough, shall have standing to seek declaratory, injunctive, and compensatory relief for
damages caused to natural communities and ecosystems within the Borough, regardless of the
relation of those natural communities and ecosystems to Borough residents or the Borough itself.
Borough residents, natural communities, and ecosystems shall be considered to be "persons" for
purposes of the enforcement of the civil rights of those residents, natural communities, and
ecosystems.
All residents of Tamaqua Borough possess a fundamental and inalienable right to a healthy
environment, which includes the right to unpolluted air, water, soils, flora, and fauna. All residents
of the Borough possess a fundamental and inalienable right to the integrity of their bodies, and
thus have a right to be free from unwanted invasions of their bodies by pollutants. The residents of
Tamaqua Borough possess a fundamental and inalienable right to self-government and a
republican form of government.
Any corporation engaging in, or planning to engage in, the storage, "beneficial use" or disposal of
waste in violation of this article shall not possess limited liability attributes within the Borough of
Tamaqua for the purposes of the enforcement of this article. Directors, officers, owners, and/or
managers of that corporation shall be personally liable for violations of this article.
Persons using corporations to engage in the types of waste storage, "beneficial use" or waste
disposal addressed by this article in a neighboring municipality shall be strictly liable for all harms
caused to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Tamaqua Borough from those
activities, and for all harms caused to ecosystems and natural communities within Tamaqua
Borough.
No permit, license, privilege or charter issued by any state or federal regulatory agency,
commission or board to any person or any corporation operating under a state charter, or any
director, officer, owner, or manager of a corporation operating under a state charter, which would
violate the provisions of this article or deprive any Borough resident, natural community, or
ecosystem of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by this article, the Pennsylvania
Constitution, the United States Constitution, or other laws, shall be deemed valid within the
Borough of Tamaqua. Additionally, any employee, agent or representative of any state or federal
regulatory agency, commission or board who issues a permit, license, privilege or charter to any
person or any corporation operating under a state charter, or any director, officer, owner, or
manager of a corporation operating under a state charter, which would violate the provisions of
this article or deprive any Borough resident, natural community, or ecosystem of any rights,
privileges, or immunities secured by this article, the Pennsylvania Constitution, the United States
Constitution, or other laws, shall be liable to the party injured and shall be responsible for payment
of compensatory and punitive damages and all costs of litigation, including, without limitation,
expert and attorneys' fees. Compensatory and punitive damages paid to remedy the violation of
the rights of natural communities and ecosystems shall be paid to the Borough of Tamaqua for
restoration of those natural communities and ecosystems.
§ 273-17. Enforcement.
Tamaqua Borough shall enforce this article by an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense
and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 166/244
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the
Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation occurs and for
each section of this article that is found to be violated.
Tamaqua Borough may also enforce this article through an action in equity brought in the Court of
Common Pleas of Schuylkill County. In such an action, Tamaqua Borough shall be entitled to
recover all costs of litigation, including, without limitation, expert and attorneys' fees.
All monies collected for violation of this article shall be paid to the Treasurer of Tamaqua Borough.
Any person, corporation, or other entity that violates, or is convicted of violating, this article two or
more times shall be permanently prohibited from engaging in business in Tamaqua Borough. This
prohibition applies to that person's, corporation's, or other entity's parent, sister, and successor
companies, subsidiaries, and alter egos, and to any person, corporation, or other entity
substantially owned or controlled by the person, corporation, or other entity (including its officers,
directors, or owners) that twice violates this article, and to any person, corporation, or other entity
that substantially owns or controls the person, corporation, or other entity that twice violates this
article.
Any Borough resident shall have the authority to enforce any section of this article through an
action in equity brought in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County. In such an action, the
resident shall be entitled to recover all costs of litigation, including, without limitation, expert and
attorneys fees.
§ 273-18. Civil rights enforcement.
Any person acting under the authority of a permit issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection, any corporation operating under a state charter, or any director, officer, owner, or
manager of a corporation operating under a state charter, who deprives any Borough resident,
natural community, or ecosystem of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by this article, the
Pennsylvania Constitution, the United States Constitution, or other laws, shall be liable to the party
injured and shall be responsible for payment of compensatory and punitive damages and all costs
of litigation, including, without limitation, expert and attorneys' fees. Compensatory and punitive
damages paid to remedy the violation of the rights of natural communities and ecosystems shall
be paid to the Borough of Tamaqua for restoration of those natural communities and ecosystems.
Any Borough resident shall have standing and authority to bring an action under this article's civil
rights provisions, or under state and federal civil rights laws, for violations of the rights of natural
communities, ecosystems, or Borough residents, as recognized by the provisions of this article.
§ 273-19. People's right to self-government.
The foundation for the making and adoption of this law is the people's fundamental and inalienable
right to govern themselves, and thereby secure their rights to life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness. Any
attempts to use other units and levels of government to preempt, amend, alter, or overturn this article,
or parts of this article, shall require the Borough Council to hold public meetings that explore the
adoption of other measures that expand local control and the ability of residents to protect their
fundamental and inalienable right to self-government.
§ 273-20. Administration.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 167/244
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
A.
The Borough Council of Tamaqua Borough shall administer this article.
Chapter 286. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Street Map
Article I. Naming of Streets
[Adopted 11-30-1907 by Ord. No. 56 (Ch. XXII, Part 1A, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 286-1. Certain streets and alleys named.
Names.
All that certain street beginning at the western boundary line of the Borough of Tamaqua, and
extending east to the Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, shall be known as West
Broad Street.
All that certain street lying east of the said railroad tracks, and extending to the eastern
boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as East Broad Street. Broad Street shall be the
division line between the northern and the southern sections of the Borough, and the
Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks shall be the division line between the eastern and
the western section of the Borough.
All that certain street lying south of West Broad Street, beginning at the western boundary line
of the Borough, and extending east to the Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, shall be
known as West Cottage Avenue.
All that certain street lying south of West Cottage Avenue, beginning at the western boundary
line of the Borough, and extending east to Cherry Street shall be known as Mahanoy Street.
All that certain street lying south of Mahanoy Street, beginning at the western boundary line of
the Borough, and extending east to South Nescopeck Street, shall be known as High Street.
All that certain street lying south of High Street, beginning at the western boundary line of the
Borough, and extending east to Bow Street, shall be known as Van Gelder Street.
All that certain street lying south of Van Gelder Street, beginning at the western boundary line
of the Borough, and extending east to the Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, shall be
known as West Spruce Street.
All that certain street lying south of East Broad Street, and extending from the Philadelphia
and Reading Railway tracks to Centre Street, shall be known as East Spruce Street.
All that certain street lying south of West Spruce Street, beginning at the western boundary
line of the Borough, and extending east to Bow Street, shall be known as Race Street.
All that certain street lying south of Race Street, beginning at the western boundary line of the
Borough, and extending east to Hunter Street, shall be known as Penn Street.
All that certain street lying south of Penn Street, beginning at the western boundary line of the
Borough, and extending east to Bow Street, shall be known as South Street.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 168/244
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
All that certain street lying south of South Street, beginning at the western boundary line of
the Borough, and extending east to the Philadelphia and Reading tracks, shall be known as
Orwigsburg Street.
All that certain alley lying south of Orwigsburg Street, beginning at the western boundary line
of the Borough, and extending east to the Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, shall be
known as Ridge Alley.
All that certain street lying north of West Broad Street, beginning at the western boundary line
of the Borough, and extending east to the Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, shall be
known as Rowe Street.
All that certain street lying north of Rowe Street, beginning at the western boundary line of the
Borough, and extending east to Washington Street, shall be known as Lafayette Street.
All that certain street lying north of Lafayette Street, beginning at Pitt Street, and extending
east to Washington Street shall be known as Franklin Street.
All that certain street lying north of Franklin Street, beginning at Pitt Street, and extending
east to Washington Street, shall be known as Clay Street.
All that certain street lying north of Clay Street, beginning at Pitt Street, and extending east to
the Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, shall be known as West Union Street.
All that certain street lying north of West Union Street, beginning at Pitt Street, and extending
east to North Nescopeck Street, shall be known as Brown Street.
All that certain street lying north of Brown Street, beginning at the western boundary line of
the Borough, and extending east to Washington Street, shall be known as Jerome Street.
All that certain street lying north of Jerome Street, beginning at the western boundary line of
the Borough, and extending east to the Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, shall be
known as Elm Street.
All that certain street lying north of West Elm Street, beginning at West Street, and extending
east to the Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, shall be known as West Vine Street.
All that certain street extending along the western boundary line of the Borough, from the
north to the south line, shall be known as West Street.
All that certain street lying north of West Vine Street, beginning at West Street, and extending
east to the Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, shall be known as West Rose Street.
All that certain street extending along the western boundary line of the Borough, from the
north to the south line, shall be known as Catawissa Street.
All that certain street lying east of Catawissa Street, beginning at the northern boundary line
of the Borough, and extending south to West Cottage Avenue, shall be known as Lehigh
Street.
All that certain street lying west of Catawissa Street, beginning at West Cottage Avenue, and
extending south to Ridge Alley, shall be known as Coal Street.
All that certain street lying west of Lehigh Street, beginning at Rowe Street, and extending
north to Jerome Street, shall be known as Lombard Street.
All that certain street lying east of Lehigh Street, beginning at the southern boundary line of
the Borough, and extending north to Van Gelder Street, shall be known as Oak Street.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 169/244
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)
(40)
(41)
(42)
(43)
(44)
(45)
(46)
(47)
All that certain street lying east of Oak Street, beginning at the southern boundary line of the
Borough, and extending north to Van Gelder Street, shall be known as Green Street.
All that certain street lying east of Green Street, beginning at Orwigsburg Street, and
extending north to West Cottage Avenue, shall be known as Bow Street.
All that certain street lying east of Bow Street, beginning at the southern boundary line of the
Borough, and extending north to West Broad Street, shall be known as Hunter Street.
All that certain street lying east of Hunter Street, beginning at Orwigsburg Street, and
extending north to Mahanoy Street, shall be known as Cherry Street.
All that certain alley lying east of Lehigh Street, beginning at Lafayette Street, and extending
north to Jerome Street, shall be known as Hamilton Alley.
All that certain street lying east of Hamilton Alley, beginning at Lafayette Street and extending
north to West Elm Street, shall be known as Gay Street.
All that certain street lying east of Lehigh Street, beginning at Van Gelder Street, and
extending north to West Broad Street, shall be known as South Swatara Street.
All that certain street lying east of Lehigh Street, beginning at West Broad Street, and
extending north to Jerome Street, shall be known as North Swatara Street.
All that certain street lying east of Gay Street, beginning at Lafayette Street, and extending
north to West Elm Street, shall be known as Pitt Street.
All that certain street lying east of South Swatara Street, beginning at West Spruce Street,
and extending north to West Broad Street, shall be known as South Nescopeck Street.
All that certain street lying east of North Swatara Street, beginning at West Broad Street, and
extending north to the northern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as North
Nescopeck Street.
All that alley lying east of South Nescopeck Street, beginning at Lafayette Street, and
extending north to West Union Street, shall be known as Rock Alley.
All that certain street lying east of Rock Alley, beginning at Lafayette Street, and extending
north to the northern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as Washington Street.
All that certain street lying east of Lehigh Street, beginning at Jerome Street, and extending
north to Rose Street, shall be known as West Street.
All that certain street lying east of West Street, beginning at West Union Street, and extending
north to the northern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as Lincoln Street.
All that certain street lying partly in the west and partly on the east side of, and along the
Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, from the southern to the northern boundary lines of
the Borough, shall be known as Railroad Street.
All that certain street lying east of the Philadelphia and Reading Railway tracks, beginning at
the southern boundary line of the Borough, and extending to the north to East Broad Street,
shall be known as Centre Street.
All that certain street lying west of the Little Schuylkill River, beginning at East Cottage
Avenue, and extending north to the northern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as
Pine Street.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 170/244
(48)
(49)
(50)
(51)
(52)
(53)
(54)
(55)
(56)
(57)
(58)
(59)
(60)
(61)
(62)
All that certain street lying east of Railroad Street, beginning at Biddle Street, and extending
north to the northern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as Rolling Mill Avenue.
All that certain street lying east of Railroad Street, beginning at East Broad Street, and
extending northwardly to Pine Street, shall be known as Mauch Chunk Street.
All that certain street lying north of East Mauch Chunk Street, beginning at Railroad Street,
and extending east to the eastern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as Biddle
Street.
All that certain street lying north of East Broad Street, beginning at Pine Street and extending
east to the eastern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as East Mauch Chunk
Street.
All that certain street lying along the eastern bank of the Little Schuylkill River, beginning at
East Mauch Chunk Street, and extending north to the northern boundary line of the Borough,
shall be known as Schuylkill Avenue.
All that certain street lying east of Schuylkill Avenue, beginning at the southern boundary line
of the Borough, and extending north to East Broad Street, shall be known as South
Greenwood Street.
All that certain street lying east of Schuylkill Avenue, beginning at East Broad Street, and
extending north to the northern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as North
Greenwood Street.
All that certain street lying east of North Greenwood Street, beginning at East Broad Street,
and extending north to the northern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as Market
Street.
All that certain street lying east of Market Street, beginning at the southern boundary line of
the Borough, and extending north to East Broad Street, shall be known as South Patterson
Street.
All that certain street lying east of Market Street, and extending north to Willing Street, shall
be known as North Patterson Street.
All that certain street lying east of Patterson Street, beginning at the southern boundary line of
the Borough, and extending north to East Broad Street, shall be known as South Elizabeth
Street.
All that certain street lying east of North Patterson Street, beginning at Biddle Street, and
extending to the northern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as North Elizabeth
Street.
All that certain street lying east of South Elizabeth Street, beginning at the southern boundary
line of the Borough, and extending north to East Broad Street, shall be known as South
Columbia Street.
All that certain street lying east of North Elizabeth Street, beginning at Biddle Street, and
extending north to the northern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as North
Columbia Street.
All that certain street lying east of South Columbia Street, beginning at the southern boundary
line of the Borough, and extending north to East Broad Street, shall be known as South
Federal Street.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 171/244
(63)
(64)
(65)
(66)
(67)
(68)
(69)
(70)
(71)
(72)
(73)
(74)
(75)
(76)
(77)
(78)
All that certain street lying north of Biddle Street, beginning at Schuylkill Avenue, and
extending east to the eastern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as Willing Street.
All that certain street lying south of Willing Street, and beginning at North Patterson Street,
and extending east to the eastern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as Church
Street.
All that certain street lying north of Willing Street, beginning at Market Street, and extending
east to the eastern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as Maple Street.
All that certain street lying north of Willing Street, beginning at Railroad Street, and extending
east to the boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as East Union Street.
All that certain street lying north of East Union Street, beginning at Market Street, and
extending east to the eastern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as Birch Street.
All that certain street lying north of Birch Street, beginning at Railroad Street, north of Union
Street, and extending east to the eastern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as
East Elm Street.
All that certain street lying north of East Elm Street, beginning at Railroad Street, and
extending east to the eastern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as East Vine
Street.
All that certain street lying north of East Vine Street, beginning at Railroad Street, and
extending east to the eastern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as East Broad
Street.
All that certain street lying south of East Broad Street, beginning at Centre Street, and
extending east to the eastern boundary line of the Borough, shall be known as Hazle Street.
All that certain street lying south of East Broad Street, beginning at Centre Street, and
extending east to South Greenwood Street, shall be known as Cedar Street.
All that certain street lying east of North Nescopeck Street, beginning at West Broad Street
and extending north to Rowe Street, shall be known as Berwick Street.
All that certain street lying east of Pine Street beginning at Mauch Chunk Street and
extending south to East Rowe Street to be known as Water Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying west of Center Street beginning at Center Street and extending
west to the railroad tracks to be known as West Cottage Avenue.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying north of East Union Street beginning at Clark Street and extending
to the eastern boundary of the Borough of Tamaqua to be known as Reiley Avenue.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Brew Street beginning at Brew Street and extending east to
the borough line to be known as Walnut Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Brew Street and south of Walnut Street beginning at Brew
Street and extending east to the borough line to be known as Chestnut Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 172/244
(79)
(80)
(81)
(82)
(83)
(84)
(85)
(86)
(87)
(88)
(89)
(90)
(91)
(92)
(93)
All that certain street lying east of Patterson Street and extending north from Mauch Chunk
Street to Biddle Street to be known as Rear Mauch Chunk Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying west of North Railroad Street and extending south from Elm Street
to Biddle Street to be known as North Railroad Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of the rear of Mauch Chunk Street extending east from rear
Mauch Chunk Street to the end to be known as Spring Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Columbia Street extending south from Willing Street to
Church Street to be known as Benjamin Yost Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Center Street extending east from Center Street to
Burkhardt Moser Street to be known as East Spruce Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying south of Spruce Street extending south to the end of Tamaqua
Borough property to be known as South Railroad Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying west of Greenwood Street extending south from Mauch Chunk
Street to East Rowe Street to be known as Schuylkill Avenue.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Route 309 and extending east from Route 309 to Elizabeth
Street to be known as East Cottage Avenue.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Elizabeth Street extending north to East End Alley to be
known as South Columbia Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Route 309 extending east to the Tamaqua Borough line to
be known as. Owl Creek Road.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying west of Hunter Street. extending south from Spruce Street to
Orwigsburg Street to be known as Bowe Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying west of Laurel Street extending north from Route 209 to East End
Alley to be known as South Federal Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Federal Street beginning at the southern boundary of the
Tamaqua Borough and extending north to East End Alley to be known as Laurel Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying west of Coal Street extending from West. Cottage Avenue to Penn
Street to be known as South Lehigh Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying north of Route 209 and extending from Elizabeth Street to Laurel
Street to be known as East End Avenue.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 173/244
(94)
(95)
(96)
(97)
(98)
(99)
(100)
(101)
(102)
(103)
[1]
(104)
A.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying north of Penn Street and extending east from Coal Street to Bowe
Street to be known as South Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying south of Church Street and extending east from Columbia Street to
Clark Street to be known as Biddle Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying west of Clark Street beginning at Willing Street and extending
south to Church Street to be known as Benjamin Yost Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying north of Willing Street and extending east from Columbia Street to
Clark Street to be known as Glenwood Avenue.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Center Street and extending from East Spruce Street to
River Street to be known as Burkhardt Moser Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Route 309 and extending east from Route 309 to Burkhardt
Moser Street to be known as River Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying south of Spruce Street and extending west from Coal Street to
South Lehigh Street to be known as Race Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying west of Clark Street and extending south from Willing Street to
Biddle Street to be known as Columbia Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying east of Columbia Street and extending south from Willing Street
to Biddle Street to be known as Clark Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying south of Elm Street and extending east from Market Street to Elm
Street to be known as Elm Street.
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
All that certain street lying north of Spruce Street between Spruce Street and Van Gelder
Street to be known as Carriage Street.[1]
[Added 8-6-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
Editor's Note: Sections 2 to 8 of this article were repealed by Section 2 of Ordinance 304(1) in
1971.
Article II. Excavations and Openings
[Adopted 8-13-1968 by Ord. No. 287 (Ch. XXII, Part 1B, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 286-2. Definitions and interpretation.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 174/244
B.
PERSON
Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association or corporation.
STREET
Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway or other public place located in the
Borough of Tamaqua and established for the use of vehicles.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 286-3. Excavations permitted only in portion of street
established for vehicular use.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any kind in any street in the
Borough of Tamaqua except in and upon those portions thereof established for the use of vehicles.
§ 286-4. Permit required to open or excavate in street.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any kind in any of the streets
in the Borough of Tamaqua without first securing a permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 286-5. Application for permit.
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of the streets in the Borough of
Tamaqua shall make application to the Borough Secretary, in writing, for the purpose. Such application
shall be made upon blanks to be furnished by the Borough and shall set forth the name of the
applicant, the exact location of the proposed opening or excavation, and the approximate size or depth
thereof, and shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be done in full
compliance with the ordinances of the Borough and the laws of the commonwealth in relation thereto,
and that the applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the Borough from and
indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by reason
of the proposed opening or excavation, and all damages to persons or property resulting in any
manner therefrom, or occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith, or from any other
matter, cause or thing relating thereto.
§ 286-6. Permit fees.
[Amended 1-6-1981 by Ord. No. 391; 5-18-2004 by Ord. No. 587]
Fees shall be paid as established pursuant to a resolution of the Borough Council. Council may
establish, by resolution, such fees from time to time as it deems necessary and/or reasonable.
§ 286-7. Backfilling following opening or excavation.
Any person who shall open or excavate any improved street in the Borough shall thoroughly and
completely refill the opening or excavation, puddling and ramming so as to prevent any settling
thereafter.
§ 286-8. Permit holder's responsibility for certain work;
exceptions; authority of Borough Manager.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 175/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including excavation, protection, refilling and
temporary paving, shall be done by the applicant at his expense, and all such work shall be subject to
the provisions of this article and to the supervision and approval of the Borough Manager, provided that
the Borough Manager may require that cutting of the surface of improved streets and the backfilling of
all excavations therein shall be done by the Borough, and the charge therefor shall be paid by the
applicant on the basis of actual cost of the work plus 20%.
§ 286-9. Requirements for work; correction of unsatisfactory
work.
No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline into the highway a distance
greater than one foot beyond the center line of the street before being refilled and the surface of
the highway restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at any one time.
The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with the water mains, sewers or
their connections with the houses, or any other subsurface lines or constructions, until permission
of the proper authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or constructions shall have been
obtained.
No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the Borough Manager and
permission therefor endorsed upon the permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be
made only in the presence of the Borough Manager or an inspector designated by him, and shall
be done only in a method approved by him.
All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with suitable materials and thoroughly
compacted in layers, each of which shall not exceed six inches in depth. On improved streets, the
backfilling shall be placed to within 10 inches of the surface.
On improved streets, a temporary paving of suitable stony materials, thoroughly bound and
compacted, shall be installed flush with the surface of the adjoining paving.
During the making of any excavation in any street, every necessary and reasonable precaution
shall be taken by the applicant and the parties making the same to keep the street in a safe and
passable condition both day and night by guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices, and all
excavating permits are granted under and subject to the express condition that the person to
whom the same is issued shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the Borough from any loss in
damages, or otherwise whatsoever, which may or shall be occasioned at any time by the said
excavation, or by any leak, explosion or other injury from any pipe, apparatus, conduit, or any
other matter placed in the said excavation.
The applicant shall notify the Borough Manager when the opening or excavation is ready for
backfilling before any backfilling is done, and when the work is completed by proper backfilling in
the case of unimproved streets and by temporary paving in the case of improved streets.
In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in the opinion of the Borough
Manager, be unsatisfactory and the same shall not be corrected in accordance with his
instructions within the time fixed by him, or in the event that the work for which the permit was
granted is not completed within the time fixed by the Borough Secretary, the Borough may
proceed to correct such unsatisfactory work or complete any such work not completed, and
charge the cost thereof, plus 20%, to the applicant.
§ 286-10. Emergency work.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 176/244
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe, line, construction or
apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or
apparatus to commence an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that the application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later than the next business day
thereafter, and that all other provisions of this article are fully complied with. If any such emergency
condition shall not be immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe, line,
construction or apparatus, the Borough Manager, after such notice as he shall deem necessary under
the circumstances of the particular case, shall proceed to do the work necessary and required by such
emergency, and charge the same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such owner or person.
§ 286-11. Work requiring opening of street to be done in advance
of street paving or improvement and not for five years thereafter;
exceptions.
The Borough Manager shall give timely notice to all persons owning property abutting on any street
within the Borough to be paved or improved, and to all public utility companies operating in the
Borough, and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas, or sewer connections,
as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the said street within 30 days
from the giving of such notice unless such time is extended, in writing, for cause shown by the Borough
Manager. New paving shall not be opened for a period of five years after the completion thereof,
except in case of emergency, the existence of which emergency and the necessity for the opening of
such paving to be determined by the Borough Manager. If it is sought to excavate upon or open a
street within five years after the completion of the paving thereof for any other reason than an
emergency as above stated, the applicant shall make written application to the Borough Council, and a
permit for such opening shall only be issued after express approval of the Council.
§ 286-12. Location of new or extended mains subject to approval
of Council.
No new water, sewer or gas main shall hereafter be laid or constructed and no existing water, sewer or
gas main shall be extended in any of the streets of the Borough until the exact location thereto and the
plan therefor shall have been first approved by the Borough Council.
§ 286-13. Payment for work done by Borough; collection
remedies.
Payment for all work done by the Borough under the provisions hereof shall be made by the person
made liable therefor under the provisions hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such
person by the Borough. Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the same shall be
collectible by the Borough in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 286-14. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating or assisting in the violation of any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by
proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 177/244
A.
defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and
each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in
lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
§ 286-15. Provisions inapplicable to certain work.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs or to the planting of poles.
Article III. Sidewalk Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(23) (Ch. XXII, Part 2A, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 286-16. Property owner to construct sidewalk or curb on notice.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
It shall be the duty of every owner of real estate in the Borough of Tamaqua, on 30 days' notice from
the Borough Council, to construct a sidewalk and/or curb, which shall conform to all applicable
requirements of this notice, in front of or alongside such real estate.
§ 286-17. Property owner to repair sidewalk or curb on notice.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
It shall be the duty of every owner of real estate in the Borough of Tamaqua, on 30 days' notice from
the Borough Council, to repair the sidewalk and/or curb, in the manner stipulated in such notice, in
front of or alongside such real estate. If the Borough deems the sidewalk or curb repair an emergency,
after notice to repair within 48 hours, the Borough may make emergency repairs to the sidewalks
and/or curb, at the property owner’s expense, where the actual cost of doing the work does not exceed
$1,000.
§ 286-18. Sidewalk specifications.
[Amended 11-15-2005 by Ord. No. 608]
All sidewalks and curbs hereafter constructed, reconstructed or repaired (excluding those
sidewalks located in an area designated as a Streetscape Project by the Borough of Tamaqua),
shall be constructed, reconstructed or repaired of non-tinted concrete, concrete pavers, historic
patterned concrete, cobblestone, granite, brownstone, red sandstone, slate, brick, or brick pavers
only, in conformity to specifications adopted by the Borough Council from time to time. Provided
that any sidewalk that was lawfully constructed prior to the enactment of this article, of material
other than concrete, may be repaired of the same material, but where the condition of any such
sidewalk shall be, in the judgment of the Borough Manager, such that reconstruction thereof shall
be necessary, and repair shall not be feasible, such sidewalk shall be reconstructed of the
materials hereinabove specified. Provided, further, the width of sidewalks shall be determined by
the Borough Council at the time of notification of the property owner to construct, reconstruct, or
repair the same, but in the case of new sidewalks the width of the sidewalk, and the location and
placement of the paved portion thereof shall, insofar as the Council shall deem the same to be
feasible, conform to the standards laid down in the Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region Joint
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for sidewalks in subdivisions; but where conditions
of terrain, the volume of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic, and the width and placement of
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 178/244
[1]
B.
A.
B.
sidewalk previously constructed in the same block so indicate, the council may depart from the
said subdivision standards.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
All sidewalks and curbs located in an area designated as a Streetscape Project by the Borough of
Tamaqua hereafter constructed, reconstructed, or repaired shall be constructed, reconstructed or
repaired pursuant to the specifications adopted by the Borough Council for the designated
Streetscape Project Area.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Section 53-A of 1971 Code of Ordinances, Materials, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 11-15-2005 by Ord. No. 608.
§ 286-19. Authority for Borough to do work and collect cost plus
10% from defaulting property owner.
In case the owner of any real estate in the Borough shall fail, neglect or refuse to construct, reconstruct
and/or repair any sidewalk and/or curb, within the time limit set in the notice from the Borough Council
so to do, the Council may, after notice, cause the said construction, reconstruction or repair, as the
case may be, to be done at the cost of such owner, and shall then collect the cost of such work and
10% additional, together with all charges and expenses, from such owner, and may file a municipal
claim therefor or collect the same by action in assumpsit.
§ 286-20. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any sidewalk or curb or portion thereof constructed, reconstructed or repaired in violation of this
article or of any notice given by the Borough Council pursuant thereto, or in any respect not in
strict conformity with all applicable provisions of this article and of any notice given by the Borough
Council pursuant thereto, shall, within 30 days' notice by the Borough Council to the owner of the
real estate abutting thereupon, be removed and reconstructed by such owner, or all necessary
steps other than removal and reconstruction, as directed by Council, shall be taken by such owner
to rectify such violation or nonconformity, in default of which the Borough Council may cause such
work of reconstruction or rectification to be done and shall collect the cost thereof, and 10%
additional, together with all charges and expenses, from such owner, and may file a municipal
claim therefor or collect the same by action in assumpsit.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense
and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against
any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the
Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated
shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section,
the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
Article IV. Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(24) (Ch. XXII, Part 2B, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 286-21. Snow and ice to be removed from sidewalks within 24
hours.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 179/244
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property abutting upon or alongside any street or alley in the
Borough of Tamaqua is hereby required to remove or cause to be removed from all of the sidewalks in
front of, alongside or abutting upon such property, all snow and ice thereon fallen or formed, within 24
hours after the same shall have ceased to fall or to be formed, such removal to be accomplished so
that a walkway at least three feet wide shall have been cleared along the entire extent of such
sidewalks. Provided that the owner of a property shall be responsible for conforming to the
requirements of this section where such property shall be occupied by such owner, shall be vacant or
unoccupied, or shall be a multiple-unit property, having more than one tenanted or tenantable unit; the
tenant or occupier shall be so responsible where such property is a single-unit property, occupied by
such tenant or occupier only. Provided further: in removing such snow and/or ice, it shall be unlawful to
place or deposit any of the same into any street or gutter.
§ 286-22. Abutting property.
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant, as aforesaid, shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with any provision of § 286-21, within the time limit prescribed therein, the Borough authorities may
proceed immediately to clear all snow and/or ice from the sidewalk of such delinquent, and to collect
the expenses thereof, with an additional amount of 10% thereof, from such owner, occupant or tenant,
as the case may be, which may be in addition to any fine or penalty imposed under § 286-23,
Violations and penalties.
§ 286-23. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any owner, occupant or tenant who shall fail to remove any snow or ice from any sidewalk as required
by § 286-21, Snow and ice to be removed from sidewalks within 24 hours, or who shall violate any
provision of the said section, shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by
proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the
defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and
each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. Such fine and costs
of prosecution may be in addition to any expenses and additional amounts imposed as provided in §
286-22, Abutting property.
Article V. Sledding Restrictions
[Adopted 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(25) (Ch. XXII, Part 3, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 286-24. Restricted area.
No person or persons shall coast or ride upon any sled or similar conveyance upon any sidewalk in the
Borough of Tamaqua or upon any street or alley in the said Borough, unless such street or alley shall
have been especially set apart and designated as a "play highway" and shall have been blocked off or
otherwise adequately protected from vehicular traffic.
§ 286-25. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 180/244
A.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay
a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough
in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil action for
collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. In addition to or in lieu of
enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of Common
Pleas of Schuylkill County. Nothing in this article shall make it unlawful for any adult to pull or draw a
child seated upon a hand sled upon any sidewalk in the Borough or across any street or alley.
Chapter 292. Subdivision and Land Development
[The Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, on August 18,
2009 by Ord. No. 639, approved the Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region Joint Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance as the ordinance to govern in the Borough. Said ordinance, as
amended, is on file in the Borough offices.]
Chapter 299. Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 556.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 299-1. Applicable definitions.
Except where specified in the following definitions, all words used in this chapter shall carry their
customary meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall
include the plural, and the plural the singular:
BODY PIERCING
The process of breaching the skin or mucus membrane for the purpose of insertion of any object,
including, but not limited to, jewelry for cosmetic purposes. The term does not include ear piercing
or nail piercing.
DEPARTMENT
The Tamaqua Board of Health.
HEALTH OFFICER
The Health Officer of the Tamaqua Board of Health or its duly authorized representative.
OPERATOR
Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation or association that owns or operates an
establishment where tattooing and/or body piercing is performed and any individual who performs
or practices the art of tattooing and/or body piercing on another person, whether or not for profit.
TATTOO, TATTOOED, TATTOOING
Any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under
the skin of a human with ink or any other substance, resulting in the coloration of the skin by the
aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. This definition shall
not apply to medical doctors or doctors of veterinary medicine in performance of their professional
duties.
§ 299-2. License.
Licensing required. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, company, corporation, or
association to engage in the business of operating or being an operator of a tattoo and/or body
piercing establishment whether or not for profit without first obtaining a license to engage in such
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 181/244
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
business, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and unless abiding by the provisions
hereof. If a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment has been permitted prior to the effective date
of this chapter, such establishment shall have three months from the date of this chapter to apply
for a permit which shall then expire pursuant to Subsection C hereof. Upon the issuance of a
license to a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment permitted prior to the effective date of this
Act or three months after the effective date of this chapter, whichever occurs first, such
establishments shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter. No tattooing and/or body
piercing establishment may apply for a transient retail business license pursuant to Chapter 240,
Peddling and Soliciting, Article I, Transient Retail Businesses, as amended.
Application for license. Applicants for a license under this chapter shall submit to the Department a
written application containing such data as required by the Department.
Fee; expiration. Each such applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay a fee as set from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council per year, or for any portion thereof. Each license
shall expire on December 31 of the year in which such license is issued.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Display of license. The license provided for in this chapter shall be posted conspicuously at the
location where the applicant/operator conducts the tattooing.
§ 299-3. Inspections.
The application for the license shall be referred to the Department. The Department shall inspect
the proposed location to determine if it complies with the health and sanitary provisions of this
chapter.
The Health Officer may conduct periodic inspections of any tattooing and/or body piercing
establishment for the purpose of determining whether or not said establishment and the persons
performing the art of tattooing and/or body piercing therein are in compliance with all applicable
health provisions contained within this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person or operator of a
tattooing and/or body piercing establishment to willfully prevent or restrain the Health Officer from
entering any licensed establishment where tattooing and/or body piercing is being performed for
the purpose of inspecting said premises after proper identification is presented to the operator or
employee present at the tattooing and/or body piercing establishment.
§ 299-4. Health and sanitary requirements.
Every operator who operates a tattooing and/or body piercing establishment shall comply with the
following requirements:
The room in which tattooing and/or body piercing is done shall have an area of not less than 100
square feet. The walls, floors and ceilings shall have an impervious, smooth, washable surface
and shall be painted or finished in a light color. Carpeting is prohibited in tattooing area(s) and
toilet room(s).
A restroom with a toilet shall be located in the establishment and shall be accessible at all times
the tattooing and/or body piercing establishment is open for business. The restroom shall also be
supplied with hot and cold running water, soap and single-use towels provided in approved
dispensers. Single-use towels provided in approved dispensers shall also be located in each room
where tattooing and/or body piercing is performed.
All tables and other equipment shall be constructed of easily cleanable material, shall be painted
or finished in a light color, with a smooth, washable finish and shall be separated from waiting
customers or observers by a permanent partition at least four feet high.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 182/244
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good
repair.
The operator shall scrub his/her hands thoroughly with soap and water before starting to tattoo
and/or body pierce; the hands shall be dried with individual, single-use towels. Sterile surgical
gloves shall be worn by the operator when tattooing or body piercing. Gloves shall be used only
once and then disposed of in a manner as prescribed by the Department.
While tattooing, a single-service blade razor shall be used for each customer or client and
disposed of in a sharps container.
The area to be tattooed or body pierced shall first be thoroughly scrubbed with an antiseptic soap
for a minimum of two minutes, and an approved sterilizing preparation used. Waste materials shall
be deposited in an easily cleanable, covered waste container provided in the tattooing and/or body
piercing area.
An antibiotic ointment that the customer or client is not allergic to shall be used on the area to be
tattooed or body pierced, and it shall be applied with sterile gauze.
The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks or other solid styptics to check the flow of blood is
prohibited.
Operators of tattoo and/or body piercing establishments shall be supplied by the Tamaqua Board
of Health, with literature on hepatitis B and C, and HIV. The operator shall distribute copies of this
literature to all customers and clients. Each operator shall obtain a written acknowledgment by
each customer and client that they have received the literature referred to above and shall retain
each written acknowledgment as proof of compliance of this section.
Single-service or individual containers of dye, ink or needles shall be used for each client or
customer and shall be discarded immediately after completing work on a customer or client by
being placed in a sharps container, which container shall be disposed of according to the contract
of the company with which the operator is dealing. The operator shall obtain and keep on file a
receipt for each such container used for this purpose. Any dye in which the needles were dipped
shall not be used on another person. Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin with an
individual, sterile sponge or a disposable paper tissue, which shall be used on one person and
then immediately discarded. After completing work on any person, the tattooed or body pierced
area shall be washed with sterile gauze, saturated with an antiseptic soap solution approved by
the Health Officer, or a 70% alcohol solution. The tattooed or body pierced area shall be allowed
to dry.
No tattoo establishment may attempt to remove a tattoo from any person or allow such a
procedure to take place on its premises.
No holder of a license hereunder, or the servant or employee of such holder, shall tattoo or body
pierce any person under the age of 18 years without first obtaining a written parental authorization.
All parental authorizations shall be maintained on file and be available for inspection for a period
of seven years after the customer or client has reached the age of 18. A copy of the parental
authorization shall be provided to the parent of the minor by the operator. Proof of age will be
required of all clients or customers.
Animals shall not be permitted in the tattooing and/or body piercing establishment except where
permitted by state law.
All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be kept in a locked, closed glass or
locked metal case or storage cabinet while not in use. The key to the case or cabinet shall be
secured by the operator or employee in charge and kept on his person while the premises are
open to the public for business. Such cabinet or case shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at
all times.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 183/244
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
A steam sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided for sterilizing reusable needles and similar
instruments (to the extent expressly permitted by this chapter) before use on any customer or
client. Sterilization of equipment shall be accomplished by exposure to live steam for at least 30
minutes at a minimum pressure of 15 pounds per square inch, temperature of 240° F. The
autoclave shall be provided with a thermometer reading ±2° accuracy and an accurate steam
pressure gauge. Alternate sterilizing procedures may only be used when specifically approved by
the Health Officer.
The needles and instruments required to be sterilized shall be so used, handled and temporarily
placed during tattooing and/or body piercing so that they not be contaminated. Animals are not to
be tattooed or body pierced with any of the instruments used in tattooing or body piercing
customers.
No person, customer or patron having any skin infection or other disease of the skin or any
communicable disease shall be tattooed or body pierced. All infections resulting from the practice
of tattooing or body piercing which become known to the operator shall promptly be reported to
the Health Officer by the person owning or operating the tattooing and/or body piercing
establishment.
All pigments, dyes, colors, etc., used in tattooing shall be sterile and free from bacteria, virus
particles and noxious agents and substances.
All bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with the tattooing or body piercing of a
person shall be sterile.
In order to carry out the intent of this chapter, the Tamaqua Board of Health may promulgate, from
time to time, rules and regulations pertaining to the requirements of sanitation, cleanliness,
adequacy of facilities, equipment and operation of a tattooing and/or body piercing establishment
consistent with this chapter.
§ 299-5. Suspension and revocation of tattoo establishment
license.
A tattoo and/or body piercing establishment license may be suspended or revoked by the Health
Department upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
The application for such license contained a false statement(s);
The operator has violated the provisions of this chapter; and/or
The operator is convicted and pleads guilty or nolo contendere to an offense listed under the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code relating to the conduct of business in the tattoo establishment.
The Health Officer shall serve the tattoo and/or body piercing establishment with written notice of
said suspension or revocation, specifying the reasons therefor, before said suspension or
revocation shall become effective. Service of said notice shall be deemed effective if delivered to
the person in apparent charge of the tattoo and/or body piercing establishment.
The tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall have the right to make a written request for a
hearing on said suspension or revocation, setting for the reasons, in writing, which hearing shall
be held before the Board of Health within 10 days after the receipt of the written request for a
hearing, whether or not the suspension or revocation was effective immediately. The Board of
Health shall uphold, reverse or modify such suspension or revocation.
§ 299-6. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 184/244
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
In addition to the revocation and suspension of any license, as provided in this chapter, any operator or
other person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay
a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough
in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil action for
collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute
a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce
this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
Chapter 305. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-29-1966 by Ord. No. 281 (Ch. XXV, Part 1, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances); amended in
its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 305-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Tamaqua Borough Earned Income Tax
Ordinance."
§ 305-2. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act[1] shall have the meanings set forth therein. The
following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR
The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the
tax.
ENACTMENT
This article.
GOVERNING BODY
The Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT
The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., while such numbering and
provisions remain in effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.,
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as amended in the
future.
TAX
The tax imposed by this article.
TAX RETURN
A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the amount of tax or other amount owed or
required to be withheld, remitted or reported under this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 185/244
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
TAX YEAR
The period from January 1 to December 31.
TAXING AUTHORITY
The Borough of Tamaqua.
TCC
The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee the collection of earned income
tax within the TCD under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TCD
Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part of the taxing authority is
assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 305-3. Imposition of tax.
General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a tax for general revenue
purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned income and net profits of individual residents of the taxing
authority.
Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the current tax year and each year
thereafter, without annual re-enactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act and all provisions thereof that relate to a tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated
into this article. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required to be
applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically become part of this article upon
the effective date of such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this article, to
the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
Applicable laws, regulations, policies and procedures. The tax shall be collected and administered
in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations, and regulations, policies and procedures
adopted by the TCC or by the Collector. This includes any regulations, policies and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 305-4. Individuals under age 16 exempt from tax.
This governing body finds that minors of various age groups have traditionally, and with judicial
sanction, been considered as comprising separate classes for many legislative purposes; and minors
under the age of 16 are generally emancipated and subject to compulsory school attendance and child
labor laws, and therefore have limited earned income and net profits and control of money such that
enforcement of reporting and collection of the tax hereunder against them would yield inconsequential
amounts and be unduly difficult, expensive and not in public interest. For these reasons, individuals
under the age of 16 years are exempt from liability for tax.
§ 305-5. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax year shall file tax returns and
pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 305-6. Employer withholding, remittance and tax returns.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 186/244
Every employer shall register, withhold and remit tax and file tax returns in accordance with the Local
Tax Enabling Act.
§ 305-7. Tax Collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector.
§ 305-8. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs and fines in accordance with the
Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 305-9. Purpose: effect on other legislation, suites or
prosecutions.
The primary purpose of this article is to conform the earned income and net profits tax currently
imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so
within the time frame required by Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income or net
profits of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read as stated in this article. Any other
prior enactment or part of any prior enactment conflicting with the provisions of this article is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in force immediately prior to
adoption of this article, the provisions of this article are intended as a continuation of such prior
enactment and not as a new enactment. If this article is declared invalid, any prior enactment levying a
similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this article. If any
part of this article is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall
remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this article. The provisions of this article shall
not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish offense under the authority of any
enactment in force prior to adoption of this article. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section,
this article shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment levying a tax on earned
income or net profits in force immediately prior to the effective date.
Article II. Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(26) (Ch. XXV, Part 2, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 305-10. Levy of tax; manner of collection.
There is hereby levied and assessed against all persons resident within the Borough of Tamaqua, of
the age of 21 years or over, a per capita tax of $5 per annum. Such tax shall be collected by the duly
elected or appointed Tax Collector of the Borough, at the time of collection of the annual tax upon real
estate, and, in the collection thereof, the Tax Collector shall have all remedies vested in collectors of
per capita taxes by the Local Tax Enabling Act.
Article III. Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 1-4-1977 by Ord. No. 357]
§ 305-11. Discount established.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 187/244
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes shall be entitled to a discount of at least 2% from the
amount of such tax upon making payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the
date of the tax notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged against
them for four months after the date of the tax notice shall be charged a penalty which shall be added to
the taxes by the Tax Collector and be collected by him.
Article IV. Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 1-6-1987 by Ord. No. 428; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 305-12. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of Tamaqua adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72
P.S. § 8101-D et seq.) and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized under that article subject to the
rate limitations therein. The tax imposed under this section shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 305-13. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 305-12 and all applicable interest and penalties shall be administered,
collected and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known
as the "Local Tax Enabling Act" (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.), provided that,
if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough
of Tamaqua, pursuant to § 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and
directs the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and
enforce the tax, interest and penalties.
§ 305-14. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 305-12 that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest as
prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No.
153; 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as
provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176; 72 P.S. § 806), as amended,
known as the "Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
Article V. Tax Certifications
[Adopted 3-19-1996 by Ord. No. 498]
§ 305-15. Appointment of administrator.
The Borough of Tamaqua hereby appoints the locally elected Tax Collector as the municipal officer
authorized to provide tax certifications as to the collection of Borough assessed real estate taxes upon
request by the public.
§ 305-16. Authorization to collect fee.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 188/244
The locally elected Tax Collector is further authorized to assess, collect and retain, as compensation
for providing such additional service, a fee of $5.
Article VI. Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 626]
§ 305-17. Title.
The title and text of Ordinance No. 601, Emergency and Municipal Services Tax, are hereby amended
to state in entirety as follows: "Local Services Tax."
§ 305-18. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR
The person, public employee or private agency designated by the political subdivision to collect
and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED
The Department of Community and Economic Development of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME
Compensation, as this term is defined in Section 501 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.501, as amended.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
EMPLOYER
An individual, partnership, association, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership,
corporation, governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM
Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL
Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or profession within the corporate
limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS
The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or other activity, as this term is
defined in Section 501 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.501, as amended.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
OCCUPATION
Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services,
domestic or other, earned on or performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for
which compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages, commission or
fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
The area within the corporate limits of the Borough of Tamaqua.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 189/244
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
TAX
The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 305-19 of this article.
TAX YEAR
The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a calendar year.
§ 305-19. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed, commencing January 1,
2008; upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Borough of Tamaqua during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any
length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a
pro rata basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the
following purposes as the same may be allocated by the Borough from time to time: 1) emergency
services, which shall include emergency medical services, police services and/or fire services; 2) road
construction and/or maintenance; 3) reduction of property taxes; or 4) property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85,
Subch. F (relating to homestead property exclusion). The political subdivision shall use no less than
25% of the funds derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes
of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52
on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which
a person may be employed.
§ 305-20. Exemption and refunds.
Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from all sources within the
political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt
from the payment of the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt
from payment of the tax:
Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which the United States was
engaged and is honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active
service if, as a result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or
quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United States
Veterans' Administration or its successor to be a total 100% disability.
Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the armed forces and is
called to active duty at any time during the taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection,
"reserve component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United
States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard
Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
Procedure to claim exemption.
A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may annually file an
exemption certificate with the political subdivision and with the person's employer affirming
that the person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources
within the political subdivision of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate is filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that officer. The exemption
certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms
from employment within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year for which
the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption
certificate and until otherwise instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person during the calendar
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 190/244
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A.
B.
year or the remainder of the calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies,
Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a form at the time of hiring.
The exemption certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from the tax,
upon notification to an employer by the person or by the political subdivision that the person
has received earned income and net profits from all sources within the political subdivision
equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible
for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax from the person under
Subsection B(3).
If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from the tax becomes subject
to the tax for the calendar year under Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for
the remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first
payroll period after receipt of the notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the
amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption claimed by the
person under this subsection, plus the per payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The
amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar
year shall be the same amount withheld for other employees. In the event the employment of
a person subject to withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in that
calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due, and the
political subdivision may pursue collection under this article.
Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this subsection that employers shall
not be responsible for investigating exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility
or exempting any employee from the local services tax.
Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the Collector and DCED, shall establish
procedures for the processing of refund claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for
exemption, which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal law
relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days
of a refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the
last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds
shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Borough
Manager or the Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt
persons.
§ 305-21. Duty of employers to collect.
Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those employers situated outside the
political subdivision but who engage in business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged
with the duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or performing for
him within the political subdivision and making a return and payment thereof to the Collector.
Further, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her
employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not all such
services are performed within the political subdivision.
A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata share of the tax for each
payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax
assessed on the person for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established by the employer for the
calendar year. For purposes of determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar. Collection
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 191/244
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for each payroll period in which the person is
engaging in an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section, for purposes of this
section, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of the tax levied by the school
district and the municipality.
No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by more than one political
subdivision during each payroll period.
In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from withholding the tax if the
employee provides a recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the name of the
employer, the length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a statement from
the employee that the pay statement is from the employee's principal employer and the employee
will notify other employers of a change in principal place of employment within two weeks of its
occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on the form approved by DCED.
The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the
number of political subdivisions within which a person may be employed. The political subdivision
shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the payment of the withheld
tax money to the political subdivision if the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect
information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally employed. Further, an employer
shall not be liable for payment of the local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount
withheld by the employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 305-21B of this article
and this section and remits the amount so withheld in accordance with this article.
Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days after the end of each quarter
of a calendar year.
§ 305-22. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the tax on forms to be supplied
to the employer by the Collector. If an employer fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not
the employer makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her to an
employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be responsible for the
payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been originally levied against the employer.
§ 305-23. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to determine the number of
employees from whom such tax shall be deducted and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th
day following the end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 305-24. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind or engages in any occupation
or profession within a primary place of employment within the political subdivision shall be required to
comply with this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or before the 30th
day following the end of each quarter.
§ 305-25. Employment in more than one occupation or political
subdivision.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 192/244
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the person becomes subject
to the tax during each payroll period. In the event a person is engaged in more than one
occupation, that is, concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in
more than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim to collect the local
services tax shall be in the following order:
First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her principal office or is
principally employed;
Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works if the tax is levied by
that political subdivision;
Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and which imposes the tax
nearest in miles to the person's home.
In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year declaring that the
taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other
political subdivisions.
§ 305-26. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places of business outside of the
political subdivision but who perform services of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or
profession within the political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this article with the same
force and effect as though they were residents of the political subdivision. Further, any individual
engaged in an occupation within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the event
his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision shall have the option of proceeding against either the
employer or employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 305-27. Administration of tax.
The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political subdivision. It shall be the duty of the
Collector to accept and receive payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the
amount received by him from each employer of self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received.
The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of this article and is
hereby charged and empowered, subject to municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination of payroll records of any
employer subject to this article, the examination and correction of any return made in compliance
with this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is
claimed or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall
have the right to appeal consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998
(Municipalities may detail their appeal processes.)[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8421 through 8428.
The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll records of any employer in
order to verify the accuracy of any return made by an employer or, if no return was made, to
ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the Collector the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
§ 305-28. Suits for collection.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 193/244
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30 days after the due dates
above set forth, the Collector may sue for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this
article, together with interest and penalty.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% on the amount of such tax
shall be calculated beginning with the due date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to
the flat rate of such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax
or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be
responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
§ 305-29. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor,
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil
action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough
may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
§ 305-30. Interpretation.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the political subdivision to levy and
collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation not within the taxing power of the political
subdivision under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be held by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or of the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not affect
or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of the tax so imposed on other
persons or individuals as herein provided.
Except as set forth hereafter, all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal the imposition and collection of an
occupation privilege tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar year 2005 and all prior
calendar years, or of an emergency and municipal services tax, plus applicable penalties and
interest, for calendar years 2006 and 2007, as the same exist prior to this amendment.
The tax imposed by this article shall be effective on January 1, 2008, and all calendar years
thereafter unless repealed or modified by ordinance of the Borough of Tamaqua.
In all other respects, all other tax ordinances of the Borough of Tamaqua shall remain as
heretofore enacted, ordained and amended, which said ordinance as amended, is hereby reenacted
in its entirety herein.
Chapter 312. Tobacco Products
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Possession and Use by Minors
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 194/244
[Adopted 4-15-2008 by Ord. No. 629]
§ 312-1. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to use or possess tobacco, in any form,
within the Borough of Tamaqua, or any Borough-owned property, on any public street, highway, traffic
way, alley or sidewalk.
§ 312-2. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this article shall be a summary offense, and any person who violates this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $50.
§ 312-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALLEY
A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear side of lots of buildings and not
intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.
HIGHWAY
The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel. The term includes a
roadway open to the use of the public for vehicular travel on grounds of a public or private school
or public or historical park.
ROADWAY
That portion of the highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of
the sidewalk, berm or shoulder.
SIDEWALK
That portion of a street between curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent
property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.
TOBACCO
A lighted or unlighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or other lighted smoking product and smokeless
tobacco in any form.
TRAFFIC WAY
The entire width between property lines or other boundary lines of every way or place of which any
part is open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel as a matter of right or custom.
§ 312-4. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to a minor smoking or using tobacco in a nonpublic place which constitutes
the residence of the minor and his or her parents or guardian.
Chapter 319. Transportation of Household Goods
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 8-20-1974 by Ord. No. 335.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 195/244
§ 319-1. Permit required to transport household goods in bulk.
No person or persons, partnership, firm or corporation shall move, or cause to be moved, from any
place within the Borough of Tamaqua to another place therein or to a place beyond the limits thereof,
or move, or cause to be moved from any place beyond the limits of the Borough of Tamaqua to a place
or places within the Borough of Tamaqua any household goods in bulk, without first securing from the
Borough Manager of the Borough of Tamaqua a permit for such moving or transportation.
§ 319-2. Application for permit.
Any person or persons, firm, or corporation desiring such a permit for the removal or transportation of
household goods in the manner above-described, shall make application to the Borough Manager of
the Borough of Tamaqua, setting forth his, its, or their name and address, and also setting forth names
of the owners or reputed owners of the property to be moved, the address and location from which the
property is to be moved, and the new address or location of the place to which the property is to be
moved.
§ 319-3. Issuance of permit.
The Borough Manager of the Borough of Tamaqua shall, upon application being made, as provided in
§ 319-2 of this chapter, issue a permit without charge. Such application shall set forth the name of the
permittee as well as the name or names of the owners of the goods to be moved and the address from
which the goods are to be moved and the address to which the goods are to be delivered. No permit
shall be issued to remove to a place beyond the limits of the Borough, when any taxes due the
Borough, other than real estate taxes, or when any charge for services rendered by the Borough, such
as water, sewer or garbage services or charges of a similar nature, remain unpaid by the owners of the
goods to be moved.
§ 319-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Mayor or Borough Manager or by such officer
as may be designated by the Borough Council.
§ 319-5. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person or persons, whether principal or agent, violating any provision of this chapter, or furnishing
false information to the Borough Manager or using any false name or address shall, upon being found
liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this
section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill
County.
Chapter 326. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 4-13-1971 by Ord. No.
304(22) (Ch. XVII of the 1971 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 196/244
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Article I. General Regulations
§ 326-1. Definitions and interpretation.
[Amended 8-20-2013 by Ord. No. 665; 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 669]
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the
Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania,[1] as now in force or hereafter amended, enacted or
reenacted, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and include: New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 326-2. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and regulations in
force immediately prior to the enactment of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and not as new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done or
liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any
of those repealed ordinances or regulations.
§ 326-3. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as ordinances or as parts of
ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the Borough of Tamaqua.
§ 326-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
[Amended 8-20-2013 by Ord. No. 665; 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 669]
The Chief of Police, Officer in Charge, any police officer or a fire police officer shall have the following
powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in the time of emergency:
In a case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish temporary traffic and/or parking
regulations.
In a case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct of parades, procession or
public events, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more
than 72 hours.
To designate places from time to time upon and along highways in the Borough or other roads in
the Borough where, for a period of not more than 90 days, or upon legal holidays, specific traffic
and or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall
designate such locations by proper signs and markings. All such regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions as set forth in this section shall be effective just as if they had been specified under the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 197/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
§ 326-5. Fire zones.
[Added 9-5-1978 by Ord. No. 377]
The following areas, described in Subsections A, B, C and D, are hereby designated "Fire Zones" and
shall be painted in yellow on the areas indicated and marked "Fire Zone - No Parking."
There shall be no parking at any time on the south side of High Street, from Swatara Street,
westwardly, to Stadium Hill or Lehigh Street. There shall be no parking on the north side of High
Street, westwardly from Swatara Street, a distance of 85 feet, to a point.
There shall be no parking at any time on the south side of Van Gelder Street, from a certain point
to Oak Street.
There shall be no parking at any time on the east and west sides of Oak Street, southwardly, for a
distance of 10 feet from Van Gelder Street.
There shall be no parking at any time on the northwest side of Stadium Hill or Lehigh Street, at
High Street, along the sidewalk.
§ 326-6. School bus loading zones.
[Added 11-8-1978 by Ord. No. 378]
The following areas, described in Subsections A, B and C, are hereby designated "School Bus Loading
Zones," and parking shall be prohibited as hereinafter provided.
Four signs shall be placed on the north side of Van Gelder Street, between Nescopec and
Swatara Streets, reading "School Bus Loading Zone - No Parking between 7:00 and 8:00 a.m.
and 3:00 and 4:00 p.m."
"No Parking" signs shall be placed on the east side of Nescopec Street, between Van Gelder and
High Streets, stating "No Parking between 7:00 and 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 and 4:00 p.m.
Signs shall be placed on the south side of Van Gelder Street, between Oak and Swatara Streets,
reading, "Caution - School Bus Loading Zone."
§ 326-7. Fire lanes.
[Added 2-17-1981 by Ord. No. 392]
The following areas, described in Subsection A(1) and (2), are hereby designated as "Fire Lanes"
and parking shall be prohibited as hereinafter provided.
There shall be no parking at any time at Jamesway Plaza, beginning at the curb fronting such
properties and proceeding in a southerly direction for a distance of 16 feet, as indicated by
signs installed at the curbline and a painted yellow line on the parking lot.
There shall be no parking at any time at Acme Markets beginning at the curb fronting said
property and proceeding in a northerly direction for a distance of 16 feet, as indicated by signs
installed at the curbline on the parking lot.
Any driver of a motor vehicle violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction before a
Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of $5, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 326-8. Experimental regulations.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 198/244
A.
B.
A.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and along the streets and alleys in
the Borough where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate such locations by proper
signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had
been specified in this section. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any
sign or marking erected or made by authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and, in the case of a violation for which no
specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $10 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more
than five days. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental determination of the
feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and
parking.
§ 326-9. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways in the
Borough and at intersections thereof.
Article II. Traffic Regulations
§ 326-10. Motor vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle longitudinally upon any sidewalk in the Borough; nor shall
any person operate any motor vehicle upon or across any sidewalk except in order to gain access to or
egress from a driveway or alley at a location where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have
been properly cut down for the purpose. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 10
days.
§ 326-11. Speed limits established on certain streets.
[Amended 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 304(22; 1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 617; 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 645; 6-
19-2018 by Ord. No. 696]
The speed limit of 25 mph is hereby established on all Borough streets, with the exception of State
Routes 209 and 309 and Owl Creek Road in the Borough of Tamaqua.
Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor at a speed in excess of that hereby established
therefor upon any of the portions of streets herein specified shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than five days.
§ 326-12. Traffic signals at certain locations.
At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or if heretofore erected are
hereby ratified), and traffic at such intersections shall be directed by such signals:
Intersection
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 199/244
B.
A.
Intersection
Broad and Centre Streets
Broad and Columbia Streets
Broad and Greenwood Streets
Broad and Hunter Streets
Broad and Nescopeck Streets
Broad and Pine Streets
Broad and Swatara Streets
Centre and Cedar Streets
Centre and Spruce Streets
Elm and Railroad Streets
Pine and Elm Streets
Pine and Mauch Chunk Streets
Spruce and Hunter Streets
Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall disobey the directions of any traffic signal shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than five days.
§ 326-13. U-turns prohibited at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle or tractor to make a U-turn at any intersection within
the Borough. A reversal of direction at any intersection, regardless of how accomplished, shall be
considered a U-turn. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $10 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than five days.
§ 326-14. One-way streets established.
The following are hereby established as one-way streets:
Street From To Direction of Travel
Arlington Street
[Added 8-20-1974 by Ord.
No. 336]
Laurel Street Greenwood Street Westbound
Berwick Street Broad Street Rowe Street Northbound
Biddle Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Market Street Greenwood Street Westbound
Cherry Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Orwigsburg Street Spruce Street Northbound
Clay Street
[Added 8-20-1974 by Ord.
No. 336]
Nescopec Street Pitt Street Westbound
Cottage Avenue Pine Street Centre Street Westbound
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 200/244
Street From To Direction of Travel
East Union Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Pine Street Water Street Eastbound
Gay Street Jerome Street Lafayette Street Southbound
Hegarty Avenue
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Berwick Street Nescopec Street Westbound
Lombard Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Anderson Street Lafayette Street Southbound
Lombard Street
[Added 8-20-1974 by Ord.
No. 336]
Jerome Street Rowe Street Southbound
Mahanoy Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Nescopec Street Hunter Street Eastbound
Mauch Chunk Street Broad Street Pine Street Northbound
Nescopec Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Van Gelder Street High Street Northbound
Nescopec Street
[Added 8-20-1974 by Ord.
No. 336; repealed 2-18-1975
by Ord. No. 343]
Nescopeck Street Rowe Street Broad Street Southbound
Orwigsburg Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Hunter Street Cherry Street Eastbound
Orwigsburg Street
[Added 8-20-1974 by Ord.
No. 336]
Hunter Street Coal Street Westbound
Penn Street
[Added 8-20-1974 by Ord.
No. 336]
Coal Street Hunter Street Eastbound
Pine Street Broad Street Cedar Street Southbound
Pine Street Vine Street Highway bridge Northbound
Railroad Street Pine Street Broad Street Southbound
Rolling Mill Avenue Rose Street East Union Street Southbound
Rowe Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Berwick Street Swatara Street Westbound
Rowe Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Lehigh Street Catawissa Street Westbound
Rowe Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Schuylkill Avenue Greenwood Street Eastbound
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 201/244
B.
A.
Street From To Direction of Travel
S. Railroad Street
[Added 3-4-1975 by Ord. No.
344; amended 3-19-1991 by
Ord. No. 463]
Cottage Avenue Broad Street Southbound
Schuylkill Avenue Mauch Chunk
Street
Biddle Street Northbound
Schuylkill Avenue Mauch Chunk
Street
Greenwood Street Southbound and
eastbound
Schuylkill Avenue
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Mauch Chunk
Street
Cottage Avenue Southbound
Schuylkill Avenue
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Mauch Chunk
Street
Rowe Street Southbound
South Patterson Street
[Added 10-2-2012 by Ord.
No. 657]
Northwest corner
of 420 East Broad
Street
East Broad Street Northbound
South Railroad Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Cottage Avenue Broad Street Southbound
Union Street
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463]
Pine Street Water Street Eastbound
Van Gelder Street*
[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 463; amended 9-16-
2003 by Ord. No. 570]
Swatara Street Nescopec Street Eastbound (*except for
the portion of the street
from the intersection
with Swatara Street
approximately 180 feet
east to the center line of
the driveway for the
Lehigh Carbon
Community College)
Willing Street
[Added 8-20-1974 by Ord.
No. 336]
Clark Street Market Street Westbound
Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor upon any street or portion thereof hereby
established as a one-way street other than in the direction hereby established for vehicular traffic
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $10 and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than
five days.
§ 326-15. Through highways established.
The following streets or portions thereof are hereby established as through highways, and official
stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby confirmed if heretofore erected) on all streets and alleys
at their intersections with such through highways (except for such intersections where traffic shall
be controlled by official traffic signals). All vehicles and tractors approaching any through highway
upon any intersecting street or alley on which an official stop sign shall have been erected shall
come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering upon such through highway:
Street Between
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 202/244
B.
A.
Street Between
Broad Street East Borough line and west Borough line
Centre Street Broad Street and south Borough line
Hunter Street West Broad Street and south Borough line
Mauch Chunk Street and Pine Street East Broad Street and Railroad Street
Railroad Street East Broad Street and Pine Street
Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall fail to come to a full stop, within a reasonable
distance, before entering any such through highway, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of $5 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than three days.
§ 326-16. Stop intersections established.
The following intersections, located in the Borough of Tamaqua, are hereby declared to be stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby confirmed if heretofore
erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named street upon the firstnamed
street, in the direction or directions hereby indicated. All vehicles and tractors approaching
any such intersection upon the first-named street, in the direction or directions hereby indicated, in
each case, shall come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering such
intersection:
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Biddle Street Pine Street Eastbound and westbound
Catawissa Street Broad Street Southbound
Chestnut Street
[Added 1-15-2013 by Ord. No. 661]
Schuylkill Avenue Westbound
Clark Street
[Added 9-15-2009 by Ord. No. 640]
Glenwood Avenue South
Columbia Street Broad Street Northbound and southbound
Cottage Avenue Hunter Street Eastbound and westbound
East End Avenue (3-way)
[Added 11-18-1975 by Ord. No.
352]
All
Elizabeth Street Broad Street Northbound and southbound
Elm Street
[Added 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 646]
Rolling Mill Avenue Eastbound and westbound
Federal Street Broad Street Northbound and southbound
Hamilton Street
[Added 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 651]
Lafayette Street South
Hegarty Avenue
[Added 11-18-1975 by Ord. No.
352]
Nescopec Street West
High Street
[Added 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 651]
Bowe Street Eastbound
High Street
[Added 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 635]
Swatara Street Eastbound
Jerome Street
[Added 11-4-1974 by Ord. No. 338]
Washington Street Eastbound
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 203/244
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Lehigh Street Broad Street Northbound and southbound
Lincoln Street
[Added 11-4-1974 by Ord. No. 338]
Jerome Street Northbound and southbound
Locust Street
[Added 1-15-2013 by Ord. No. 661]
Schuylkill Avenue Westbound
Market Street Broad Street Southbound
Mountain Avenue
[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
667]
Federal Street Eastbound
Oak Street
[Added 9-15-2009 by Ord. No. 640]
Race Street Northbound and southbound
Orwigsburg Street Hunter Street Eastbound and westbound
Orwigsburg Street
[Added 4-11-1972 by Ord. No. 315]
Oak Street Eastbound and westbound
Orwigsburg Street
[Added 6-21-2005 by Ord. No. 603]
Bowe Street Westbound
Penn Street Hunter Street Westbound
Rolling Mill Avenue
[Added 4-11-1972 by Ord. No. 315]
Elm Street Eastbound and westbound
Rose Street Pine Street Eastbound
Rose Street Railroad Street Eastbound and westbound
Rowe Street
[Added 4-11-1972 by Ord. No. 315]
Lehigh Street Westbound
Schuylkill Avenue
[Added 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 635]
Chestnut Street Northbound and southbound
Schuylkill Avenue
[Added 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 635]
Locust Street Northbound and southbound
South Patterson Street
[Added 10-2-2012 by Ord. No. 657]
East Broad Street Northbound
South Railroad Street West Broad Street Northbound
Swatara Street
[Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 697]
Van Gelder Street Southbound
Union Street Pine Street Eastbound and westbound
Van Gelder Street
[Added 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 635]
Oak Street Westbound
Vine Street Pine Street Eastbound
Vine Street Railroad Street Eastbound and westbound
Vine Street
[Added 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 646]
Rolling Mill Avenue Eastbound and westbound
Walnut Street
[Added 1-15-2013 by Ord. No. 661]
Schuylkill Avenue Westbound
West Rowe Street
[Added 11-15-2005 by Ord. No.
607]
Lehigh Street Eastbound
West side of road exiting Boyer's
Supermarket
[Added 8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 593]
East Spruce Street Southbound
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 204/244
B.
A.
B.
C.
Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall fail to come to a full stop, within a reasonable
distance, before entering any such stop intersection, as hereinabove required, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than three days.
§ 326-17. No turn on red.
[Added 7-19-1977 by Ord. No. 363]
A "NO TURN ON RED" sign shall be erected at certain intersections, prohibiting vehicular traffic facing
a steady red signal from entering the intersection to turn on red. This shall apply to traffic at the
following intersections.
Name of Street Direction of Travel Prohibited Turn on Red Signal Onto
Broad Street East Center Street
Broad Street East South Railroad Street
Broad Street West Mauch Chunk Street
Centre Street North Broad Street
Mauch Chunk Street North Pine Street
Mauch Chunk Street West Pine Street
Pine Street North Mauch Chunk Street
Pine Street South Mauch Chunk Street
Railroad Street South Broad Street
Railroad Street South Mauch Chunk Street
§ 326-18. Truck traffic restricted to certain streets.
[Added 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 595]
No person shall drive a vehicle other than a passenger car, motorcycle or truck with a gross
weight of under 10,000 pounds, except local traffic, on:
Street Between
Owl Creek Road Beginning at Route 309 proceeding to the Carbon-Schuylkill
County line
Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an emergency vehicle on any of those
streets or parts of streets, or from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises located along that street or
part of a street.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined $100 and costs.
§ 326-19. Play highways authorized.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Police Department is hereby authorized to designate as a "play highway," whenever it shall deem
such action advisable and for whatever period of time directed by it, any portion of any street or alley in
the Borough, whereon sledding and coasting shall be permitted. No person shall operate any motor
vehicle or tractor upon any play highway at any time when such highway shall be so designated,
except in case of emergency, with special permission of the police officer in charge, who shall first
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 205/244
A.
B.
C.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
clear such highway of all persons using such highway for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any
person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $10 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than five days.
§ 326-20. Specific driveways' entrance and exit restrictions.
[Added 12-17-1974 by Ord. No. 339]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to enter the west side of Pine Street from the market located on
the Genetti lot, between Pine and Railroad Streets, in said Borough. This driveway shall be
marked by official signs designating it as an "Entrance" to the market from Pine Street only and
not as an "Exit" from said market on the Genetti lot.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle making an exit from the driveway on the premises of the
Tamaqua Leased Housing building to turn left onto East Broad Street.
[Added 2-15-1977 by Ord. No. 358]
Penalty for violation. Any person who shall violate this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $2 or more than $10 and costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment of not more than five days.
Article III. Parking
§ 326-21. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of Tamaqua are hereby established as a zone in which motor
vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all streets and alleys within such boundary limits are
hereby designated as streets and alleys where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 326-22. Vehicles to park within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any street or alley for the parking of an individual vehicle,
every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding such space.
§ 326-23. Parking restrictions.
[Added 8-20-2013 by Ord. No. 665; amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 669]
No motor vehicle of any kind shall be permitted to park at any time in the Borough as follows:
In a zone designated by Council of the Borough of Tamaqua or its designee as a handicapped
parking zone, unless the vehicle parked in the handicapped zone is authorized to be parked in that
handicapped parking zone by appropriate placard or license plate issued under the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
In front of a firehouse door or entrance.
Within 20 feet of any intersection.
In the front or side yard of any property, unless the vehicle is parked on a driveway.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 206/244
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
In a posted no-parking zone.
In a manner that obstructs a crosswalk or sidewalk.
In front of a private driveway.
On the sidewalk or curb.
Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
In a manner that obstructs or blocks vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
It shall be illegal to park a vehicle upon a roadway or traffic way of the commonwealth with a
missing, expired, suspended or revoked inspection or registration sticker.
In excess of the time limits of a metered parking space.
§ 326-24. Miscellaneous.
[Added 8-20-2013 by Ord. No. 665; amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 669]
No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition
or restriction and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected,
posted or made by authority of this chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the Borough's authority or power to establish permanent no
parking regulations or ordinances.
All violations of the parking regulations established in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code are
hereby declared to be violations of this chapter, and such violations shall be subject to prosecution
under this chapter.
The police officers of the Borough are hereby given the authority to direct traffic on the highways
of the Borough and at intersections thereof, and to enforce any and all parking regulations
established under this chapter.
§ 326-25. Violations and penalties.
[Added 8-20-2013 by Ord. No. 665; amended 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 669]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine as follows:
Section 326-23B, metered parking: $10.
Section 326-23B, firehouse: $35.
Section 326-23A handicapped: $50.
Section 325-23K registration/inspection: $50.
All other parking violations shall be subject to a fine of $25.
In a default of payment of the aforesaid fine plus the costs of prosecution, the violator will be
subject to imprisonment of up to five days.
§ 326-26. Parking prohibited in certain locations.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 207/244
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Arlington Street North Greenwood Street and Federal Street
Cedar Street North Centre Street and Greenwood Street
Cottage Avenue Both Railroad Street and Nescopeck Street
Greenwood Street West Broad Street and Cedar Street
High Street
[Added 12-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 700]
South Signs in the 200 block
Hunter Street East Broad Street and Cottage Avenue
Hunter Street West Broad Street and Orwigsburg Street
East Mauch Chunk Street South Pine Street and east side of Schuylkill River
Lafayette Street
[Added 9-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 698]
South In front of 22 Lafayette Street
Oak Street
[Added 9-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 686]
West Van Gelder Street and Spruce Street (tow-away zone)
Penn Street North Catawissa Street and Cherry Street
Race Street
[Added 10-21-2014 by Ord.
No. 674]
Both Coal Street and Lehigh Street
Railroad Street West Pine Street and Broad Street
Rolling Mill Avenue East Rose Street and Union Street
Rowe Street North Nescopeck Street and Swatara Street
Rowe Street South Berwick Street and Nescopeck Street
Schuylkill Avenue East Biddle Street and East Rowe Street
Schuylkill Avenue West East Mauch Chunk Street and Rowe Street
Spruce Street Both Hunter Street and Bow Street
Swatara Street West Broad Street and Rowe Street
Van Gelder Street
[Added 12-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 700]
North Signs in the 200 block
Washington Street
[Added 10-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 699]
East Designated signs on the 200 block of Washington
Street along the stone wall
§ 326-27. Parking time limited on portions of certain streets
certain days and hours.
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle or to allow the same to remain parked, on any of the following
portions of streets, for longer than the time hereby designated therefor, upon any day or between the
hours hereby designated therefor:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking Time
Limit
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 208/244
A.
B.
A.
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking Time
Limit
Centre Street Both Cedar Street and
south Borough line
Every day 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hours
§ 326-28. Loading and unloading zones established; parking
restricted.
The following locations along the streets in the Borough are hereby established as loading and
unloading zones:
Street Side Location
Broad Street North West of Pine Street; opposite Hunter Street
intersection; east of Nescopeck Street
Broad Street South West of Greenwood Street; east of Pine Street in
front of No. 112 West Broad Street
Hunter Street West From Cottage Avenue to a point 40 feet north
thereof
Mauch Chunk Street East In front of No. 11 Mauch Chunk Street
Mauch Chunk Street West From Broad Street to a point 40 feet north thereof
Pine Street East In front of 27 Pine Street, for a distance of 40 feet
West Cottage Avenue
[Added 5-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 704]
North Rear of 16-22 West Broad Street, for a distance of
approximately 60 feet (15-minute parking only)
It shall be unlawful for any passenger vehicle to park in any loading and unloading zone at any
time. It shall be unlawful for any commercial vehicle to be parked on any portion of any street in
the Borough other than the said loading and unloading zones.
§ 326-29. Special purpose parking.
The following locations along the streets in the Borough are hereby established as special
purpose parking zones:
Street Side Location
Authorized Parking
Purpose
Centre Street East Taylor's Diner Bus zone
East Broad Street North 237 East Broad Street Mortician
East Broad Street South 242 East Broad Street Doctor
East Broad Street North 221 East Broad Street Doctor
East Broad Street North 211 East Broad Street Doctor
Rowe Street North Borough Building Police (2)
Rowe Street North Borough Building Mayor Zone
West Broad Street North At Railroad Street Bus zone
West Broad Street South At Railroad Street Bus zone
West Broad Street North 131 West Broad Street Doctor
West Broad Street North 237 West Broad Street Doctor
West Broad Street North 243 West Broad Street Mortician
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 209/244
B.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Street Side Location
Authorized Parking
Purpose
West Broad Street North 255 West Broad Street Salvation Army
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to park in any such special purpose parking zone
other than for the authorized parking purpose.
§ 326-30. Handicapped parking.
[Added 8-16-1983 by Ord. No. 411]
At the request of any handicapped person, the Borough Council, by motion, may authorize the
erection on a Borough street, as close as possible to the handicapped person's place of
residence, a sign or signs indicating the space is reserved for a handicapped person, and that no
parking is allowed there by other than a handicapped person. At the discretion of the Borough
Council, it may, by motion, remove any signs erected pursuant to this section at any time.
The Borough may, at its discretion, set up guidelines, which, at its discretion, may be changed or
deviated from at any time to regulate the granting of parking spaces for handicapped persons as
set forth in Subsection A. Further, the Borough may appoint a commission composed of seven
people to review all requests or applications and make any recommendation to the Borough
Council.
Any unauthorized person parking in spaces established pursuant to Subsection A shall be guilty of
a summary offense and pay a fine of $15.[1]
Editor's Note: A section "prohibiting parking upon a triangular piece of ground," which was added
to this chapter 9-4-1984 by Ord. No. 415 and immediately followed this subsection, is repealed.
§ 326-31. Restricting the parking or storing of recreational
equipment and utility trailers on any street, alley or thoroughfare.
[Added 4-3-2001 by Ord. No. 538]
No recreational equipment as defined in Subsection D hereof shall be parked or stored on any
street, alley or thoroughfare within the Borough of Tamaqua; provided, however, that such
recreational equipment may be parked on any such street, alley or thoroughfare for a period not to
exceed seven days or 168 hours during loading or unloading. While so temporarily parked, any
such recreational equipment which is not self-propelled must be attached to a motorized vehicle
displaying current license plates and registration.
No utility trailers shall be parked or stored on any street, alley, or thoroughfare within the Borough
of Tamaqua, whether or not it is attached to a motorized vehicle; provided, however, that utility
trailers may be parked on any such street, alley or thoroughfare for a period not to exceed 48
hours during loading and unloading. While so temporarily parked, any such utility trailer must be
attached to a motorized vehicle displaying current license plates and registration.
No recreational equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when
parked in any location not approved for such use.
"Recreational equipment" is defined as boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or
coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers,
buses and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment whether
occupied by such equipment or not.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 210/244
E.
[1]
A.
B.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense
and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against
any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the
Schuylkill County correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days.
[Added 5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 540; amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
Article IV. Parking Meters
Editor's Note: This article, Ch. XVII, Part 2 of the 1971 Code of Ordinances, was derived from Ord. No.
194, adopted 3-2-1942, as amended by Ord. No. 304(3), adopted 4-13-1971.
§ 326-32. Parking meter zones established; parking time limit
therein; days and hours when meters operative and time limit
applicable.
[Amended 7-8-1952 by Ord. No. 219; 6-19-1990 by Ord. No. 453; 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 666]
The following streets and portions thereof, in the Borough of Tamaqua, are hereby designated as
parking meter zones:
Street Side Between
Berwick Street East and west Broad Street and Rowe Street
Broad Street North and south Greenwood Street and Swatara
Street
Center Street East Broad Street and Cedar Street
Hunter Street Parking Lot
Mauch Chunk Street East and west Broad Street and Pine Street
Nescopec Street East and west Cottage Avenue and Rowe Street
Nescopec Street Parking Lot
North Railroad Street East Broad Street and Biddle Street
North Railroad Street Parking Lot
Pine Street East and west Broad Street and Mauch Chunk
Street
South Railroad Street West West Broad Street and Spruce
Street
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any of the said parking meter zones, or to
allow the same to remain parked therein, at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday, and for longer than the time hereinafter designated; provided the
provisions of this chapter limiting parking time in parking meter zones and requiring the deposit of
a coin or coins in parking meters, shall not be applicable Sunday, or on New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas.
§ 326-33. Designation of individual parking spaces; installation of
parking meters.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 211/244
On the streets so designated, the Borough Council shall cause the designation, by appropriate
markings, of individual parking spaces, adjoining each of which parking spaces shall be erected a
parking meter which, upon the deposit of a coin as hereinafter provided, will indicate the duration of the
legal parking period and the time when such legal period shall have elapsed.
§ 326-34. Coin deposit in meter.
[Amended 3-20-1990 by Ord. No. 452; 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 666]
In order that the police officers may properly compute the time during which a vehicle is parked, the
owner or operator shall, during the period of limited parking, immediately upon entering a parking
space, deposit the appropriate denomination of the United States coinage in the parking meter
adjoining said parking space, and cause the meter to operate in accordance with the instructions
printed on said meter. Failure to deposit the requisite coin or to cause the parking meter to operate
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 326-35. Unlawful to park in violation of requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any such vehicle registered in his or
her name to be parked in a parking meter zone herein designated, or to be hereinafter designated, in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 326-36. Vehicles to be parked wholly within marked spaces.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking designating a parking space or to
park said vehicle in any way that the same shall not be wholly within a parking space as designated by
said markings.
§ 326-37. Unlawful to tamper with meters.
It shall be unlawful to deface, or tamper with, damage, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter installed under the terms of this chapter.
§ 326-38. Parking not permitted where otherwise prohibited.
Nothing contained in this chapter or in any ordinance hereinafter establishing parking meter zones
shall be construed to permit parking of vehicles in those spaces within any zone, in which by other
ordinances of the Borough, parking is prohibited.
§ 326-39. Collection, reporting and accounting for parking meter
revenues.
It shall be the duty of the Mayor to collect, at intervals, as shall be directed by the Borough Council, all
moneys deposited in parking meters under the provisions of this article. The Mayor shall make monthly
reports of the sum collected from each parking meter and he shall, if necessary, be assisted by the
Borough Secretary, as directed by Borough Council, in the collection and reporting and accounting for
the sums collected from such parking meters.
§ 326-40. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 212/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
G.
[Amended 1-11-1972 by Ord. No. 314; 3-20-1990 by Ord. No. 452; 1-17-2012 by Ord. No. 653]
Upon any person violating any provisions of this article, the police officers or the meter persons of the
Borough may place a parking ticket upon the vehicle stating the time and nature of the violation, and
notifying such violator that he shall pay the prescribed amount for the violation indicated:
Parking meter violation: $10.
Parking in prohibited zone: $25.
Parking over maximum time allowed: $10.
Parking in way of street sweeper: $25.
Parking obstructing snow removal: $25.
Parking in fire zone: $25.
Parking in violation of Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, as specified by law.[1] If such violator
shall fail to pay the prescribed fine within 72 hours of the date of the violation, the police officer
may issue a citation, and upon conviction thereof, such violator shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$75 plus the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and costs, imprisonment
for not more than five days.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
Chapter 333. Vehicles, Motor-Driven
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua 4-6-1982 by Ord. No. 407.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 333-1. Operation on public or private property.
[Amended 4-5-1988 by Ord. No. 442]
No person, firm or corporation shall drive, operate, leave parked running unattended, or ride in or upon
any automobile, truck, tractor, motor bike, motor scooter, motorcycle, mini-bike, snowmobile, or
motorized vehicle, device or contraption of any sort, upon any paved or unpaved portions of any
property owned or leased by the Borough of Tamaqua, the Tamaqua Area School District, or any
private citizen, firm or corporation within the Borough, without the consent of the owner thereof; nor
shall the owner of any such vehicle, device or contraption permit or allow any other person to drive,
operate, leave parked running unattended, or ride in or upon any such vehicle on any such property
owned or leased by the Borough of Tamaqua, the Tamaqua Area School District, or any private citizen,
firm or corporation within the Borough without the consent of the owner thereof.
§ 333-2. Violations and penalties.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by
summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Schuylkill County
correctional facility for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 213/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce
this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Schuylkill County.
Chapter 340. Water
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 260.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Article I. Water Rates
[Adopted 5-12-1964 by Ord. No. 267 (Ch. XXVII of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 340-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as
follows:
AUTHORITY
The Tamaqua Borough Authority, a municipality authority incorporated, organized and existing
under provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented.[1]
BOROUGH
The Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, a Pennsylvania municipal corporation,
acting by and through its Council or its properly authorized officers, agents or employees.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Each building, room, group of rooms or other enclosure connected directly or indirectly to the
water system and used or intended for use in the operation of one business enterprise for the sale
and distribution of any product, commodity, article or service.
CONSUMER
A party who holds a fee simple title to a property and who has contracted for a supply of water to
said property, or who has contracted on behalf of his, her, or its tenant for a supply of water to said
property as hereinafter classified. (See "consumer unit.")
[Amended 3-1-1974 by Ord. No. 331]
CONSUMER UNIT
Any of the following:
A building under one roof and occupied by one family or business; or
A combination of buildings in one enclosure or group and occupied by one family or business;
or
One side of a double building or house having a solid vertical partition wall; or
A building, house or other structure, or any room, group of rooms or part thereof, occupied by
more than one family or business, the water fixtures of which are used in common; or
Each room or group of rooms in a building occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate
business or as separate living quarters by a family or other group of persons living together or
by a person living alone, the water fixtures of which are not used in common; or
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 214/244
F.
[1]
A.
B.
Each apartment, office or suite of offices in a building or house having several such
apartments, offices or suites of offices and using in common one or more hallways and one or
more means of entrance.
COUNCIL
The group of elected officials acting as the governing body of the Borough.
DWELLING UNIT
Each building, room, group of rooms or other enclosure connected directly or indirectly to the
water system and occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by a family or
other group of persons living together or by a person living alone.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Each building, room, group of rooms or other enclosure connected directly or indirectly to the
water system and used or intended for use in the operation of one business enterprise for
manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling any product, commodity or article.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any building, room, group of rooms or other enclosure connected directly or indirectly to the water
system which does not constitute a commercial establishment, a dwelling unit or an industrial
establishment.
PERSON
An individual, a partnership, an association, a corporation, a joint stock company, a trust, an
unincorporated association, a governmental body, a political subdivision, a municipality, a
municipality authority or any other group or entity.
WATER SYSTEM
All waterworks, water supply works and water transmission and distribution system facilities and
properties and facilities related thereto at any time owned by the Authority and used or useful in
the supply, transmission and distribution of water to the public, together with all appurtenant
facilities and properties so owned by the Authority, including all property, real, personal and mixed,
rights, powers, licenses, easements, rights-of-way, privileges, franchises and any and all other
property or interests in property of whatsoever nature used or useful in connection with the supply,
transmission and distribution of water, all of the foregoing being leased by the Authority to this
Borough for operation and use.
Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed by Act 22 of
2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601
et seq.
§ 340-2. Water rates, rents and charges for establishments inside
Borough.
[Amended 3-1-1974 by Ord. No. 331]
The following water rates, rents and charges hereby are amended, adopted, established and imposed
upon each consumer within the Borough limits, served or to be served with water service through the
water system for use thereof and for services rendered by this Borough in connection therewith:
Flat rate schedule. The minimum water rate, rent, and charge for each unmetered consumer unit
receiving water service through the water system shall be $15 per quarter annum.
[Amended 11-16-1982 by Ord. No. 408]
Metered rate schedule for industrial establishments and municipalities situate within the Borough.
[Amended 12-17-1974 by Ord. No. 340]
Quantity Rate Per Month
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 215/244
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
Quantity Rate Per Month
Minimum charge per consumer unit $2.40
For the first 500,000 gallons $0.24 per 1,000 gallons
For the next 4,500,000 gallons $0.17 per 1,000 gallons
For the next 35,000,000 gallons $0.12 per 1,000 gallons
All over 40,000,000 gallons $0.09 per 1,000 gallons
Metered rate schedule for dwelling units, commercial establishments and institutional
establishments situate within the Borough.
[Amended 12-17-1974 by Ord. No. 340; 11-16-1982 by Ord. No. 408]
Quantity
(gallons) Rate Per Quarter Annum
First 6,000 or less, minimum at $1.70/100 = $ 10.20
Next 6,000 at $0.80/1,000 = $4.80
Next 13,000 at $0.30/1,000 = $3.90
Next 25,000 at $0.22/1,000 = $5.50
Next 50,000 at $0.20/1,000 = $10.00
Next 100,000 at $0.17/1,000 = $17.00
Next 400,000 at $0.15/1,000 = $60.00
All over 600,000 at $0.11/1,000
Multiple consumer units.
Where more than one consumer unit is located in one building, house or other structure
owned by one consumer and such building, house or other structure, at the discretion of this
Borough, is served by one service connection, multiple charges per quarter shall be imposed
upon such consumer equal to the number of consumer units located in such building, house
or other structure. In the event that such building, house or other structure is served by one
meter, the multiple quarterly charge shall be computed in the following manner:
The total consumption of water through such common water meter shall be divided by
the number of consumer units served thereby;
The schedule of meter rates for computing water rates, rents and charges as established
hereunder shall be applied to the resultant quotient; and
The resultant pro rata rental and charge for each consumer unit shall be multiplied by the
number of such consumer units receiving water service through such common water
meter to arrive at the total bill for all such consumer units served through the common
meter.
Provided, however, that there shall be charged the minimum quarterly rental and charge for
each consumer unit computed on the same basis as if each consumer unit were connected
separately and independently with the water system.
Rights reserved by Borough. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Council of the
Borough from entering into separate agreements with persons for the furnishing of water service
at rates, rents and charges other than as set forth in Subsections A, B, C and D of this section.
§ 340-3. Water rates, rents and charges for establishments
outside Borough.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 216/244
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
B.
(1)
C.
[Added 3-1-1974 by Ord. No. 332]
Meter rates - outside.
Rates outside the Borough.
Consumption Charges
First 1,000 gallons or less per
month
$3 First 3,000 gallons or less
per quarter
$9
Next 9,000 gallons per month or 27,000 gallons per
quarter
$0.85 per 1,000
gallons
Next 160,000 gallons per month or 480,000 gallons per
quarter
$0.75 per 1,000
gallons
Next 1,330,000 gallons per month or 3,990,00 gallons per
quarter
$0.45 per 1,000
gallons
All over 1,500,000 gallons per
month
or 4,500,000 gallons per
quarter
$0.14 per 1,000
gallons
Minimum Charge
5/8 inch $3.00 per month or $9.00 per quarter
3/4 inch $3.85 per month or $11.55 per quarter
1 inch $5.55 per month or $16.65 per quarter
1 1/2 inch $10.65 per month or $31.95 Per quarter
2 inch $21.90 per month or $65.70 per quarter
3 inch $36.90 per month or $110.70 per quarter
4 inch $70.65 per month or $211.95 per quarter
6 inch $130.65 per month or $391.95 per quarter
8 inch $189.15 per month or $567.45 per quarter
10 inch $279.15 per month or $837.45 per quarter
12 inch $504.15 per month or $1,512.45 per quarter
The customer shall pay the minimum charge only when the amount resulting by applying the
meter rates to the quantity of water consumed is less than the said minimum charge. When
such amount is greater than said minimum charge, then that shall constitute the bill for
service rendered.
Flat rate.
Public fire protection. For each public fire hydrant, a charge of $64 per annum payable
quarterly in arrears.
Private fire protection. For each private fire hydrant, a charge of $64 per annum payable
quarterly in arrears.
For each standpipe, hose or sprinkler connection, charges per annum, payable quarterly in
arrears, based on the size of connection, are as follows:
Eight-inch connection: $400.
Ten-inch connection: $624.
Standby service.
Application. Standby service to Lansford-Coaldale Joint Authority.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 217/244
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(5)
D.
Minimum charge: $160 per month.
Consumption charges. In accordance with schedule of rates applicable to general meter
service, Subsection A.
Rules and regulations.
Application for service connection.
Any property owner desiring the introduction of a service line or lines from the Borough
main into his or her premises must first make a written application on the form furnished,
in the name of the owner and tenant, the purpose for which service will be used, and the
guarantee that such service will continue for at least one year, and the exact time when
the trench from curb to property will be ready for the connection.
The application must be signed by the owner of the premises, or his duly authorized
agent, which application shall together with the rules and regulations of the Borough,
regulate and control the service of water to such premises.
Application for water service. Any property owner desiring a supply of water must make a
written application on the form furnished by the Borough at least one day before service is
required, which must be properly approved by the Borough or its duly authorized agent before
the water will be turned on.
Definition of consumer. Each separate family and/or business, which to a major degree is a
separate institution, shall each be a "consumer."
CONSUMER
A party who holds a fee simple title to a property and who has contracted for a supply of
water to said property, or who has contracted on behalf of his, her or its tenant for a
supply of water to said property as hereinafter classified (see "consumer unit" in § 340-1):
A building under one roof and occupied as one business or residence; or
A combination of buildings in one common enclosure occupied by one family or business;
or
The one side house of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall; or
One side or part of a house occupied by one family even though the closet and/or other
fixtures be used in common; or
A building of more than one apartment and using in common one hall and one entrance;
or
A building having a number of apartments and/or offices and/or businesses using in
common one hall or one or more means of entrance.
Written permit for consumer to supply persons or families. No owner or tenant of any
premises supplied with water by the Borough will be allowed to supply other persons or
families or other premises except by written permit from the Borough. Consumers who violate
this rule may have their water shut off after a notice of five days, and it will be so until the
Borough is satisfied that the rules and regulations will be observed.
Service lines to curb.
Upon the approval of the application of any property owner for a supply of water, the
Borough will tap the main, insert a corporation cock, carry the service pipe to the curb
and install a curb stop and service box.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 218/244
(b)
(c)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
The Borough will be responsible for the maintenance and repairs of the service line
between the main and the curbline.
Service lines will not be installed when the service line passes over or through premises
which at the time may be the property of persons other than the owner of the premises to
be supplied, unless the owner of the premises supplied assumes the liability.
Service lines from curb to premises. The service line beyond the curb stop shall be installed
and maintained by and at the expense of the consumer. The portion of the service line
installed by the consumer shall be not less in size and quality than the service line in the
street laid by the Borough, and shall be laid not less than four feet below the surface, and
shall not be covered until the tap on the main is made and service line tested. If any defects in
workmanship are found the service shall not be turned on until such defects are remedied. All
plumbing connections should be able to withstand a pressure of at least 125 pounds per
square inch.
Responsibility for condition of service line from curb to premises. The service line from the
curb to the premises shall be kept in good condition by the owner under penalty of
discontinuance of service by the Borough.
Opening and closing valve and stop cocks. Under no circumstances shall any person not
authorized by the Borough open or close the stop cocks or valves in any public or private line.
Two or more consumers on same service line. In case two or more consumers are supplied
with water from the same service pipe, a distinct and separate stop cock and curb box will be
provided for each consumer, if practical.
Bills rendered. All bills will be rendered at stated intervals, either monthly, or quarterly, at the
option of the Borough. If bills are rendered monthly, they will cover a charge for service
rendered during that month. If bills are rendered quarterly, they will cover bills for service
rendered during that quarter.
Bills due and payable.
All bills for water service shall be due and payable when rendered. On all water bills
remaining unpaid 30 days after the service has been furnished, a penalty of 5% will be
added. Delinquency in payment of bills for 30 days after the service is furnished warrants
the Borough to disconnect the service upon seven days' notice.
Remittance in payment of bills sent by mail, on or previous to the last day of the nonpenalty
period, as evidenced by the United States Post Office mark on the envelope in
which they are received, will be accepted by the Borough as a tender of payment of the
bill within such non-penalty period.
When the water is shut off for nonpayment of bills, the same will not be turned on until all
arrearages are paid.
Investigation of bills of doubtful accuracy. Any consumer, upon receipt of bill, having reason to
doubt its accuracy, shall bring or mail the bill, within five days, to the Borough for
investigation.
Ownership of meters. The Borough will furnish and set meters and connections free of
charge. The meter and connection shall remain the property of the Borough, and access to
same for reading of the meter, inspection, testing, repairs, etc., must be permitted at all
reasonable times by the consumer.
Location of meters. The Borough will determine the location for all meters. If the Borough
decides that the meter is to be placed within the building, the consumer will provide, free of
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 219/244
(15)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(a)
(b)
(19)
charge and expense to the Borough, an easily accessible place in the cellar near the entrance
of service pipes to cellar, with a stop and waste cock on the inlet side of the meter and a stop
and waste cock on the outlet side of the meter; the stop and waste cock on the outlet side of
the meter will be furnished and installed at the expense of the consumer. If the Borough
decides that the meter is to be placed outside of the building, it must be placed in an
approved meter box at the expense of the consumer and must have suitable stop and waste
valves approved by the Borough.
Protection of meter. The consumer must, at all times, properly protect the meter from injury by
frost or any other cause and will be held responsible for repairs to the meter made necessary
due to their negligence. Damage due to freezing, hot water, or external cause shall be paid for
by the consumer.
Meter tests.
In case of a disputed account involving the accuracy of a meter, such meter shall be
tested, upon the request of the applicant, in conformity with the provisions of the rules
and regulations pertaining to water service utilities of the Public Utility Commission.
When meters are removed after installation, at the request of the applicant, for testing,
the following rule of the Public Utility Commission shall apply:
"If the meter so tested shall be found to be accurate within the limits herein specified, a
fee determined from the schedule indicated below, shall be paid to the utility by the
customer requiring such test; but if not so found, then the cost thereof shall be borne by
the utility furnishing the service. The amount of the fee shall be $2 for each water meter
having an outlet not exceeding one inch; for other water meters having an outlet not
exceeding two inches, the test fee shall be $5 per meter."
Rates for testing meters not included in the above classification, or which are so located
that the cost is out of proportion to the fee specified, will be furnished by the Commission.
If a meter is found to be in error at any test by more than 4%, an allowance or charge
shall be made to the customer by the utility equal to the excess or deficiency in quantity
charged the customer, figured back from the date of test through the entire period of the
current bill, unless it can be shown that the error is due to an accident or other cause, the
exact date of which can be determined, in which case it shall be figured back to such
date.
Leaks and defective plumbing. The Borough shall not be liable for any damage resulting from
leaks, broken pipes, or from any other cause, occurring to or within any house or building, or
between curb stop and meter, and it is expressly stipulated by and between the Borough and
the consumer, that no claims shall be made against the said Borough on account of the
bursting or breaking of any main or service pipe or any attachment to said water works.
Leaks or waste. All water passing through a meter shall be charged for at the regular rate,
and no allowance will be made for excessive consumption due to leaks or waste.
Use of hydrants.
All persons forbidden to open any fire hydrant or to use any water therefrom for sprinkling
streets, for building or any purpose without permission, in writing, from the Borough,
under the penalty prescribed by law, except in case of fire, and by fire companies to test
the hydrants, such tests shall be made directly under the supervision of an authorized
agent of the Borough.
The consumer will understand that fire protection charges are mainly a compensation for
"standing ready to serve" and that for said charge the use of water is not contemplated
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 220/244
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
(b)
(20)
(a)
(b)
(21)
except for the actual extinguishing of fires or for testing fire hydrants, systems, and
apparatus which shall not be done without first notifying officials of the Borough. If used
otherwise, a consumption charge, in accordance with the rates published, will be
imposed.
Turning off water.
The Borough reserves the right at all times, after due notice, to shut off the water for
nonpayment of water bills, or for neglect or refusal to comply with the rules and
regulations of the Borough.
Service under application may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
For misrepresentation in application as to property or fixtures to be supplied or the
use to be made of the water supply;
For the use of water for any other property or purpose than that described in the
application;
For waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, or otherwise;
For failure to maintain, in good order, connection, service lines or fixtures beyond the
curb and owned by the applicant;
For molesting any service pipe, meter, curb stop, or seal, or any appliance of the
Borough;
In case of vacancy of the premises;
For violation of any rules of the Borough;
For neglecting to make payments of charges for water service within the period
herein specified or failure to pay any other fee or charge herein provided;
For refusal of access to property for purpose of inspecting, or for reading, caring for,
or removing meters;
The Borough shall have the right to cut off the water without notice in case of
breakdowns or for other unavoidable causes, or for the purpose of making
necessary repairs, connections, etc. Reasonable notice will be given when
practicable. In no case shall the Borough be liable for any damage or inconvenience
suffered.
A service charge of $5 will be imposed by the Borough to turn off water and a similar
charge of $5 will be imposed for turning on the water, in cases where it becomes
necessary due to the delinquency of bills. A similar charge will be made for turning
off the water and for turning on the water for consumers who apply under Subsection
D(24) herein.
Supply of water.
The Borough shall not be liable for a deficiency or failure in the supply, when occasioned
by shutting off water to make repairs, or connections or failure from any cause beyond
control.
The Borough reserves the right to restrict the supply of water in case of scarcity or
whenever the public welfare may require it.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 221/244
(22)
(23)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
[1]
(28)
E.
Vacating the premises. A consumer desiring abatement of a water bill due to a vacancy shall
give notice, in writing, to the Borough requesting water service to be shut off. All vacancies
shall date from the day the required notice is received by the Borough or from the date
specified on the notice upon which water service is to be shut off, whichever is later.
Allowance shall be made for the period of vacancy in computing the bill of the consumer;
provided, however, that no abatement shall be made for a period of less than one month.
Connection or outlets between main and meter. No connection, or outlet, will be permitted on
the service pipe, or pipes, supplying any premises, between the street main and the meter. All
water used must pass through the meter.
Deposits from consumers.
Deposits may be required from all consumers in an amount equal to the estimated gross
bill for any single billing period plus one month, with a minimum of $5.
Deposits will be returned to the depositor when he has established his credit to the
satisfaction of the Borough.
The deposit will bear interest at the rate of 6% annum.
Any consumer having a deposit shall pay bills for water service as rendered, in
accordance with the rules of the Borough, and the deposit shall not be considered as
payment on the account of a bill during the time the consumer is receiving water service.
Multiple units. Where more than one consumer unit is located in one building, house or other
structure owned by one consumer, and such building, house or other structure, at the
discretion of the Borough, is served by one service connection, multiple charges per quarter
shall be imposed upon such consumer equal to the number of consumer units located in such
building, house or other structure. In the event that such building, house or other structure is
served by one meter, the multiple quarterly charge shall be computed in the following manner:
(1) the total consumption of water through such common water meter shall be divided by the
number of consumer units served thereby; (2) the schedule of meter rates as shown herein
shall be applied to the resultant quotient; and (3) the resultant pro rata rental and charge for
each consumer unit shall be multiplied by the number of such consumer units receiving water
service through such common water meter to arrive at the total bill for all such consumer units
served through the common meter; provided, however, that there shall be charged the
minimum quarterly rental and charge for each consumer unit computed on the same basis as
if each consumer unit were connected separately and independently.
Failure to receive bill. Failure to receive a bill shall not exempt any consumer from the
accruing of a penalty. The presentation of a bill to the consumer is only a matter of
accommodation and not a waiver of this rule.
Service. All contracts for water shall continue in force from month to month, but either party
may cancel contract by giving 10 days' written notice that the contract shall terminate on the
first day of the month succeeding date of notice. For service beginning during a monthly
period, the minimum charge shall be pro rated to the first day of the following month. In case
water is turned off at the curb at the end of any month, no further charge for water service will
be made until service is again requested.
Changing of rules and regulations. The Borough reserves the right to change, or amend, from
time to time, these rules and regulations and the rates for the use of water in the manner
provided by the Public Utility Law[1].
Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
This article shall become effective as of April 1, 1974.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 222/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
§ 340-4. Billing and payment.
All water bills will be made out only in the name of the property owner, whom the Water
Department, Borough of Tamaqua, will hold responsible for their payment and, in the event of a
change of ownership, the purchaser will be held for all unpaid water rents assessed to said
property.
[Amended 4-5-1977 by Ord. No. 359]
All bills for water service shall be due and payable as of the date thereof. If bills for water service
shall not be paid within 15 days after such shall become due and payable, a penalty of 5% shall
be added. Payments mailed and postmarked on or before such fifteenth day shall be deemed to
be payments within the period allowed for payment without penalty. If such 15th day shall be a
legal holiday or a Sunday, payments made on or mailed and postmarked on the next succeeding
business day not a legal holiday shall be deemed to be payments within the period allowed for
payment without penalty.
A consumer whose water service remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after the same becomes
due and payable, is on the same line as a consumer whose water service is current at all times,
shall be ordered, upon seven days' notice by this Borough, to have his own separate line installed.
[Amended 4-5-1977 by Ord. No. 359]
Whenever water service to any consumer unit shall begin after the first day or shall terminate
before the last day of any billing period, the water rate, rent and charge for such period shall be
pro-rated equitably for that portion of the billing period during which service was provided.
A consumer desiring abatement of a water bill due to a vacancy shall give notice, in writing, to this
Borough requesting water service to be shut off. All vacancies shall date from the day the required
notice is received by this Borough or from the date specified on the notice upon which water
service is to be shut off, whichever is later. Allowance shall be made for the period of vacancy in
computing the bill of the consumer; provided, however, that no abatement shall be made for a
period of less than one month.
Every consumer initially shall provide this Borough with and thereafter shall keep this Borough
advised of his correct address. Failure of any person to receive bills for water rates, rents and
charges shall not be considered an excuse for nonpayment nor shall such failure result in an
extension of the period of time during which such bills shall be payable without penalty.
§ 340-5. Enforcement.
Proper officers of this Borough hereby are authorized and directed to do all things and to take all legal
action necessary, including the filing of municipal claims in accordance with law, to enforce collection of
water rates, rents and charges established and imposed hereby and otherwise to carry out provisions
hereof.
§ 340-6. Rules and regulations.
This Borough, from time to time, in accordance with law, by appropriate ordinance or resolution,
may adopt such additional rules and regulations as, in the opinion of the Council of this Borough,
may be desirable, beneficial or necessary for or in connection with use and operation of the water
service facilities being operated by this Borough and which shall govern and control the
distribution and supply of water.
Any such rules and regulations shall be construed in conjunction with provisions hereof and shall
become effective upon the date fixed by this Borough upon adoption thereof.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 223/244
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A service charge of $20 will be imposed by the Borough of Tamaqua to turn off water and a
service charge of $10 will be imposed for turning on the water in cases where it becomes
necessary due to delinquency in payment of water bills. A similar charge will be imposed for
turning off the water and for turning on the water for consumers who apply under § 340-4E, Billing
and payment.
[Amended 3-1-1974 by Ord. No. 331; 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 473]
Under no circumstances shall any person not authorized by the Borough open or close the stop
cocks or valves in any public or private line.
[Amended 3-1-1974 by Ord. No. 331]
In case two or more consumers are supplied with water from the same service pipe, a distinct and
separate stop cock and curb box will be provided for each consumer, if practical.
[Amended 3-1-1974 by Ord. No. 331]
No owner or tenant of any premises supplied with water by the Borough will be allowed to supply
other persons or families or other premises except by written permit from the Borough. Consumers
who violate this rule may have their water shut off after notice of five days, and it will be so until
the Borough is satisfied that the rules and regulations will be observed.
[Added 11-16-1982 by Ord. No. 408]
Service line approval, responsibility, maintenance and prohibition.
[Added 11-16-1982 by Ord. No. 408]
Upon the approval of the application of any domestic property owner for a supply of water the
Borough will tap the main, insert a corporation cock, carry the service pipe to the curb and
install a curb stop and service box.
The Borough will be responsible for the maintenance and repairs of the domestic service line
between the main and the curbline.
Service lines will not be installed when the service line passes over or through premises
which at the time may be the property of persons other than the owner of the premises to be
supplied, unless the owner of the premises supplied assumes the liability.
The service line beyond the curb stop shall be installed and maintained by and at the expense of
the consumer. The portion of the service line installed by the consumer shall not be less in size
and quality than the service line in the street laid by the Borough, and shall be laid not less than
four feet below the surface, and shall not be covered until the tap on the main is made and the
service line tested. If any defects in workmanship are found, the service shall not be turned on
until such defects are remedied. All plumbing connections should be able to withstand a pressure
of at least 125 pounds per square inch.
[Added 11-16-1982 by Ord. No. 408]
The service line from the curb to the premises shall be kept in good condition by the owner under
penalty of discontinuance of service by the Borough.
[Added 11-16-1982 by Ord. No. 408]
The Borough, upon written notification from the owner, shall allow the sidewalk excavation to
remain open for a period of 48 hours to allow the homeowner to replace the remainder of the
service line should they decide to do so. Along with this notification, the owner shall execute an
agreement with the Borough agreeing to indemnify, defend, and save harmless the Borough from
any liability as a result of the excavation remaining open.
[Added 11-16-1982 by Ord. No. 408]
In the event it is necessary for the Borough to remove the owner's sidewalk, and the removal is
not necessitated by a repair of the water line from the curb stop to the premises of the owner
(which would be the owner's responsibility), the Borough will backfill the sidewalk to grade and, in
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 224/244
A.
a timely fashion, replace the paving to match the existing material. In all other cases, it shall be the
owner's responsibility to backfill the sidewalk to grade and, in a timely fashion, replace the paving
to match existing material.
[Added 11-16-1982 by Ord. No. 408; 8-1-1989 by Ord. No. 447]
§ 340-7. Effective date and applicability.
With respect to all consumer units connected with and served by the water supply, transmission and
distribution system owned by this Borough and to be transferred and conveyed by this Borough to the
Authority and to be leased by the Authority, as lessor, to this Borough, as lessee, for operation and
use, this article shall become effective as of June 1, 1964; and with respect to all other consumer units
served or to be served by the water system, this article shall become effective immediately upon
acquisition by the Authority of the water distribution system serving such consumer units and
constituting the water system, known as the "Still Creek-Hometown System," formerly owned and
operated by the Panther Valley Water Company.
§ 340-8. Rights reserved by Borough.
The Borough reserves the right to repeal, amend or modify this article or any part thereof or to change
the water rates, rents and charges established and imposed by this article in such manner and at such
times as, in the opinion of the Council of this Borough, shall be necessary and/or desirable, all after
due legal procedure.
§ 340-9. Declaration of purpose.
It is declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation
of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this Borough.
Article II. Water Conservation
[Adopted 8-20-1991 by Ord. No. 468]
§ 340-10. General policy.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, recreational, governmental, or public building or structure of any kind which is constructed
or remodeled and in which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed, extended or
altered in any way, and for which construction a permit is required to be obtained from the Borough of
Tamaqua (or would be required but for an exemption from a permit requirement for public or
governmental agencies) unless the new, extended or altered plumbing, water piping and other waterusing
fixtures therein conform to the requirements and standards of § 340-11 of this article. The
provisions of this article shall apply to any such building or structure for which such a building permit is
issued, or would otherwise be required to be issued but for such an exemption, on or after September
3, 1991.
§ 340-11. Water conservation performance standards for
plumbing fixtures and fittings.
Water closets and associated flushing mechanisms. The water consumption of water closets shall
not exceed an average of 1.6 gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 psi to
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 225/244
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
80 psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of the ANSI A122.19.2M
and ANSI A112.19.6M.
Urinals and associated flushing mechanisms. Urinal water consumption shall not exceed an
average of 1.5 gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 psi to 80 psi. The
fixtures shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A122.19.2M and ANSI
A112.19.6M.
Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed 3.0 gallons of water per minute over
a range of test pressures from 20 psi to 80 psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the
test requirements of ANSI A122.18.1M.
Faucets. Sink and lavatory faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 3.0 gallons of water per minute
over a range of test pressures from 20 psi to 80 psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance with
the test requirements of ANSI A112.18.1M.
§ 340-12. Special provisions.
Special purpose equipment. The performance standards of § 340-11 shall not apply to fixtures and
fittings such as emergency showers, aspirator faucets, and blowout fixtures that, in order to
perform a specialized function, cannot meet the specified standards.
Exemptions. Any person(s) may apply to the Borough of Tamaqua for an exemption to the terms
of this article, which may be granted by the Council of the Borough, upon proof that some other
device, system or procedure will save as much or more water as those set forth herein, or that
those set forth herein cannot be complied with, without undue hardship.
§ 340-13. Official review and modification.
The Council of the Borough of Tamaqua may, from time to time, modify, add to, or remove from the
standards and restrictions herein.
§ 340-14. Violations and penalties.
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to use or apply water within the Borough of Tamaqua
contrary to or in violation of the restrictions herein, and upon conviction thereof, such persons shall be
punished by being imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by fine of not more than
$300 or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Article III. Connection to Public Water System
[Adopted 5-19-1999 by Ord. No. 519]
§ 340-15. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms and phrases
used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
The Tamaqua Area Water Authority, a Pennsylvania municipality authority.
BOROUGH
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 226/244
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
The Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, a political subdivision, acting by and
through its Borough Council or, in appropriate cases, by and through its authorized
representatives.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property located within this Borough upon which there is erected a structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals to which
structure shall be connected to the Public Water System.
OWNER
The person, custodian, guardian, trustee, caretaker, executor, administrator in whose name the
deed for a property is designated.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, company, corporation, association, corporate political body, joint
ownership or any other entity capable of functioning in the context used herein.
PREMISES
The property, building, or other site to which water service is furnished, including:
A building under one roof, owned or leased by one person, occupied as one residence or
business;
Each combination of buildings owned or leased by one person, served by one service line,
and occupied by one family or business;
Each side of a double unit or each housing unit;
Each apartment, condominium, manufactured housing, mobile home, office, or suite of offices
located in a building having several such apartments, offices, or suites of offices and using in
common one or more means of entrance; or
Such other situations as the Authority shall deem proper and advisable.
WATER SERVICE
The provision by the Authority of water as a commodity of readiness to provide water for any
purposes and of any services related thereto.
WATER SYSTEM
The Authority's water supply and distribution facilities taken as a whole or any portion thereof,
situate in or adjacent to this Borough and owned, maintained and operated by the Authority.
§ 340-16. Use of public water system required.
The owner of any improved property which is located within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Tamaqua, except any improved property which constitutes an industrial establishment which has
its own supply of water for use other than human and/or agricultural use or consumption, and
excepting any improved property which as of the effective date of this article is being served by a
private water source, and whose principal building or structure is within 150 feet of the public
water system shall connect such improved property with and shall use such public water system in
such manner as the Borough and/or Authority may require, within 60 days after notice to such
owner from the Borough to make such connection; subject to such limitations and restrictions as
may be established herein or otherwise shall be established by the Borough and/or Authority. If
the Borough and/or the Authority determines that it cannot reasonably make the connection to
such improved property and/or cannot provide adequate water pressure, the Borough and/or the
Authority shall exempt such property from the requirement to use the public water system.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 227/244
B.
C.
D.
E.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, or occupier of any improved property in the Borough to
employ any means of cross-connecting any other water source to the public water system,
including service lines and house plumbing served by these services. Private water sources,
including wells, may be continued to be used by the owner of the improved property so long as the
private water source is not used for domestic purposes (including use for drinking water),
agricultural purposes, or interconnected to the public water system. This provision limiting the use
of private water sources shall not apply to owners of improved property whose principal building
and/or structure is not within 150 feet of the public water system or whose improved property is
exempted from the requirement to use the public water system pursuant to the provision of
Subsection A.
The owner or owners of the aforementioned improved property identified in Subsection A hereof
shall permit the Borough and/or Authority's designated inspector full and complete access to all
water system facilities in each building and in and about all parts of the property for the purposes
of inspecting said facilities.
The notice by this Borough to each owner of improved property to make connection to the public
water system referred to in Subsection A, shall consist of a copy of this article, including any
amendments at the time in effect, and a written or printed document requiring such connection in
accordance with the provision of this article and specifying that such connection shall be made
within 60 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may be given at any time after the
public water system is in place which will provide potable water to the particular improved property
in accordance with Subsection A. Such notice shall be served upon the owner of such improved
property either by personal service or by registered mail, return receipt requested.
All service connections shall be made by each owner of the improved property pursuant to the
rules and regulations of the Authority.
§ 340-17. Enforcement.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to pay a fine of not more than $500, together with the costs of prosecution in each
case. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 340-18. Declaration of purpose.
It is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough of Tamaqua.
Chapter 350. Zoning
[The Borough Council of the Borough of Tamaqua, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, on August 18,
2009, by Ord. No. 638, approved the Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region Joint Zoning
Ordinance as the ordinance to govern in the Borough. Said ordinance, as amended, is on file in the
Borough offices.]
Derivation Table
Chapter DT. Derivation Table
In order to assist Code users in the transition to the new Code's organization, the Derivation Table
indicates where chapters and articles of the 1971 Code of Ordinances have been included in the 2019
Code, or the reason for exclusion.
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 228/244
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1971 Code of Ordinances to 2019
Code.
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code of Ordinances Location in 2019 Code
Ch. I, Administration and Government
Part 1, Elected Officers NI
Part 2, Manager Ch. 41
Part 3, Authorities Ch. 8, Art. I
Part 4, Boards and Commissions
§ 41, Borough Planning Commission Established Ch. 15, Art. I
§ 42, Recreation Board Established REP
Part 5, Police Department Ch. 62
Part 6, Firemen's Relief Ch. 30
Part 7, Pensions, Retirement and Social Security
A. Police Pensions NI; see Ch. 55
B. Social Security for Borough Employees and Officers NI; Superseded by Statute
C. Employees' Retirement and Insurance Plan NI; see Ch. 55
Ch. II, Air Pollution (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. III, Animals Ch. 102, Art. I
Ch. IV, Bicycles REP
Ch. V, Buildings
Part 1, Building Code Repealed by Ord. No. 585; see now
Ch. 129
Part 2, Electrical Code Repealed by Ord. No. 585
Ch. VI, Comfort Station REP
Ch. VII, Conduct
Secs. 1, 5, 6, 12,
Sec. 4, Firearms
REP
Ch. 154
Ch. VIII, Curfew Ch. 136
Ch. IX, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
Part 1, Fire Prevention Superseded by Ord. Nos. 644 and
678
Part 2, Fire Protection Ch. 157, Art. I
Ch. X, Franchises
Part 1, Electric NI
Part 2, Gas NI
Part 3, Telephone and Telegraph NI
Part 4, Water NI
Part 5, Television NI
Ch. XI, Garbage and Refuse Superseded by Ord. No. 611
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 229/244
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code of Ordinances Location in 2019 Code
Ch. XII, Health and Sanitation Superseded by Ord. No. 660
Ch. XIII, Housing Superseded
Ch. XIV, Libraries (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XV, Licenses, Permits and General Business Regulations Ch. 240, Art. I
Ch. XVI, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XVII, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 326
Ch. XVIII, Parks and Recreation (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XIX, Plumbing Repealed by Ord. No. 585
Ch. XX, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Sewer Connections Ch. 260, Art. I
Part 2, Sewer Rentals and Regulations Ch. 260, Art. II
Ch. XXI, Signs and Billboards (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XXII, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Streets
A. Naming of Streets Ch. 286, Art. I
B. Street Excavations and Openings Ch. 286, Art. II
Part 2, Sidewalks
A. Sidewalk and Curb Construction, Reconstruction and
Repair
Ch. 286, Art. III
B. Snow and Ice Removal Ch. 286, Art. IV
Part 3, Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 286, Art. V
Ch. XXIII, Subdivision and Land Development Superseded by Joint SALDO
Ch. XXIV, Swimming Pools (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XXV, Taxation, Special
Part 1, Earned Income Ch. 305, Art. I
Part 2, Per Capita Ch. 305, Art. II
Part 3, Real Estate Transfer Superseded by Ord. No. 428
Ch. XXVI, Trees (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XXVII, Water Ch. 340, Art. I
Ch. XXVIII, Zoning Repealed by Ord. No. 323; replaced
by Joint Zoning
Appendix
I. Agreements and Contracts (Reserved) Omitted
II. Annexation of Territory NI
III. Bond Issues and Loans NI
IV. Electricity NI
V. Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs NI
VI. Public Property NI
VII. Sewers NI
VIII. Sidewalks NI
IX. Streets NI
X. Taxation NI
XI. Water NI
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 230/244
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Borough of Tamaqua reviewed for
codification, indicating for each its inclusion in the Code or the reason for exclusion. The last legislation
reviewed for the original publication of the Code was Ord. No. 692, adopted June 20, 2017.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
312 7-13-1971 Construction Codes: Plumbing
Standards Amendment
Repealer only
313 12-14-1971 Tax Rate for 1972 NCM
314 1-11-1972 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
315 4-11-1972 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
316 5-10-1972 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Planning
Commission Amendment
Ch. 15, Art. I
317 7-11-1972 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewage Disposal Systems
Ch. 260, Art. III
318 11-14-1972 Solid Waste: Garbage and
Refuse Collection Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 611
319 11-14-1972 Cooperation Agreement:
Tamaqua Leased Housing
Corporation
NCM
320 12-19-1972 Tax Rate for 1973 NCM
321 1-9-1973 Street Name Change
Designation
NCM
322 2-13-1973 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
323 7-10-1973 Zoning Superseded by Ord. No. 638
324 7-10-1973 Subdivision and Land
Development Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 639
325 9-18-1973 Water and Sewer Main Extension
Policy
NCM
326 12-11-1973 Increasing Indebtedness NCM
327 12-18-1973 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
328 12-18-1973 Tax Rate for 1974 NCM
329 12-18-1973 Solid Waste: Sanitation Fee Superseded by Ord. No. 611
330 2-20-1974 Increasing Indebtedness NCM
331 3-1-1974 Water: Water Rates Amendment Ch. 340, Art. I
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 231/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
332 3-1-1974 Water: Water Rates Amendment Ch. 340, Art. I
333 3-1-1974 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
334 7-16-1974 Subdivision and Land
Development
Superseded by Ord. No. 639
335 8-20-1974 Transportation of Household
Goods
Ch. 319
336 8-20-1974 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
337 8-20-1974 Street Paving NCM
338 11-4-1974 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
339 12-17-1974 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
340 12-17-1974 Water: Water Rates Amendment Ch. 340, Art. I
341 12-30-1974 Appropriations and Expenses for
1975
NCM
342 12-30-1974 Tax Rate for 1975 NCM
343 2-18-1975 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
344 3-4-1975 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
345 3-18-1975 Manager Amendment Ch. 41
346 5-6-1975 Incurrence of Debt NCM
347 5-6-1975 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
348 5-6-1975 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Connections Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
349 5-6-1975 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
350 11-18-1975 Taxation: Occupation Privilege
Tax
Superseded by Ord. No. 601
351 11-18-1975 Police Department Amendment Ch. 62
352 11-18-1975 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
353 12-16-1975 Tax Rate for 1976 NCM
354 12-16-1975 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewage Disposal Systems
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
355 1-20-1976 Solid Waste: Sanitation Fee
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 611
356 12-21-1976 Tax Rate for 1977 NCM
357 1-4-1977 Taxation: Discounts and
Penalties for Payment of Taxes
Ch. 305, Art. III
358 2-15-1977 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
359 4-5-1977 Water: Water Rates Amendment Ch. 340, Art. I
360 4-19-1977 Increasing Indebtedness NCM
361 5-18-1977 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Industrial Cost Recovery System
Ch. 260, Art. IV
362 7-19-1977 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 665
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 232/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
363 7-19-1977 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
364 8-16-1977 Annexation NCM
365 9-6-1977 Gas Stations Repealed by Ord. No. 376
366 12-6-1977 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
367 12-6-1977 Subdivision and Land
Development Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 639
368 12-20-1977 Tax Rate for 1978 NCM
369 3-7-1978 Construction Codes: Housing
and Property Maintenance
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 400
370 3-7-1978 Construction Codes: Building
Construction Amendment
Repealed by Ord. No. 397
371 3-7-1978 Construction Codes: Fire
Prevention Amendment
Repealed by Ord. No. 399
372 3-7-1978 Construction Codes: Plumbing
Standards Amendment
Repealed by Ord. No. 396
373 3-7-1978 Construction Codes: Electrical
Standards Amendment
Repealed by Ord. No. 398
374 3-7-1978 Construction Codes: Mechanical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 395
375 4-25-1978 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment: Sidewalk
Construction and Maintenance
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 608
376 5-17-1978 Gas Stations Repealer Repealer only
377 9-5-1978 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
378 11-8-1978 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
379 11-8-1978 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Communications
Commission
REP
380 12-19-1978 Tax Rate for 1979 NCM
381 1-30-1979 Increasing Indebtedness NCM
382 3-6-1979 loitering Ch. 206
383 3-6-1979 Disorderly Conduct Amendment REP
384 8-7-1979 Solid Waste: Collection From
Business Consumers
REP
385 11-7-1979 Increasing Indebtedness NCM
386 12-27-1979 Tax Rate for 1980 NCM
387 2-19-1980 Stoves and Chimneys REP
388 6-3-1980 Street Acceptances NCM
389 12-29-1980 Tax Rate for 1981 NCM
390 1-6-1981 Solid Waste: Sanitation Fee
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 611
391 1-6-1981 Streets and Sidewalks:
Excavations and Openings
Amendment
Ch. 286, Art. II
392 2-17-1981 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 233/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
393 2-17-1981 Taxation: Realty Transfer Tax
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 428
394 3-3-1981 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
395 9-1-1981 Construction Codes: Mechanical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 422
396 9-1-1981 Construction Codes: Plumbing
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 421
397 9-1-1981 Construction Codes: Building
Construction
Repealed by Ord. No. 419
398 9-1-1981 Construction Codes: Electrical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 439
399 9-1-1981 Construction Codes: Fire
Prevention
Repealed by Ord. No. 420
400 9-1-1981 Property Maintenance: Adoption
of Standards
Superseded by Ord. No. 615
401 9-15-1981 Street Vacation NCM
402 11-4-1981 Street Vacation NCM
403 12-15-1981 Solid Waste: Sanitation Fee
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 611
404 12-29-1981 Tax Rate for 1982 NCM
405 3-2-1982 Subdivision and Land
Development Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 639
406 4-6-1982 Alcoholic Beverages REP
407 4-6-1982 Vehicles, Motor-Driven Ch. 333
408 11-16-1982 Water: Water Rates Amendment Ch. 340, Art. I
409 12-21-1982 Tax Rate for 1983 NCM
410 6-21-1983 Adult Entertainment REP
411 8-16-1983 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
412 10-4-1983 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
413 11-1-1983 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
414 12-20-1983 Tax Rate for 1984 NCM
415 9-4-1984 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
416 10-16-1984 Franchise Agreement: Service
Electric Cable TV, Inc.
NCM
417 12-18-1984 Tax Rate for 1985 NCM
418 2-19-1985 Construction Codes: Existing
Structures Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 438
419 2-19-1985 Construction Codes: Building
Construction
Repealed by Ord. No. 433
420 2-19-1985 Construction Codes: Fire
Prevention
Repealed by Ord. No. 435
421 2-19-1985 Construction Codes: Plumbing
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 437
422 2-19-1985 Construction Codes: Mechanical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 434
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 234/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
423 4-2-1985 Rental Property: Smoke
Detectors
Ch. 253, Art. I
424 12-23-1985 Tax Rate for 1986 NCM
425 7-15-1986 Rental Property: Smoke
Detectors Amendment
Ch. 253, Art. I
426 8-5-1986 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
427 12-23-1986 Tax Rate for 1987 NCM
428 1-6-1987 Taxation: Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 305, Art. IV
429 1-20-1987 Solid Waste: Landfill Permits REP
430 1-20-1987 Solid Waste: Sanitation Fee
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 611
431 5-20-1987 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
432 7-7-1987 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
433 7-7-1987 Construction Codes: Building
Construction
Repealed by Ord. No. 457
434 7-7-1987 Construction Codes: Mechanical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 455
435 7-7-1987 Construction Codes: Fire
Prevention
Repealed by Ord. No. 459
436 7-7-1987 Construction Codes: One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Standards
Superseded by Ord. No. 523
437 7-7-1987 Construction Codes: Plumbing
Standards Amendment
Repealed by Ord. No. 456
438 7-7-1987 Construction Codes: Existing
Structures Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 458
439 7-7-1987 Construction Codes: Electrical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 460
440 10-7-1987 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
441 12-29-1987 Tax Rate for 1988 NCM
442 4-5-1988 Vehicles, Motor-Driven
Amendment
Ch. 333
443 6-7-1988 Construction Codes: Fire
Prevention Amendment
Repealed by Ord. No. 459
444 7-19-1988 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
445 12-20-1988 Tax Rate for 1989 NCM
446 3-7-1989 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
447 8-1-1989 Water: Water Rates Amendment Ch. 340, Art. I
448 12-19-1989 Tax Rate for 1990 NCM
449 1-16-1990 Solid Waste: Sanitation Fee
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 611
450 1-16-1990 Rental Property: Tenant Lists Superseded by Ord. No. 584
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 235/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
451 3-20-1990 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
452 3-20-1990 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
453 6-19-1990 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
454 6-19-1990 Intergovernmental Cooperation:
Municipal Drug Task Force
Agreement
NCM
455 10-2-1990 Construction Codes: Mechanical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 482
456 10-2-1990 Construction Codes: Plumbing
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 483
457 10-2-1990 Construction Codes: Building
Construction
Repealed by Ord. No. 484
458 10-2-1990 Construction Codes: Property
Maintenance
Repealed by Ord. No. 485
459 10-2-1990 Construction Codes: Fire
Prevention
Repealed by Ord. No. 486
460 10-2-1990 Construction Codes: Electrical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 487
461 12-27-1990 Tax Rate for 1991 NCM
462 3-5-1991 Hazardous Materials:
Reimbursement for Expenses
Ch. 185, Art. I
463 3-19-1991 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
464 3-19-1991 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
465 4-2-1991 Lease Rental Debt NCM
466 4-30-1991 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
467 5-22-1991 Solid Waste: Recycling Ch. 273, Art. I
468 8-20-1991 Water: Water Conservation Ch. 340, Art. II
469 10-1-1991 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
470 12-3-1991 Construction Codes: Property
Maintenance Amendment
Repealed by Ord. No. 485
471 12-17-1991 Tax Rate for 1992 NCM
472 1-21-1992 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
473 3-17-1992 Water: Water Rates Amendment Ch. 340, Art. I
474 8-4-1992 Cost of Living Raise NCM
475 10-20-1992 Animals: Dog Control
Amendment
Ch. 102, Art. I
476 12-15-1992 Tax Rate for 1993 NCM
477 1-5-1993 Insurance: Fire Insurance Claims Superseded by Ord. No. 568
478 3-2-1993 Cost of Living Raise NCM
479 6-15-1993 Lease Rental Debt NCM
480 7-6-1993 Water Authority Agreement NCM
481 7-6-1993 Water Authority Agreement NCM
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 236/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
482 8-17-1993 Construction Codes: Mechanical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 505
483 8-17-1993 Construction Codes, Uniform:
Plumbing Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 585
484 8-17-1993 Construction Codes: Building
Construction
Repealed by Ord. No. 503
485 8-17-1993 Construction Codes: Property
Maintenance
Repealed by Ord. No. 506
486 8-17-1993 Construction Codes: Fire
Prevention
Repealed by Ord. No. 504
487 8-17-1993 Construction Codes: Electrical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 526
488 12-7-1993 Tax Rate for 1994 NCM
489 12-7-1993 Fire Department: Fire Companies
Recognized
Ch. 24, Art. I
490 7-5-1994 Pensions: Employees’
Retirement Plan Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
491 9-6-1994 Cost of Living Raise NCM
492 12-20-1994 Tax Rate for 1995 NCM
493 4-4-1995 Cost of Living Raise NCM
494 6-20-1995 Lease Rental Debt NCM
495 7-18-1995 Lease Rental Debt NCM
496 12-19-1995 Tax Rate for 1996 NCM
497 12-19-1995 Street Acceptance NCM
498 3-19-1996 Taxation: Tax Certifications Ch. 305, Art. V
499 3-19-1996 Cost of Living Raise NCM
500 4-16-1996 Records Disposition Ch. 70
501 9-3-1996 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
502 12-17-1996 Tax Rate for 1997 NCM
503 12-17-1996 Construction Codes: Building
Construction
Repealed by Ord. No. 521
504 12-17-1996 Construction Codes: Fire
Prevention
Repealed by Ord. No. 522
505 12-17-1996 Construction Codes: Mechanical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 525
506 12-17-1996 Construction Codes: Property
Maintenance
Repealed by Ord. No. 524
507 12-19-1996 Intergovernmental Agreement:
Eastern Schuylkill Recreation
Commission
NCM
508 3-18-1997 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
509 5-6-1997 Solid Waste: Sanitation Fee
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 611
510 5-21-1997 Cost of Living Raise NCM
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 237/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
511 9-2-1997 General Obligation Note NCM
512 12-16-1997 Tax Rate for 1998 NCM
513 3-3-1998 Cost of Living Raise NCM
514 5-5-1998 Intergovernmental Agreement:
Eastern Schuylkill Recreation
Commission Amendment
NCM
515 12-15-1998 Tax Rate for 1999 NCM
516 2-2-1999 Peddling and Soliciting: Transient
Retail Businesses Amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
517 3-16-1999 Cost of Living Raise NCM
518 3-16-1999 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
519 5-19-1999 Water: Connection To Public
Water System
Ch. 340, Art. III
520 6-1-1999 Intergovernmental Agreement:
Eastern Schuylkill Recreation
Commission Amendment
NCM
521 11-7-1999 Construction Codes, Uniform:
Building Construction
Repealed by Ord. No. 585
522 11-7-1999 Construction Codes: Fire
Prevention
Superseded by Ord. No. 644
523 11-7-1999 Construction Codes, Uniform:
One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 585
524 11-7-1999 Construction Codes: Property
Maintenance
Repealed by Ord. No. 582
525 11-7-1999 Construction Codes, Uniform:
Mechanical Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 585
526 11-7-1999 Construction Codes: Electrical
Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 580
527 12-21-1999 Tax Rate for 2000 NCM
528 2-15-2000 Cost of Living Increase NCM
529 2-15-2000 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
530 2-15-2000 Pensions: Employees’
Retirement Plan Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
531 6-6-2000 Animals: Dog Control
Amendment
Ch. 102, Art. I
532 6-6-2000 Cost of Living Raise NCM
533 12-27-2000 Tax Rate for 2001 NCM
534 1-16-2001 Fire Prevention and Fire
Protection: Fire Protection
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 678
535 2-6-2001 Officers and Employees:
Secretary and Treasurer
Ch. 48, Art. I
536 2-20-2001 Cost of Living Raise NCM
537 2-20-2001 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 238/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
538 4-3-2001 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
539 4-3-2001 Lease Rental Debt NCM
540 5-1-2001 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
541 6-19-2001 Street Vacation NCM
542 7-3-2001 Lease Rental Debt NCM
543 9-18-2001 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Connections Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
544 9-18-2001 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Connections Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
545 9-18-2001 Rental Property: Registration Ch. 253, Art. II
546 11-7-2001 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
547 12-18-2001 Tax Rate for 2002 NCM
548 3-5-2002 Cost of Living Raise NCM
549 3-5-2002 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
550 3-5-2002 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
551 3-5-2002 Street Vacation NCM
552 4-16-2002 Lease Rental Debt NCM
553 5-22-2002 Historic Preservation Ch. 192
554 8-6-2002 Streets and Sidewalks: Naming
of Streets Amendment
Ch. 286, Art. I
555 8-6-2002 Peddling and Soliciting: Transient
Retail Businesses Amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
556 9-17-2002 Tattoo and Body Piercing
Establishments
Ch. 299
557 10-1-2002 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Connections Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
558 10-15-2002 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
559 10-15-2002 Intergovernmental Agreement:
Schuylkill Region Insurance
Cooperative
NCM
560 11-6-2002 Cost of Living Raise NCM
561 11-6-2002 Cost of Living Adjustment NCM
562 11-6-2002 Cost of Living Adjustment NCM
563 12-3-2002 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
564 12-3-2002 Subdivision and Land
Development Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 639
565 12-3-2002 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
566 12-30-2002 Tax Rate for 2003 NCM
567 5-21-2003 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
568 6-3-2003 Insurance: Fire Insurance Claims Ch. 199, Art. I
569 6-17-2003 Cost of Living Raise NCM
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 239/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
570 9-16-2003 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
571 9-16-2003 Municipal Claims and Liens:
Collection Procedures; Charges,
Interest and Attorneys' Fees
Superseded by Ord. No. 597
572 10-7-2003 Noise: Engine Brakes Ch. 220, Art. I
573 11-5-2003 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
574 11-18-2003 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
575 12-16-2003 Tax Rate for 2004 NCM
576 2-17-2004 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
577 2-17-2004 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
578 3-2-2004 Cost of Living Increase NCM
579 3-2-2004 Environmental Impact Statement Ch. 148
580 3-2-2004 Construction Codes, Uniform:
Electrical Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 585
581 3-16-2004 Boards, Commissions And
Committees: Planning
Commission Amendment
Ch. 15, Art. I
582 3-16-2004 Construction Codes: Property
Maintenance
Repealed by Ord. No. 615
583 4-20-2004 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Acceptance of Trucked Wastes
Ch. 260, Art. V
584 4-20-2004 Rental Property: Tenant Lists Ch. 253, Art. III
585 4-20-2004 Construction Codes, Uniform Ch. 129
586 5-4-2004 Boards, Commissions And
Committees: International
Property Maintenance Code
Appeals Board
Ch. 15, Art. II
587 5-18-2004 Streets and Sidewalks:
Excavations and Openings
Amendment
Ch. 286, Art. II
588 7-20-2004 Zoning Amendment Superseded by Ord. No. 638
589 7-20-2004 Subdivision and Land
Development Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 639
590 7-20-2004 Boards, Commissions And
Committees: Uniform
Construction Codes Appeals
Board
Ch. 15, Art. III
591 8-3-2004 Construction Codes, Uniform
Amendment
NI
592 8-3-2004 Parks and Recreation Areas:
Helmets Required At Skateboard
Park
Ch. 227, Art. I
593 8-17-2004 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 240/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
594 10-19-2004 Franchise Agreement: Nunet,
Inc.
NCM
595 11-3-2004 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
596 11-3-2004 Intergovernmental Agreement:
Pennsylvania Municipal Health
Insurance Cooperative
NCM
597 12-16-2004 Municipal Claims and Liens:
Collection Procedures; Charges,
Interest and Attorneys' Fees
Ch. 213, Art. I
598 12-29-2004 Tax Rate for 2005 NCM
599 2-1-2005 Municipal Claims and Liens:
Collection Procedures; Charges,
Interest and Attorneys' Fees
Amendment
Ch. 213, Art. I
600 2-1-2005 Historic Preservation
Amendment
Ch. 192
601 3-1-2005 Taxation: Emergency and
Municipal Services Tax
Superseded by Ord. No. 626
602 4-5-2005 Cost of Living Raise NCM
603 6-21-2005 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
604 6-21-2005 Solid Waste: Sanitation Fee
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 611
605 7-5-2005 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Connections Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
606 9-6-2005 Graffiti Ch. 178
607 11-15-2005 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
608 11-15-2005 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment: Sidewalk
Construction and Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 286, Art. III
609 12-27-2005 Tax Rate for 2006 NCM
610 5-17-2006 Historic Preservation
Amendment
Ch. 192
611 6-6-2006 Solid Waste: Garbage and
Refuse Collection
Ch. 273, Art. II
612 9-19-2006 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewage Sludge
Ch. 260, Art. VI
613 9-19-2006 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
614 9-19-2006 Pensions: Employees’
Retirement Plan Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
615 10-17-2006 Property Maintenance: Adoption
of Standards
Repealed by Ord. No. 641
616 12-28-2006 Tax Rate for 2007 NCM
617 1-16-2007 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
618 2-6-2007 Taxation: Emergency and
Municipal Services Tax
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 626
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 241/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
619 5-1-2007 Sex Offender Residency
Restrictions
Repealed by Ord. No. 654
620 5-1-2007 Solid Waste: Corporate Waste
and Local Control
Ch. 273, Art. III
621 5-16-2007 Street Acceptances Amendment NCM
622 5-16-2007 Property Maintenance: Adoption
of Standards Amendment
Repealed by Ord. No. 641
623 6-19-2007 General Obligation Note NCM
624 6-19-2007 Drug Task Force Agreement NCM
625 11-20-2007 Property Maintenance: Adoption
of Standards Amendment
Repealed by Ord. No. 641
626 12-4-2007 Taxation: Local Services Tax Ch. 305, Art. VI
627 12-18-2007 Tax Rate for 2008 NCM
628 1-22-2008 General Obligation Note NCM
629 4-15-2008 Tobacco Products: Possession
and Use By Minors
Ch. 312, Art. I
630 9-2-2008 General Obligation Note NCM
631 12-16-2008 Tax Rate for 2009 NCM
632 1-20-2009 Property Maintenance: Adoption
of Standards Amendment
Repealed by Ord. No. 641
633 2-3-2009 Food Establishments Ch. 171
634 2-17-2009 Intermunicipal Agreement:
Eastern Schuylkill Planning
Commission
NCM
635 6-16-2009 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
636 6-16-2009 Solid-Fuel-Burning Equipment Ch. 267
637 7-7-2009 Burning, Open Ch. 116
638 8-18-2009 Zoning [Eastern Schuylkill
Planning (ESP) Region Joint
Zoning]
Ch. 350; reference only
639 8-18-2009 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 292; reference only
640 9-15-2009 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
641 9-15-2009 Property Maintenance: Adoption
of Standards
Ch. 246, Art. I
642 12-28-2009 Tax Rate for 2010 NCM
643 4-6-2010 Floodplain Management Repealed by Ord. No. 675
644 4-6-2010 Fire Prevention and Protection:
Fire Prevention Standards
Ch. 157, Art. I
645 10-5-2010 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
646 10-5-2010 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
647 10-19-2010 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
648 12-7-2010 Fire Prevention and Fire
Protection: Fire Protection
Amendment
Superseded by Ord. No. 678
649 12-21-2010 Tax Rate for 2011 NCM
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 242/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
650 12-21-2010 Lease Rental Debt NCM
651 2-1-2011 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
651-A 8-16-2011 General Obligation Note NCM
652 12-20-2011 Tax Rate for 2012 NCM
653 1-17-2012 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
654 1-17-2012 Sex Offender Residency
Restrictions Repealer
Repealer only
655 3-6-2012 Animals: Feral and Homeless
Cats
Ch. 102, Art. II
656 6-19-2012 General Obligation Note NCM
657 10-2-2012 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
658 12-4-2012 Tax Rate for 2013 NCM
659 12-4-2012 Pawnshops and Secondhand
Goods Dealers
Ch. 233
660 12-4-2012 Property Maintenance: Quality of
Life Violations
Ch. 246, Art. II
661 1-15-2013 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
662 4-16-2013 Solid Waste: Garbage and
Refuse Collection Amendment
Ch. 273, Art. II
663 4-16-2013 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
664 5-22-2013 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
665 8-20-2013 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
666 11-19-2013 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
667 11-19-2013 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
668 11-19-2013 Property Maintenance: Quality of
Life Violations Amendment
Ch. 246, Art. II
669 11-19-2013 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
670 12-3-2013 Lease Rental Debt NCM
671 12-3-2013 Tax Rate for 2014 NCM
672 3-4-2014 Pensions: Employees’
Retirement Plan Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
673 3-18-2014 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Planning
Commission Amendment
Ch. 15, Art. I
674 10-21-2014 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
675 11-18-2014 Floodplain Management Ch. 164
676 11-18-2014 Authorities: Community
Revitalization and Improvement
Zone Contracting Authority
Ch. 8, Art. II
677 12-2-2014 Tax Rate for 2015 NCM
678 4-7-2015 Fire Department: Administration
of Department
Ch. 24, Art. II
679 4-21-2015 Pensions: Police Pension
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 243/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
680 12-1-2015 Tax Rate for 2016 NCM
681 2-16-2016 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM
682 3-1-2016 Pensions: Employees Retirement
and Insurance Plan Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
683 3-1-2016 Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Amendment
Ch. 260
684 5-17-2016 Pensions: Police Pension
Amendment
NI; see Ch. 55
685 7-19-2016 Franchise Agreement: Service
Electric Cablevision, Inc.
NCM
686 9-20-2016 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
687 11-15-2016 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
688 11-15-2016 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
689 11-15-2016 Property Maintenance: Adoption
of Standards Amendment
Ch. 246, Art. I
690 12-6-2016 Tax Rate for 2017 NCM
691 1-17-2017 General Obligation Note NCM
692 6-20-2017 Board, Commissions and
Committees: Board Of Health
Established
Ch. 15, Art. IV
693 12-19-2017 Tax Rate for 2018 NCM
694 3-20-2018 Naming of Street NCM
695 4-3-2018 Police Pension Fund Amendment Ch. 55; Reference Only
696 6-19-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
697 9-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
698 9-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
699 10-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
700 12-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
701 12-18-2018 Tax Rate for 2019 NCM
702 2-19-2019 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rentals and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
703 2-19-2019 Solid Waste: Garbage and
Refuse Collection Amendment
Ch. 273, Art. II
704 5-22-2019 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 326
705 6-18-2019 Zoning [Eastern Schuylkill
Planning (ESP) Region Joint
Zoning]
Ch. 350; Reference Only
706 6-18-2019 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 292; Reference Only
707 7-2-2019 Fireworks Ch. 159
8/17/2020 Borough of Tamaqua, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/TA3193?guid=TA3193&children=true 244/244
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
708 8-20-2019 Franchise Agreement: Service
Electric Cablevision, Inc.
NCM
709 8-20-2019 Animals Amendment Ch. 102
710 8-20-2019 General Provisions: Adoption of
Code
Ch. 1, Art. I

1
Eastern Schuylkill
Planning Region
Zoning Ordinance
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER I
TITLE, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION
Section 100. Title.
Section 101. Purpose
Section 102. Interpretation
Section 103. Application
CHAPTER II
DEFINITIONS
Section 200. General
Section 201. Definitions
CHAPTER III
ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 300. Types of Zoning Districts
Section 301. Official Zoning Map
Section 302. District Boundaries – Rules for Interpretation
Section 303. Application of District Regulations
CHAPTERS IV THROUGH IX
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 400. W-P (Woodland Preservation) Zoning District
Section 401. Specific Intent.
Section 402. Uses Permitted by Right
Section 403. Uses Permitted by Special Exception
Section 404. Conditional Uses (Reserved)
Section 405. Area, Yard and Height Regulations
Section 406. General Regulations.
Section 407 through 449 (Reserved)
Section 450. EAP (Enhanced Agricultural Preservation) Zoning District
Section 451. Specific Intent.
Section 452. Uses Permitted by Right
Section 453. Uses Permitted by Special Exception
Section 454. Conditional Uses (Reserved)
Section 455. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations.
Section 456. Family Farm Support Business
Section 457. Subdivision and Land Development Permitted Within the EAP Zoning District
Section 458. Farm Related Business
Section 459. General Regulations
Section 460 through 499 (Reserved)
3
Section 500. A-P (Agricultural Preservation) Zoning District
Section 501. Specific Intent.
Section 502. Uses Permitted by Right
Section 503. Uses Permitted by Special Exception
Section 504. Conditional Uses (Reserved)
Section 505. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations
Section 506. Family Farm Support Business
Section 507. Subdivision and Land Development Permitted
within the AP Zoning District
Section 508. Farm Related Business
Section 509. General Regulations
Section 510. through 549 (Reserved)
Section 550. R-1 Rural Agricultural (Low Density) Zoning District
Section 551. Specific Intent
Section 552. Uses Permitted by Right
Section 553. Uses Permitted by Special Exception
Section 554. Conditional Uses
Section 555. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations
Section 556. General Regulations
Section 557 through 599 (Reserved)
Section 600. R-2 (Low Density Suburban Residential) Zoning District
Section 601. Specific Intent
Section 602. Uses Permitted by Right
Section 603. Uses Permitted by Special Exception
Section 604. Conditional Uses
Section 605. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations
Section 606. General Regulations
Section 607 through 649 (Reserved)
Section 650. R-3 (Medium Density Suburban Residential)
Zoning District
Section 651. Specific Intent
Section 652. Uses Permitted by Right
Section 653. Uses Permitted by Special Exception
Section 654. Conditional Uses
Section 655. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations
Section 656. General Regulations
Section 657 through 699 (reserved)
Section 700. R-4 (Medium to High Density Urban Residential/
Commercial) Zoning District
Section 701. Specific Intent
Section 702. Uses Permitted by Right
Section 703. Uses Permitted by Special Exception
Section 704. Conditional Uses
Section 705. Area, Yard, and Height Requirements
Section 706. General Regulations
Section 707 through 749. (Reserved)
Section 750. R-5 (High Density Urban Residential / Commercial) Zoning District
Section 751. Specific Intent
Section 752. Uses Permitted by Right.
Section 753. Uses Permitted by Special Exception
4
Section 754. Conditional Uses
Section 755. Area, Yard, and Height Requirements
Section 756. General Regulations
Section 757 through 799. (Reserved)
Section 800. G-C (General Commercial) Zoning District
Section 801. Specific Intent.
Section 802. Uses Permitted by Right
Section 803. Uses Permitted by Special Exception
Section 804. Conditional Uses
Section 805. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations
Section 806. General Regulations.
Section 807 through 849 (Reserved)
Section 850. H-C (Highway Commercial) Zoning District
Section 851. Specific Intent.
Section 852. Uses Permitted by Right
Section 853. Special Exception Uses.
Section 854. Conditional Uses
Section 855. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations
Section 856. General Regulations
Section 857 through 899. (Reserved)
Section 900. LI (Light Industrial) Zoning District
Section 901. Specific Intent.
Section 902. Uses Permitted by Right
Section 903. Special Exception Uses
Section 904. Conditional Uses
Section 905. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations
Section 906. General Regulations
Section 907 through 949 (Reserved)
Section 950. GI (General Industrial) Zoning District
Section 951. Specific Intent.
Section 952. Uses Permitted by Right.
Section 953. Special Exception Uses
Section 954. Conditional Uses
Section 955. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations
Section 956. General Regulations
Section 957 through 999 (Reserved)
CHAPTERS X THROUGH XIV (RESERVED)
CHAPTER XV
GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 1500. Prohibited Uses
Section 1501. Access to Structures
Section 1502. Establishment of More Than One (1) Principal Use and/or the Erection of More Than One
(1) Principal Structure on a Lot
Section 1503. Storage of Explosives
Section 1504. Accessory Building Setback Exceptions
Section 1505. Landscaping
Section 1506. Lighting
5
Section 1507. Signs
Section 1508. Loading Areas
Section 1509. Off-Street Parking, Access Drives, Drive-Through Facilities
Section 1510. Front Yard Exceptions
Section 1511. Fences
Section 1512. Corner Lot Restrictions
Section 1513. Slope Controls
Section 1514. Conduct of Agricultural Activities in the ESP Region
Section 1515 through 1525 (Reserved)
Section 1526. Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses – Residential
Section 1527. Projections Into Yards – Residential Uses
Section 1528 through 1550 (Reserved)
Section 1551. Commercial, Retail, and Industrial Accessory Buildings, Structures, and Uses
Section 1552. Highway Frontage Development in Commercial and Industrial Districts
Section 1553. Environmental Performance Standards for Industrial Districts
Section 1554 through 1599 (Reserved)
CHAPTER XVI
SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS
Section 1600 (Reserved)
Section 1601. Home Occupations; No-impact Home-based Business
Section 1602. Townhouses; Duplexes
Section 1603. Apartment Buildings
Section 1604. Planned Residential Development
Section 1605. Mobile Home Park Regulations
Section 1606. Retirement Community and Life Care Retirement Facility
Section 1607. Adaptive Reuse; Residential Conversion; Boarding House; Commercial Conversion
Section 1608. Cluster Development
Section 1609. Transfer of Development Rights (TDR)
Section 1610 through 1614 (Reserved)
Section 1615. Intensive Agriculture Standards
Section 1616. General Agriculture Standards for the EAP Zoning District, General Agriculture
Standards for the A-P, R-1, and R-2 Zoning Districts
Section 1617. Standard Animals Weights to Calculate Animal Units
Section 1618. Vacation Farms
Section 1619. Farm Labor Housing
Section 1620 through 1624 (Reserved)
Section 1625. Group Home
Section 1626. Adult Day-Care Facilities
Section 1627. Child Day-Care Facilities
Section 1628. Hospitals; Healthcare Facilities; Healthcare Services
Section 1629. Treatment Center; Methadone Treatment Center
Section 1630. Places of Worship; Cemeteries
6
Section 1631. Schools
Section 1632 through 1639 (Reserved)
Section 1640. Office/Commercial Center
Section 1641. Shopping Center
Section 1642. Super Market; Grocery Store; Specialty Grocery Store; Convenience Store
Section 1643. Outdoor Flea and Antique Market; Outdoor Farmer and Produce Markets
Section 1644. Car and Vehicle Washing Facility
Section 1645. Automobile Service Station
Section 1646. Vehicular and Mobile Home Sales, Rentals and Display; Heavy Equipment Sales,
Service, and/or Repair Facilities
Section 1647. Auction House; Automobile and Vehicle Auction
Section 1648. Hotel; Motel; Bed and Breakfast Establishment
Section 1649. Restaurants
Section 1650. Regulations for Taverns; Nightclubs; Bottle Clubs; After Hours Clubs
Section 1651 through 1658 (Reserved)
Section 1659. Recreation Uses
Section 1660. Hunting Lodges and Clubs, Gun Clubs and Archery Clubs; Game Preserves;
Wildlife Sanctuary
Section 1661. Campgrounds and Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks; Camps
Section 1662. Riding Academy; Riding Stables and Horse Boarding Facilities
Section 1663. Motor sports Facility
Section 1664. Game Room/Video Arcade
Section 1665. Golf Course; Golf Driving Range
Section 1666. Outdoor Motion Pictures Establishment
Section 1667 through 1674 (Reserved)
Section 1675. Kennel; Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic; Animal Shelter
Section 1676. Airport; Heliport
Section 1677. Self Storage Facility
Section 1678. Telecommunications Facilities
Section 1679. Off-Track Betting Parlors
Section 1680. Adult Business and Adult Establishment
Section 1681. Private Surface Parking Facilities; Parking Garages
Section 1682 through 1684 (Reserved)
Section 1685. Water Extraction Regulations; Forestry
Section 1686. Solid Waste Disposal Facilities
Section 1687. Mineral Extraction
Section 1688. Planned Industrial Park
Section 1689. Truck Terminal; Warehousing; Distribution Center; Truck Stop
Section 1690. Junk Yard; Automobile Dismantling Facility
Section 1691. Commercial Slaughterhouse
Section 1692. Wind Energy Facility
Section 1693. Ethanol Production Facility
Sections 1694 through 1699 (Reserved)
7
CHAPTER XVII
GOVERNMENT AND UTILITY USES
Section 1700. Regulations for Municipal, State, and Federal Uses
Section 1701. Public Utilities Corporation Exemption Criteria; Public utilities Regulations
CHAPTER XVIII
NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES, AND BUILDINGS
Section 1800. Statement of Intent
Section 1801. Non-conforming Lots of Record
Section 1802. Abandonment
Section 1803. Change
Section 1804. Expansion
Section 1805. Repair, Movement and Replacement
Section 1806. Damage or Destruction
CHAPTER XIX
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 1900. Zoning Officer
Section 1901. Zoning Permits
Section 1902. Zoning Certificate of Use and Occupancy
Section 1903. Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses
Section 1904. Amendments
Section 1905. Enforcement Notices
Section 1906. Enforcement Remedies
Section 1907. Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinion
Section 1908. Appeals
CHAPTER XX
ZONING HEARING BOARD
Section 2000. Creation; Appointment; Organization
Section 2001. Hearings
Section 2002. Functions of the Zoning Hearing Board
Section 2003. Procedures for Application to the Zoning Hearing Board
Section 2004. Conditional Use Procedures
Section 2005. Stay of Proceedings
CHAPTER XXI
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 2100. Severability
Section 2101. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
Section 2102. Effective Date
8
CHAPTER I. TITLE, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION
Section 100. Title. This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as “The Eastern Schuylkill
Planning (ESP) Region Joint Zoning Ordinance of ____, as amended”.
Section 101. Purpose. This Ordinance is enacted for the purpose of promoting the public health and
general welfare of the residents of the Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region and to reflect the intent of the
ESP’s development objectives by encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings; preventing the
overcrowding of land; avoiding undue congestion of population; providing for adequate areas for vehicular parking
and loading; providing for adequate light and air; conserving the value of land and buildings; securing safety from
fire, panic, flood and other dangers; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, school
and other public facilities; encouraging the harmonious development of land; lessening congestion on the roads and
highways; preserving natural and historical values in the environment; and preserving forest, wetlands, aquifers and
flood plains.
Section 102. Interpretation. In interpreting and applying any of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health and safety and the
general welfare of the residents and occupants of the ESP Region. Wherever the provisions of this Ordinance may
impose greater restrictions than those of any other statute, ordinance, or regulation, the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be complied with. Wherever the provisions of any other Municipal statute, ordinance, or regulation may
impose greater restrictions than this Ordinance, the provisions of such other Municipal statute, ordinance, or
regulation shall be complied with.
Section 103. Application. Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, land or parts thereof in
the ESP Region shall be used or occupied, erected, constructed, assembled, moved, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered unless said work is done in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
9
CHAPTER II. DEFINITIONS
Section 200. General. For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are defined below.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. Words in the singular shall include the plural and
words in the plural shall include the singular. Words in the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter. The
word “shall” is mandatory. The word “may” is permissive. The word “person” includes “individual,” “profit or
non-profit corporation,” “organization,” “partnership,” “company,” “unincorporated association” or other similar
entities. The words “used for” include “designed for,” “arranged for,” “intended for,” “maintained for,” or
“occupied for.” The word “building” shall, also mean “structure” and shall further include, as appropriate, the
phrase “or part thereof.”
When phrases or words are not defined herein, they shall have their ordinary, accepted, meanings or such as the
context may imply.
Section 201. Definitions.
Accessory Building or Accessory Structure – A building or structure (such as a garage, swimming pool,
storage shed, children’s playhouse, or non-commercial greenhouse) which is clearly subordinate and
accessory to a principal building, located upon the same lot, and which is used for purposes customarily
incidental to that which is conducted within the principal building.
Accessory Use – A use or structure or part thereof clearly subordinate to and located on the same lot as the
principal use or building and which clearly serves a purpose customarily incidental to the primary use
which is conducted upon the property regardless of whether said use is conducted within a building or
structure.
Acreage, Gross – The calculated land area contained within the deeded boundaries of a lot.
Acreage, Net – The remaining area of a lot after deducting the features defined in Lot Size from the Gross
Acreage.
Adult Bookstore – A use with a significant portion of the market value or total floor area occupied by (or
over fifteen [15] square feet of) items for sale or rent being books, films, magazines, video tapes, coin or
token operated films or video tapes, paraphernalia, novelties or other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by a clear emphasis on matter depicting, displaying, describing or relating to uncovered male
or female genitals or “specified sexual activities.” This definition shall include, but not be limited to,
materials that would be illegal to sell to persons under the age eighteen (18) under State and/or Federal law.
Adult Business – Any commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or
rental for any form of consideration any form of sexually explicit material (i.e., books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs or film, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description
of sexual activities or display of human genital and/or other anatomical areas and/or instruments, devices,
or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with sexual activities), and/or which offers to
provide, for entertainment purposes, persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity (i.e., go-go
dancers, erotic and/or exotic dancers, erotic and/or exotic entertainers, etc.).
This definition is a broad overall definition which includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(A) Adult arcade
(B) Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store
(C) Adult cabaret, adult dance hall, adult theatre, adult club, adult bar, adult tavern, adult night club, adult
restaurant, or any other similar type of adult establishment
(D) Adult materials rentals and sales
(E) Adult mini motion picture theatre
(F) Adult motion picture theatre
(G) Adult motel
10
(H) Adult peep shows
(I) Any type of sexual encounter center
(J) Massage parlor
(K) Nude model studio
(L) Adult drive-in theatre
Adult Day-Care Facility – Any premises operated for either profit, or not for profit, in which older adult
daily living services, as defined herein, are simultaneously provided for four (4) or more adults who are not
relatives of the operator of said facility. The following types of adult day-care facilities are regulated
through this definition and Ordinance.
A. Adult Day-Care Home – Any adult day-care facility in which services are provided to between
four (4) and eight (8) adults and where the day-care areas are being primarily used as a family
residence.
B. Adult Day-Care Center – Any adult day-care facility in which services are provided to eight (8) or
more adults and where the day-care areas are not being primarily used as a family residence.
Adult Establishment – (See also “Adult Business”) Means and includes any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any type of sexually oriented business as a new business.
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not it is currently a sexually oriented business,
to any type of sexually oriented business;
C. The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
E. Adult Business – As previously defined by this Section.
Advertising Sign – (See “Sign, Off-premise”)
After-Hours Club – A use that permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages by five (5) or more
unrelated persons between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and that involves some form of monetary
compensation paid by such persons for said alcoholic beverages and/or for the use of the premises.
Agriculture – The cultivation of the soil and the raising and harvesting of both the products of the soil and
animals typically raised on such agricultural lands including, but not limited to, nursery, horticulture,
forestry, poultry farming and dairy farming, fish farming, aquaculture, and related forms of animal
husbandry; excluding kennels, the keeping of animals solely as pets, and the keeping, breeding, and/or
raising of any type of game animals (e.g., deer, elk, antelope etc.), and/or any type of dangerous predatory
animals (e.g., wolves, lions, wolverines, etc.)
Agricultural Buildings – Any building or structure, whether principal or accessory, the use of which is
devoted in whole or in part to an agricultural use. This may include, but not be limited to, the storage of
agricultural equipment, produce or products, the housing of livestock or poultry, or the processing of
agricultural products. This definition also includes, but is not limited to, barns, silos, corncribs, implement
sheds and other similar types of agricultural structures.
Agriculture, Intensive – Specialized agricultural activities including, but not limited to, mushroom, pig,
egg and poultry production, and dry livestock production which, due to the intensity of production and/or
raw material storage needs, necessitates the special control of operation, raw material storage and/or
processing, animal housing, and the storage and disposal of liquid and solid wastes.
Unless stated otherwise in this Ordinance, this definition includes the following agricultural uses:
A. A swine operation in excess of one point zero (1.0) animal unit/acre.
11
B. The raising and ownership of horses, cattle, sheep, goats, poultry, rabbits or similar animals raised
for agriculturally related purposes in excess of three (3.0) animal units per acre.
C. The production, processing, or cultivation of mushrooms.
D. Mink farms.
Airport/Airstrip – An area of land which is designated, used, or intended to be used for the landing and
take-off of airplanes, gliders, helicopters and/or ultra-light aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are
designed to be used for airport support facilities. Airports and airstrips shall meet all applicable State and
Federal Regulations.
Alley – A private or, in some very specific instances, a public, minor right-of-way providing secondary
vehicular and pedestrian access usually to the rear of properties.
All-Weather Surface – A surface comprised of asphalt, bituminous concrete and/or cementitious concrete,
or other similar materials that will not render a driveway, parking lot, or loading area unusable because of
inclement weather conditions. For purposes of this Ordinance stone and/or gravel surfaces are not to be
considered an “All-Weather Surface” and any and all “All-Weather Surfaces” are to be considered
impervious coverage.
Alteration – (See “Structural Alteration”)
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) – A national organization which formulates guidelines and
standards. ANSI standards are recognized as authoritative by the FCC.
Amusement Device – A device, other than a jukebox, that is used or designed to be used to provide
amusement or entertainment to the user for a fee and shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, pinball
machines, video display games, simulated sport machines, and billiard tables.
Animal Cemetery – Any area or place used for the burial of the remains of non-cremated animals other
than the necessary, proper and customary burial of farm animals as an accessory use to any animal
husbandry land use.
Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic – An establishment offering veterinary services for all types of animals
which may include short term indoor and/or outdoor overnight boarding of animals related to the medical
care of said animals.
Animal Husbandry – The raising and keeping of domesticated livestock or poultry for any commercial
purpose. The keeping of less than three (3) units of livestock or four (4) individual poultry as farm pets or
for domestic purposes and the raising of pigs or the raising of minks shall not be construed as normal
animal husbandry, but shall be considered as intensive agriculture.
Animal Manure Storage Facility – A permanent structure or facility, or portion of a structure or facility,
utilized for the primary purpose of containing manure. Examples include liquid manure structures, manure
storage ponds, component reception pits and transfer pipes, containment structures built under confinement
buildings, permanent stacking and composting facilities, and manure treatment facilities. The term does
not include the animal confinement areas or poultry houses, horse stalls, free stall barns, or bedded pack
animal housing systems.
Animal Shelter – A governmental or a non-profit private organization that provides temporary homes for
stray, surrendered, abandoned or abused pet animals. Animal shelters may also offer veterinary care.
Animal Unit – One thousand (1,000) pounds live weight of domesticated livestock or poultry regardless of
the actual number of animals comprising the unit.
12
Animal Unit/Acre – A mathematical figure representing the number of animal units per acre. This can be
represented by a decimal (ex. 0.125 animal units/acre or 1/8 animal units/acre, which is the equivalent of
125 lbs. of animals per acre of land) or whole number and decimal (ex. 2.0 animal units/acre which is the
equivalent of 2,000 pounds of animals) per acre of land.
Annexation Parcel – A subdivision of land which shall not be used as a separate building lot, but shall be
incorporated into the legal description of the lot which is receiving said annexation parcel.
Antenna, Standard – (See “Standard Antennas”)
Antenna, Satellite Dish – (See “Satellite Dish Antenna”)
Antenna, Telecommunications – (See “Telecommunications Antenna”)
A-P Agricultural Annexation Parcels – A tract of land within the A-P Zoning District created by a
subdivision after the date of Adoption of this Ordinance, meeting the requirements of both the ESP Joint
SALDO and the ESP Joint Zoning Ordinance, the sole purpose of which is to transfer land to increase the
size of a lot where both the A-P Parent Tract from which the land is taken and the lot to which the land is
added will be greater than ten (10) acres in size after said subdivision has occurred.
A-P Agricultural Lot – As defined in this Ordinance, a parcel of land greater than ten (10) contiguous acres
within the A-P Zoning District which was created after the date of Adoption of this Ordinance by an
approved subdivision plan meeting the requirements of both the ESP SALDO and the ESP Zoning
Ordinance which may be used for the production, keeping or maintenance for sale, lease or personal use of
plants and animals useful to man, including: mushrooms; forages and soil crops; grains and seed crops;
dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; domesticated livestock, including dairy
cows, beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, or goats (including any non-aggressive any
mutations or hybrids thereof) including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals; bees and
apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and
berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil
conservation or forestry management program. Development of an A-P Agricultural Lot is regulated by
both the ESP Joint SALDO and the ESP Joint Zoning Ordinance.
A-P Development Unit – A unit of an approved subdivision/land development which is allocated to an A-P
Parent Tract, or portion thereof, and which lies within the A-P Zoning District.
A-P Parent Tract – A contiguous tracts of land deeded, either as a single tract or as one deed with multiple
purports, prior to the date of Adoption of this Ordinance that are situated within the A-P Zoning District. In
cases where individually deeded tracts of land are under single ownership, each individually deeded tract
will be considered to be its own Parent Tract.
A-P SFD Lots (See also “A-P Development Unit”) – Single Family Dwelling Lots within the A-P Zoning
District created after the date of Adoption of this Ordinance by an approved subdivision plan meeting the
ESP Region SALDO and the ESP Region Zoning Ordinance.
Apartments – (See “Dwelling)
Apartment Building- (See “Dwelling, Multi-family”)
Applicant – A Record or Equitable landowner and/or the agent of either, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for subdivision or land development.
Approved Private Street – A legally established right-of-way which provides the primary vehicular access
to a lot or lots and which has not been dedicated or deeded to the Municipality, but which the design and
as-built condition of said street has been reviewed and approved by the Governing Body.
13
Aquaculture – A form of agriculture which is the controlled cultivation of aquatic plants, animals, and
microorganisms.
Arcade, Video Arcade – (See “Game Room”)
Area, Gross or Net – (See “Acreage, Gross” or “Acreage, Net”)
Assisted Living Facility – A type of Healthcare Facility (as defined) which is comprised of coordinated and
centrally managed housing, including self-contained units designed to provide a supportive environment
and to accommodate a relatively independent lifestyle for older, adult persons. Such a facility may contain
a limited number of supportive services, such as meals, transportation, housekeeping, linen, and organized
social activities for residents and their invited guests. Such a use shall primarily serve persons fifty-five
(55) years of age and older, persons with physical handicaps and/or the developmentally disabled. Assisted
living facilities shall be licensed as personal care centers by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Auction, Automobile and/or Vehicle – The public sales of autos and/or vehicles to the highest bidder.
Auction House – Establishment for the public sale of property to the highest bidder.
Auditorium – A structure involving indoor and outdoor space for exhibits, meetings, live performances or
sports events.
Automobile Service Station – A building and/or place of business where gasoline, oil and greases,
batteries, tires, and automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed directly to the motor vehicle trade at
retail prices, and where the following services may be rendered:
A. Minor Repair
1. Sale and servicing of spark plugs and batteries.
2. Tire repair and servicing, not to include tire recapping.
3. Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hoses, fan belts, brake and transmission
fluids, light bulbs, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers, grease retainers and wheel
bearings.
4. Radiator cleaning and flushing.
5. Washing and polishing, (including mechanical and/or automatic car wash facilities).
6. Installation of fuel pumps and fuel lines.
7. Minor servicing and replacement of carburetors.
8. Adjustment and installation of brakes.
9. Tuning engines, except for the machining of engine parts, cleaning of carbon from the
engine or the removal of the head of engines and/or the crankcases of same.
10. Greasing and lubrication.
11. Emergency wiring repairs.
12. The sale of retail convenience items as a clearly secondary activity.
13. Any similar minor service or repair not listed below under “major repair”.
B. Major Repair
In addition to those repairs and services listed above as “minor repair”, any general repair,
rebuilding or reconditioning not listed above; collision service including body, frame or fender
straightening or repair; machining of engine parts, cleaning carbon or removing the head of
engines and/or crankcases; painting or paint shops; but not including any operations which require
the heating or burning of rubber.
14
Automobile/Vehicle Dismantling Facility – A type of junk yard where the primary activity is the storage
dis-assemblement, bailing, packaging and hauling of junk/inoperable automobiles and vehicles for
compensation.
Awning – A roof like structure, often made of canvas, metal, or plastic, attached to a building that serves as
a shelter over a storefront, window, door, deck, or patio. Awnings may or may not be equipped with a
mechanism for raising and holding an awning in a retracted position against the building.
Baby-Sitting – Any of the following types of childcare activity:
A. The temporary or occasional care of any number of children at a dwelling unit customarily and
regularly occupied by the children as their residence.
B. The regular care of one, two, or three children not related to the person giving care which takes
place at the home of the person giving care.
Bar or Barroom - (See” Tavern”).
Basement – A portion of a building or structure that is completely or partially beneath the average
elevation of the finished grade.
Bed and Breakfast – A single family detached dwelling and/or its accessory structure(s) which is/are
wholly or partially used for the rental of overnight sleeping accommodations and bathroom access to
temporary overnight guests, inclusive of the provision of meals to said guests, employees, and residents of
the dwelling. Overnight stays shall be restricted to transient visitors to the area, employees of the Bed and
Breakfast and their immediate family members.
Billboard – (See “Sign, Off-premise”)
Block – A tract of land, a lot, or group of lots, bounded on one (1) side by a public or private street, and on
the other three (3) sides by streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, municipal boundary
lines, other lots and/or by any combination of the above.
Boarding House – A single-family dwelling occupied by the landowner thereof (and the landowner’s
family, if applicable) and in which the landowner provides, for compensation, one or more rooms for the
lodging of individuals for five (5) or more consecutive days, where the maximum number of such persons
residing in the building is restricted to the landowner and landowners immediate family, and no more than
three (3) unrelated boarders. A boarding house may provide meals to residents, but the Boarding House
shall not include the establishment of a Restaurant or Tavern as defined in this Ordinance.
Bottle Club – A business (not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board) which permits the
consumption and/or storage of alcoholic beverages as provided in Title 18, Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes. Said use shall be conducted in accordance with and shall be subject to the requirements and
limitations provided in the cited act of the Pennsylvania legislature or assembly inclusive of any
amendments made thereto.
Buffer Strip – A continuous strip of landscaped land which is clear of buildings, structures (other than
fences where the use of same has been approved by the Municipality), and paved areas.
Building – Any structure, including principal or accessory structures, comprised of any combination of
building materials, which is erected upon the ground, upon a foundation or piers, and which may be
permanently affixed thereto. This definition includes buildings which are designed, intended, or arranged
for the housing, shelter, enclosure, or storage of persons, animals, goods, materials, or property of any kind.
15
Building Area – The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of all primary and
accessory buildings on a lot, excluding unroofed porches, paved terraces, steps, eaves and gutters, but
including all enclosed structures (eg; sunrooms, screened porches, vestibules etc…).
Building Coverage – (See also “Impervious Coverage”) The ratio obtained by dividing the maximum
horizontal cross-section of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot (including balconies and decks,
covered porches, carports, breezeways, and patios) by the total area of the lot upon which the buildings are
located.
Building Height – The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the
two (2) front corners of a building to the highest point of the building’s roof. Chimneys, spires, cupolas,
antennas, and other similar projections shall not be included in calculating building height.
Building Setback Line – A line defining the minimum required distance within a lot from, and parallel to, a
street right of way line and side and rear lot lines, which future buildings and structures may be placed or
erected in proximity to said street’s right of way line.
Building Permit – A permit indicating that proposed construction, alteration, or reconstruction of a
structure is in accordance with the applicable provisions of any Building Code which was validly adopted
by the Municipality, and which authorizes the permittee to commence with said construction, alteration, or
reconstruction.
Camp – Any organized establishments which provide food or lodging accommodations of tents or cabins
for groups of children or adults engaged in organized recreational or educational programs. The term
“camp” shall include, but shall not be limited to, camps with special program emphasis, such as horseback
riding, conservation, music and sports, as well as “retreat camps”. The term “camp” shall not include
manufactured home parks, migrant labor camps or recreational vehicle parks.
Campground/Recreational Vehicle Park – Any parcel or tract of land upon which two (2) or more
individual recreational vehicle or camping sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by
individual recreation vehicles or camping units as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation
purposes. This definition does not include a property upon which the owner of same may choose to camp
and provide potable water and sanitary sewage facilities within the subject property’s boundary lines.
Canopy – A protective roof-like covering, often of canvas mounted on a frame attached to a building over a
walkway, sidewalk, or door. Canopies are also a freestanding structure that may have a roof with support
but which does not have walls.
Carport – A structure which has a roof but is open on two (2) or more sides and which is used as an
accessory structure for the storage of motor vehicles.
Cartway – The portion of a street right-of-way, whether paved or unpaved, intended for vehicular use.
Car Wash – A tract of land containing machines or hand operated facilities primarily used for the cleaning,
washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.
Cemetery – A tract of land used for the purpose of the burial of deceased human beings, including
columbariums, crematoria, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with the cemetery
and when said facilities are located entirely within the boundaries of the cemetery.
Certificate of Use and Occupancy (Zoning) – A written statement, based on an inspection signed by the
Municipal Zoning Officer, setting forth that a building, structure, sign, and/or land complies with the ESP
Region Joint Zoning Ordinance, and stating that said building, structure, sign, and/or land may now be
legally used for a specific permitted purpose as provided for within this Ordinance.
16
Child Day-Care Facility – The following types of child day-care facilities are hereby define and regulated
by this Ordinance:
A. Day-Care Center – A facility in which care is provided for seven (7) or more children, unrelated to
the caregiver, at any one time, for less than twenty-four (24) hours/day where the child-care areas
are not being used as a family residence.
B. Family Day-Care Home – Any premise other than the child’s own home in which child care is
provided, at any one time, for less than twenty-four (24) hours/day to four, five, or six children
who are not relatives of the caregiver, and where the child-care areas are being primarily used as a
family residence.
C. Group Day-Care Home – A facility in which care is provided for less than twenty-four (24)
hours/day for more than seven, but fewer than twelve (12) children, at any one time, where the
child-care areas are being used primarily as a family residence.
“Baby-Sitting,” as defined in this Ordinance, is not considered to be a Child Day-Care Facility.
Church/Place of Worship – A building structure, or group of buildings or structures, including accessory
uses, designed or intended for public worship. This definition shall include rectories, convents, cemeteries,
parsonages, and church-related educational and/or day-care facilities.
Cinema- (See “Theater”)
Clear sight triangle – An area of unobstructed vision, located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets
and at the intersection of a street and a driveway, defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersections of the street and/or driveway center lines. The planting of any vegetative
species which exceeds twenty-four (24) inches of height at maturity and the placement of any and all types
of ornaments, fences, structures, and/or other types of landscape features which will occlude (either wholly
or partially) the safe sight distance for any motor vehicle operators using any intersection which have, or
should have, clear sight triangles is strictly prohibited.
Club or Lodge – An organization situate on premises or within buildings of persons and their guests
associated for some common activity, (not including groups organized primarily to render a service which
is customarily carried on as a business), and which may include associations registered with the applicable
local, state, and federal agencies as a certified not for profit organization. Clubs and lodges are considered
“Social Clubs” as defined in this Ordinance, and include, but are not limited to, service organizations,
political organizations, labor unions, social and athletic clubs.
Cluster Development – A type of residential development wherein, for the purposes of this Ordinance,
single family detached dwellings are permitted on lot sizes which may be reduced to smaller than what is
normally required, although with little or no increase in overall density thereby preserving an area of the
parent tract’s land for common open space, agriculture purpose, or some other use specified by the
regulations of this Ordinance.
Cocktail Lounge – (See “Tavern”)
Services Business – A business which provides services not included in the definition of “Personal
Service”, “Professional Service,” or “Retail Business.” Examples include, but are not limited to, the
businesses of contractors and tradesmen; commercial trade, and businesses which provide services to other
business (eg; cleaning services, cafeteria services, temporary staffing, etc.).
Commercial Conversion – The legal conversion of the first floor of a single family detached dwelling, that
existed on or prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, to a personal service or retail business use as defined
in this Ordinance.
17
Community Center – A use that exists solely to provide primarily indoor leisure, educational activities and
programs, and meeting space to members of the surrounding community, the general public, and/or certain
age groups, and which does not involve substantial use of machinery or noise-producing equipment. The
use also may include the preparation and/or provision of meals to elderly persons, as accessory to leisure
activities. This use shall not include residential uses or any type of treatment center.
Community Sewerage System – (See “Sewage Facilities”).
Community Water Supply – (See “Water Supply, Community”).
Composting Facility – (Also see “Resource Recovery Facility”) A facility for the composting of organic
matter in a manner consistent with Local, State, and Federal Laws.
Conditional Use – Conditional Uses are specified land uses which may either be allowed or denied by the
municipalities governing body pursuant to both the public notice and public hearing and related
requirements of the PAMPC and pursuant to express standards and criteria set forth in the ESP Joint
Zoning Ordinance. In allowing a conditional use, other restrictions and/or conditions may be placed upon
the applicant by the municipality as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code and the ESP Joint Zoning Ordinance.
Condominium – A form of ownership of real property, including an undivided interest in common in a
portion of a parcel, together with a separate interest in a space within a structure subject to the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act.
Congregate Residence – Any building or portion thereof that contains facilities for living, sleeping and
sanitation, and which may include facilities for eating and cooking, for occupancy by other than a family.
The definition of a congregate residence shall include a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity
or sorority house, but shall not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, or lodging houses.
Convalescent Home/Nursing Home –An establishment providing housing, nursing care, dietary, and other
similar personal services to convalescents, invalids, or aged persons, excluding mental cases, cases of
contagious or communicable disease, surgical patients, and/or other persons who are receiving treatments
which are customarily provided in sanitariums, hospitals, and similar institutions. (Also see “Healthcare
Facility”)
Convenience Store - A retail business housed in a building having less than 10,500 square feet of gross
floor area which specializes in providing household products and foods. “Convenience Stores” may also
provide any or all of the following accessory uses:
A. Retail sales or rental of books, magazines, videos, and video games provided that any and all of the
uses defined in this Ordinance as an Adult Business are expressly prohibited.
B. Take-out or Fast-food Restaurants provided that rest rooms are made available to the public.
C. Amusement devices with a maximum of two (2).
D. Automatic bank teller machines.
E. Photomats and film development drop-off sites.
F. Lottery sales, which are State and/or Federally approved.
G. Propane fuel sales with no larger than twenty (20) pound tanks which must be stored outside of the
building within a locked enclosure at all times.
H. Dispensing of automobile fuels, oils, compressed air, kerosene, washer fluid, and other auto-related
items.
I. Car washes, subject to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
Corner Lot – A lot abutting two or more intersecting public or private streets, or at the point of an abrupt
change of direction of a single street (an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees).
Any yard adjoining a street shall be designated the front yard and must meet the front yard requirements of
18
the applicable zoning district and any yard opposite said front yard shall meet the side yard requirements of
the applicable zoning district. In the case where a building is to be placed on a corner lot such that the front
of the building will not be parallel to a street line, front yards shall be provided such that no portion of the
building will be placed closer to a street than the front yard requirement of the applicable zoning district, so
that no portion of the rear of the building will be placed closer to a rear lot line than the rear yard
requirement of the applicable zoning district, and so that no portion of the building will be placed closer to
a side lot line than the side yard requirement of the applicable district.
Crematorium – A building with a specially designed and Federally permitted furnace where corpses are
cremated.
Dedication – The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general public use, reserving to
themselves no other rights than those that are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public
uses to which the property has been devoted.
Density – The number of dwelling units that are allowed to be placed upon the net buildable acreage of a
parcel of land.
Developer – Any Record or Equitable landowner, agent of any such landowner, or tenant with the
permission of any such landowner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision or land development.
Development – Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
Determination – The final action of any duly appointed Municipal Zoning Officer, Municipal Zoning
Hearing Board, Municipal Planning Commission, or by the Municipal Governing Body charged with the
administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder, within the scope of the ESP Region’s
legal jurisdictional limits.
Distribution Center – A type of warehouse for the short term storage and distribution of goods and
materials for a specific commercial establishment (also see “Warehouse”). A “Distribution Center” is not
a “Truck Terminal” or a “Truck Stop” as defined in this Ordinance.
Dormitory – Residential facilities that are only inhabited by members faculty and/or full-time students of
an accredited college, university, or medical training facility or state-licensed teaching hospital, or of an
approved care and treatment center for children (as an accessory use to such use), or of an accredited public
or private primary or secondary school, and which are owned and operated by the principal use to which
the dormitory serves. Other types of lawfully permitted dwelling units shall not be regulated as
dormitories.
Drive-Through Facility- Any portion of a building or structure from which business is transacted or is
capable of being transacted, directly with customers who are seated within or are riding upon a motor
vehicle during such business transactions. Examples include, but are not limited to, drive-up windows at
fast-food restaurants, or drive-up tellers at financial institutions, or drive-up windows at a pharmacy, etc.
Duplex – (See “Dwelling”)
Dwelling – A building or portion thereof arranged, intended, designed, or used as living quarters for one or
more families living independently of each other. The term “dwelling” shall not be construed to include
any hotel, motel, boarding house, congregate residence, bed & breakfast inns, tourist home, hospital,
nursing home, fraternity or sorority house, dormitory, automobile court, mobile home park, or any other
type of group residence. “Dwellings” include:
A. Adaptive Reuse – The conversion of industrial or commercial buildings to residential or office
use(s) where allowed by the ESP Joint Zoning Ordinance.
19
B. Apartment – A dwelling unit contained in a building, structure or part thereof, leased to an
occupant for residential purposes. Three (3) or more such dwelling units must be present in order
for said building or structure to be considered as an Apartment Building.
C. Duplex – A two-family detached building having two (2) dwelling units; one above the other,
being fully separated by a horizontal fire resistant floor, and where each dwelling unit has its own
separate outside access. For purposes of this Ordinance, a duplex is a structure erected after the
date of Adoption of this Ordinance which was expressly built as a duplex. The conversion of a
single family dwelling into a duplex – like structure is a “Residential Conversion” (as defined in
this Ordinance) and is further regulated in this Ordinance.
D. Residential Conversion – The conversion of a single family dwelling to a two-family dwelling
with the dwelling units one above the other, fully separated by a horizontal fire resistant floor,
where each dwelling unit has its own separate outside access (i.e., a “duplex-like structure”).
E. Single Family Attached – A dwelling which is intended for the exclusive use of one (1) family as
defined in this ordinance with no other dwelling units located directly and totally above or below
it, having a vertical fire resistant party walls in common with at least two (2) other similar
dwelling units, and having its own independent outside access. For purposes of this Ordinance the
term “row houses” or “row homes” and “townhouses” or “town homes” are considered a type of
Single Family Attached Dwelling. Those units not meeting the definition of “Townhouses” in this
Ordinance are considered to be “Row homes.”
F. Single Family Detached – A single building unattached to any other dwelling unit which has been
arranged, designed, intended for, and occupied exclusively as a residence by one (1) family as
defined in this ordinance.
G. Single Family Semi-detached – Two (2) buildings attached one to the other, yet separated by a
vertical fire resistant party wall, which have been arranged, designed, intended for, and occupied
exclusively as residences by two (2) families (as defined in this ordinance), living independently
from each other. These dwelling units shall not have any living, sleeping, storage, cooking or
sanitary facilities in common with each dwelling being separated from the other by an un-pierced
solid, fire resistant, vertical party wall.
H. Townhouses - A multi-family building containing three (3) to eight (8) single-family attached
dwelling units and not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, with each dwelling unit being
separated from another by a solid, fire resistant, party wall and with each dwelling unit having its
own individual separate access from the outside.
I. Mobile home – A transportable, single family detached dwelling intended for occupancy
exclusively as a residence by one (1) family as defined in this ordinance.
J. Multi-family – A building designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living
independently of each other and containing three (3) or more dwelling units. Such buildings shall
consist of the following types:
1. Apartment Buildings – A multi-family building specifically constructed and occupied as
separate living quarters for more than three (3) families with direct access from the
outside provided either through a common hall or by separate entrance and with each unit
being in the apartment building being separated from one another by the appropriately
required fire walls, and with each unit being provided with separate living, cooking,
sleeping, and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of each family. “Apartment
Buildings” include:
20
a. Medium Density Apartment Buildings – A building or group of buildings
containing three (3) to twelve (12) apartments, designed as an integrated
development, limited to a height of forty-eight (48) feet, and with the apartments
therein leased to the occupants for a definite period of time of at least thirty (30)
days.
b. High Density Apartment Buildings – An apartment building or a group of
buildings containing more than twelve (12) apartments, designed as an
integrated development, and limited to a height of sixty-five (65) feet, and with
the apartments therein leased to the occupants for a definite period of time (but
no less than thirty [30] days).
Dwelling Unit – A building, or portion thereof, providing one (1) or more rooms arranged for one (1) or
more individuals living together as a single family (as defined in this Ordinance), and having no cooking or
sanitary facilities in common with any other dwelling unit.
Easement – A right of way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land for a public or quasipublic
purpose and within which the (lessee) or owner of the property shall not erect any permanent
structure, but shall have the right to make other use of the land which is not inconsistent with the rights of
the grantee.
Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region – Municipalities in Schuylkill County which comprise the
Tamaqua Area School District (TASD) and which have worked cooperatively to create the ESP Joint
Comprehensive Plan, ESP Joint Zoning Ordinance, and ESP Joint (SALDO). These five (5) municipalities
are:
Walker Township
Schuylkill Township
Rush Township
Borough of Tamaqua
Enhanced Agricultural Preservation (EAP) Agricultural Annexation Parcels – A tract of land within the
ESP’s Enhanced Agricultural Preservation (EAP) Zoning District created by a subdivision after the
Adoption date of this Ordinance and meeting the requirements of the ESP SALDO, the sole purpose of
which is to transfer land to increase the size of a lot where both the EAP Parent Tract from which the land
is taken and the lot to which the land is added will be greater than twenty-five (25) acres in size after said
subdivision.
EAP Agricultural Lot – As defined in this Ordinance, a parcel of land greater than twenty-five (25)
contiguous acres within the ESP’s EAP Zoning District which was created after the date of Adoption of this
Ordinance by an approved subdivision plan meeting both the ESP Joint SALDO and the ESP Joint Zoning
Ordinance and which may be used for the production, keeping or maintenance for sale, lease or personal
use of plants and animals useful to man, including: mushrooms, forages and soil crops; grains and seed
crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle,
sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats of any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and
grazing of an or all of such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits
of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse
products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. Development of any
EAP Agricultural Lot is regulated within this Ordinance.
EAP Development Unit – A unit of subdivision/land development which is allocated to an EAP Parent
Tract, or portion thereof, which is situate in the EAP Zoning District.
21
EAP Parent Tract – Contiguous tracts of land deeded either as a single tract or as one deed with multiple
purparts prior to the adoption date of this Ordinance that are situate within the EAP Zoning District. In
cases where individually deeded tracts of land are under single ownership, each individually deeded tract
shall be considered to be its own Parent Tract.
EAP SFD Lots (See also “EAP Development Unit”) – Single Family Dwelling (SFD) Lots within the
EAP Zoning District created after the adoption date of this Ordinance by an approved subdivision plan
meeting the requirements of both the ESP Region Joint SALDO and the ESP Region Joint Zoning
Ordinance.
Emergency Service Facilities – Facilities housing fire, ambulance, rescue, and other emergency services of
a municipal or volunteer nature. A membership club may be included if it is a permitted use in the zoning
district in which the facility is located. This use may include housing for emergency personnel while they
are “on-duty” and/or “on-call”.
Entertainment, Accessory Use- Live, simulated, or recorded displays of any musical and/or theatrical
performances, and any sporting event or movie showings which are clearly accessory to the primary use of
the premises.
Entertainment, Primary Use- Live, simulated, or recorded displays of any musical and/or theatrical
performances, and any sporting event or movie showings which are the primary function and purpose of the
premises or are offered more frequently than three (3) times in any seven (7) day period. Primary Use
Entertainment shall be limited to nightclubs, theatres, and cinemas.
Ethanol Production Facility - A site on which engineering principles are utilized including, but not limited
to, fermenting, milling, and distilling from feed stocks (such as, but not limited to grain, sorghum, wheat,
corn, sugarcane barley, or potatoes) for the purposes of making ethanol fuel.
Extended-Care Facility – A long-term care facility licensed and/or approved by the appropriate local, state,
and federal agencies as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for the aged, or as a governmental
medical institution.
Façade – Any structure, or part of a structure, attached or otherwise mounted parallel to a wall or other
vertical part of a structure and which serves a primarily aesthetic, but non-structural, purpose.
Family – A “family” consists of one (1) or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage,
adoption, and or legal foster parentage together with said relatives’ respective spouses, children, or legal
wards including no more than one (1) boarder, roomer or lodger who are living together in a single
dwelling and are maintaining a common household and single and common cooking facilities; or a group of
not more than five (5) unrelated persons who are living together in a single dwelling unit and are
maintaining a common household with a single cooking facility. This term shall not include the terms club,
fraternity house, sorority lodge, foster home, group home, rooming or boarding house.
Family Farm Support Business – A family-owned and operated business located upon a farm and related
to agriculture purpose. The definition includes small-scale, limited site coverage, agriculturally compatible
farmstead occupations conducted commercially within the context of and/or in proximity to farmstead
buildings.
Farm – An area of land not less than ten (10) acres in size in the A-P Zoning District and all other zoning
districts (except the EAP Zoning District where farmers must be a minimum of twenty-five (25) acres in
size) which is primarily used for any of the permitted agricultural purposes as defined in this Ordinance.
Farm-Labor Housing – Separate living quarters to be used for the temporary seasonal accommodation of
workers employed by the owner or operator of a farm (provided such seasonal employees perform their
22
duties on such farm owned or rented by the farm owner or operator), and in which lodging with or without
meals is supplied or intended to be supplied to such employees.
Farm-Related Business – A business substantially devoted to serving agricultural-based customers which
can be conducted on a property within either the EAP or the A-P Zoning District. Said businesses must be
clearly farm-related and/or clearly designed to provide goods and services to the agricultural community
and must meet either the EAP or the A-P Zoning District requirements of this Ordinance.
Farm Stand – A building or structure, the sales area of which shall be limited to one thousand (1,000)
square feet and the building height to twenty (20) feet, in which the display and sale of farm produced
products shall be permitted wherever agricultural activity is being conducted.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) – The Federal government agency charged with regulating
the national airwaves.
Fence – A freestanding and uninhabited structure consisting of wood, glass, metal, plastic, wire, wire
mesh, masonry, or vegetation, singly or in a combination with other materials, erected to secure or divide
one property from another or part of a property from a remaining part, to assure privacy, to protect the
property so defined, or to enclose all or part of the property. A freestanding masonry wall shall be
considered to be a fence.
Fill – Any earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other suitable, structurally sufficient, non-organic material
which is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new location above the natural surface
of the ground or on top of the stripped surface of the ground.
Fish Hatchery – An agricultural establishment which is designed, intended, and used for the incubation
and/or gestation of fish which are lawfully permitted to be raised in the United States of America.
Fitness/Health Centers – Facilities providing fitness, health, and dietary instruction and training by
certified professionals. Aerobic, cardio-vascular and weight training instruction and equipment may be
available; as well as, but not limited to, martial arts instruction, aquatic activities, therapeutic massage and
other similar physical rehabilitation therapies. This term shall not include any activities which have been
defined as an Adult Entertainment Business by this Ordinance.
Flea Market – An outdoor retail sales area utilizing temporary tables, tents and/or shelters for the selling of
commodities and/or goods which are not usually produced on-site and which are usually sold by multiple
vendors who are usually not residents or owners of the property. The sale, preparation, and consumption of
food and beverages sold on the site is considered to be incidental to the flea market use unless said food
operations exist even when the flea market is not in operation. In that instance, any such food operation
requires a separate application, approval, and permit as a second primary use within the flea market.
Floodplain – The area (identified by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
and National Flood Insurance Administration) along a natural watercourse which is periodically inundated
by flood waters.
Floodway – The channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be preserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more then one (1) foot.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term shall include all floodway areas identified in the Flood Insurance
Study prepared for a Municipality by the Federal Flood Insurance Administration as well as any such
additional areas which have been identified in any other federal, state, or other acceptable studies,
regulations, or other sources of information (ex. the so-called “PA DEP Fifty Foot Rule”).
Floor Area – (See “Gross Floor Area” and “Net Floor Area”)
Forestry – The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance with accepted
23
silviculture principles through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting, and selling of trees for
commercial purposes. This term does not include the retail sale of living plants which occurs in either a
nursery or greenhouse and does not include the routine thinning or pruning of trees.
Frontage – The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public, or private, road right-of-way as measured at the
front property line of any such lot.
Funeral Home/Mortuary – An establishment in which the deceased are prepared for burial or cremation.
The facility shall be permitted to include a chapel for the conduct of funeral services, rooms specifically
designed or intended for funeral services and the gathering of mourners, and/or the display of funeral
accoutrements (eg; caskets, urns, etc.).
Game Preserve – An area of land set aside for the protection and propagation of animals not traditionally
domesticated. Game Preserve does not include any type commercial hunting operations whereby fees are
charged for persons to enter lands for the purpose of hunting game animals.
Game Room/Video Arcade – A type of leisure-time activity on a premises where more than two (2)
amusement devices (as defined in this ordinance) are provided as the principal use of the building or
structure. This term shall not include any activities defined as an Adult Business by this Ordinance.
Garage – A building, the primary use of which is for the storage of vehicles. As defined in this Ordinance,
if any garage is deemed to be an accessory residential use, then this term does not include commercial
vehicle repair or maintenance services, the rental of space, or the sale of gasoline or other petroleum
products. Garages associate with Commercial Business/Services, Retail Businesses, or Professional
Services shall only be used for vehicles associated with said enterprise.
Gas Station – (See “Automobile Service Station”)
Golf Course – A tract of land laid out, landscaped, and used primarily for the playing of the sport known
as golf, however, this term may additionally include swimming pools, tennis courts, and other facilities for
outdoor recreation normally associated with country club/golf courses. The term shall include buildings
and structures located on a golf course tract which are incidental to outdoor recreation, such as rain shelters,
maintenance and storage sheds, swimming pools, shower and dressing rooms and also clubhouses and/or
other buildings having facilities for the sale, rental, and storage of sports equipment; General Restaurants
(as defined in this Ordinance); and accommodations (including lodging) for members of private golf clubs
and their guests, which buildings and structures are normally associated with tournament-type eighteenhole
golf courses, provided that only eighteen (18) hole golf courses shall have lodging and no single
eighteen-hole courses shall have more than twenty (20) units of lodging; and provided, further, that any
commercial activity permitted by this sentence shall terminate if the golf course served by it shall cease to
operate as a golf course as defined in the preceding sentence. Public commercial hotels, motels,
restaurants, stores, snack bars and beverage service bars, and taverns are not permitted.
Golf Driving Range – A specified area, which may or may not be located upon a golf course, on which
golfers do not walk, but onto which they drive golf balls from a central tee.
Government Facility ( other than Municipally Owned) – A use owned by a state or federal government,
government agency, or government authority for valid public health, public safety, recycling collection or
similar governmental purpose, and which is not owned by a municipality within the ESP Region. This term
shall not include uses listed in Zoning District Regulations of this Ordinance, such as publicly owned
recreation. This term shall also not include any type of prison, halfway house, juvenile detention facility,
mental health institution and/or institutions housing the criminally insane.
Grade – The level of the ground, whether it is adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or structure or
not, after said ground has been graded by man-made means or machinery (as opposed to the terms “natural
grade” or “natural gradient”).
24
Greenhouse – An enclosed structure, whose roof and sides are made largely of transparent or translucent
material, used for the growing, raising, and/or distribution of plants and vegetables.
Grocery Store – A retail business housed in a building having less than 10,500 square feet of gross floor
area, which has as its primary purpose to sell fresh and prepackaged food and groceries, housewares, and
toiletries. Grocery stores shall not include the dispensing of gasoline or other fuels (Also See
“Supermarket”).
Gross Floor Area – The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floor, or floors of a building measured
from the exterior face of the exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but
not including any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than seven (7) feet.
Group Home – A dwelling operated by a responsible individual, family, or organization, with a program to
provide a supportive living arrangement for individuals in a setting in which the total number of persons in
the living arrangement may total more and is, in substantive ways, different than the definition of “Family”
found in this Ordinance. This home, which is required to be licensed by the state, must be staffed by
qualified persons who provide training, care, supervision, treatment, and/or rehabilitation to the aged,
physically challenged/disabled, or mentally challenged/retarded who require personal assistance and
supervision on a continuing around-the-clock basis. Group Home does not include child day care centers,
adult day care facilities, foster homes, schools, hospitals, jails, prisons, treatment centers, detention centers,
or methadone treatment centers. Group Homes shall be subject to the same limitations and regulations set
by this Ordinance for single family dwellings.
Healthcare Facility – A facility or institution, whether publicly or privately owned, principally engaged in
providing services for health maintenance or the diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury,
deformity or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general hospital, public health center,
diagnostic center, physical rehabilitation center, assisted living facility, extended-care facility, skilled-care
facility, nursing care facility, nursing home, convalescent home, long-term care facility, intermediate-care
facility, chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital, outpatient clinic, dispensary, home health care agency,
or personal-care facility.
Healthcare Services – Those services primarily related to the furnishing of medical, surgical, or other
services to individuals, including the offices of physicians, radiological centers, dentists and other health
practitioners, medical and dental laboratories, outpatient care facilities, blood banks, and the businesses
which provide the various types of medical supplies and services to the healthcare professionals and their
patients.
Heliport – An area used for helicopters to land and take off, including all auxiliary, service and
maintenance facilities related thereto, whether or not said heliport is located upon the ground or upon the
roof of a building or structure. This definition does not include the term “Helistop”.
Helistop – An area on a roof or on the ground to accommodate touchdown and lift-off of rotor-wing
aircraft (helicopters) for the purpose of picking up and discharging passengers or cargo. Such area shall
have sufficient space to accommodate all required safety controls and comply in all respects with Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements, but in no case shall such area provide the service facilities
associated with a “Heliport”.
Highway Frontage – The lot dimension measured along the right-of-way line of a street or highway
abutting a lot. Highway Frontage shall be a continuous dimension and not the sum of two (2) or more
separate dimensions. In addition, Highway Frontage shall be the shortest straight line distance; it shall not
be measured on an arc.
Home Occupation – An accessory use for commercial gain which is clearly and customarily incidental or
secondary to the residential use of any dwelling unit and which is customarily carried on within a dwelling
25
unit, and the existence of which does not alter the residential character of the subject home itself and/or the
residential area thereof, or have any exterior evidence of such secondary use, except for those signs or
parking facilities which may be allowed by this Ordinance.
Hospital – An institution designed for the diagnosis, treatment, and care of human illness or infirmity
including, but not limited to, the provision of surgical treatments, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, etc., and
which provides said human health services, primarily for inpatients and including as related facilities,
laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, and staff offices. (Also See “Healthcare Facility”)
Hotel – For purposes of this Ordinance, an establishment providing overnight accommodations for
transient visitors, containing a minimum of six (6) rental rooms and having the following requirements:
A. Access to rooms shall be provided through a lobby and internal hallways.
B. A private bath shall be provided for each rental room.
C. Buildings contain at least two (2) (or more) stories with a maximum building height of sixty-five
(65) feet.
D. The hotel may, at its option, provide meeting rooms, banquet facilities, fitness centers for guests
and ancillary commercial shops within the building with internal hallway access.
E. “Hotel” does not include institutional or educational uses and buildings where human beings are
housed under any type of legal constraint (other than sequestered jurors or witnesses for the
prosecution).
Impervious Coverage – Coverage of the site by materials which cannot be usually and/or easily penetrated
by water. Included in this definition are:
A. All principal and accessory buildings.
B. Any roof, parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any areas covered by
well-compacted gravel or crushed stone shall also be assumed to be impervious.
C. The percentage of a lot covered by impervious surfaces.
D. All-Weather Surfaces shall be included in the definition of Impervious Coverage.
Improved Private Road – A road having a cartway, which is improved with a paved surface which may be
constructed to the standards for public streets under the applicable regulations of the ESP Joint SALDO,
which provides access to a lot or lots. If parking shall be permitted along an “improved private road,” the
minimum cartway width shall be increased by eight feet for each side of the “improved private road” where
“on-street parking” is permitted.
Improvement – Any type of man-made structure erected upon a lot.
Improvement Setback Line – A line parallel to and set back from a road’s right of way line. No
improvements are permitted between the road’s right of way line and the improvement setback line.
Incinerator – A facility specifically designed and federally permitted to reduce municipal solid waste by
combustion. This use may or may not include heat exchange equipment for energy recovery.
Industry, General – Any industrial activities which do not meet the definition of Light Industry.
26
Industry, Light – Industrial activities which are carried on entirely within an enclosed building and include
no outdoor processes and/or outdoor storage of materials and involve mainly the assembly, packaging, and
shipping of products which were not produced “on-site” via a foundry, sawmill, or similar means.
Industrial Park – A tract of land developed according to an approved Land Development Plan and/or
Subdivision Plan which provides either fee simple lots or leased parcels that are configured in such a
manner as to be suitable for either light industrial or general industrial users dependent upon the underlying
zoning classification of the developed tract of land.
Intermediate Care Facility – A facility which provides, on a regular basis, health-related care and services
to individuals who do not require the degree of care and treatment which a hospital or skill-nursing facility
is designed to provide, but who, because of their mental or physical condition, require care and services
(above the level of room and board) which can be made available to them only through institutional
facilities such as these.
Junk – Any discarded materials, articles, or any pieces or portions thereof, is considered to be junk. This
definition shall include, but not be limited to, scrap metal; scrapped, discarded or inoperable, un-repairable,
unlicensed, unregistered or otherwise non-road worthy motor vehicles; machinery discarded, obsolete, or
otherwise non-useable; and equipment, paper products, glass, plastic or metal containers, structures, and
any other items which are not ordinarily and customarily disposed of as rubbish, refuse, garbage or organic
household waste.
Junk Vehicle – Includes any vehicle (as defined in this ordinance) that meets any of the following
conditions:
A. Does not display a license plate with a current registration sticker (if one is required) and does not
have a valid state safety inspection sticker (if one is required and except for licensed antique cars
not required to have an inspection sticker). Licenses or inspection stickers that expired less than
90 days ago shall be considered current for the purposes of this subsection.
B. Has been demolished beyond repair.
C. Has been separated from its axles, body or chassis.
D. Includes only the axle, engine, body parts and/or chassis, separated from the remainder of the
vehicle.
E. Is otherwise non-road worthy, un-repairable, inoperable and/or generally deteriorated to a state of
disrepair.
Junk Yard – Any lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof inclusive of any buildings or structures where junk,
waste, scrap materials, discarded or salvage materials, inoperable vehicles are bought, sold, exchanged,
stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled. This definition shall include automobile/vehicle
dismantling facilities and automobile salvage yards, but shall not include any buildings or structures used
for the storage of used furniture and household appliances or any lot or building where used cars in
operable condition, with current motor vehicle registrations, are stored.
Kennel – Any property and/or establishment wherein domesticated pets (and not livestock as defined in this
Ordinance) are kept, transported to, transported from, or seen by appointment for the purposes of breeding,
boarding, grooming, obedience training, sale, or show purposes. For the purpose of this definition, the
production of more than two (2) litters in any calendar year shall be considered “breeding”; and the keeping
of more than five (5) dogs or more than five (5) cats on any real property located within the ESP Region
shall be considered to be a “Kennel” operation.
27
Land Development – Any of the following activities:
A. The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any
purpose involving commercial or industrial uses.
B. A group of two or more residential or non-residential buildings, whether proposed initially or
cumulatively, or a single non-residential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure.
C. The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets, common
areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features.
D. A subdivision of land.
E. The following shall not be considered land development:
1. The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling or single family semi-detached
dwelling into not more then two (2) residential units unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
2. The addition of an accessory building of less than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area,
exclusive of any farm buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
Landfill – (See “Solid Waste Landfill”)
Landowner – A legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to
purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee if he is authorized
under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having a proprietary interest in the
land.
Laundry, Self Service – A business that provides washing, drying, and/or ironing machines for hire to be
used by customers on the premises.
Leisure-time Activity - Those activities performed by individuals during non-working periods and other
times of rest or relaxation.
Library - A building containing books, magazines, and other reading related materials which is open to the
public or connected with a permitted educational use and is generally not conducted as a private business
for profit or financial gain. This term shall not include any use defined as an Adult Business by this
Ordinance.
Life Care Retirement Facility – A residential development generally consisting of a regulated mixture of
single family detached dwellings, semi-detached dwellings, and townhouse dwellings as well as Apartment
Buildings along with personal-care services and skilled nursing-care facilities in an environment which
usually cannot be achieved through the use of a conventional residential development scenario. Such
facilities serve persons and or their spouse and companion who are a minimum of fifty-five (55) years old
and who may be handicapped to an extent which requires personal or skilled nursing care. Housing,
Healthcare Facilities, and Healthcare Services are provided to each resident of a “Life Care Retirement
Facility” pursuant to an agreement between the resident(s) and the owners/operators of said facility(ies).
Services provided in such facilities may include, but are not limited to, health care, intermediate and skilled
nursing care, medical facilities, physical therapy, board, lodging, support services, and accessory uses.
Livestock – Equine animals, bovine animals, sheep, goats, swine, and poultry commonly raised upon farms
in Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania. The definition of “Livestock” does not include dogs, cats, or any type
28
of animals or birds which are normally considered to be either “domesticated pets,” wild or exotic animals,
and/or game animals
Living Accommodation Unit For Caretakers – A dwelling for no more than two (2) persons located upon
the premises of a business which employs at least one (1) of said two (2) persons for security or
maintenance purposes.
Lodge – (See “Club”)
Lodging House – (See “Boarding House”)
Long-Term Care Facility – An institution, or a distinct part of an institution, which is licensed or approved
to provide health care under medical supervision for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours to two (2)
or more patients. The term “long-term care facility” is inclusive of either an extended-care facility or an
intermediate-care facility.
Lot – A tract or parcel of land which has road frontage, regardless of size, held in single and/or joint
ownership, not necessarily being a tract or parcel of land shown on a duly recorded subdivision plan or
surveyor’s map, which is occupied, or is capable of being occupied, by buildings, structures, and accessory
buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed, or required, and having frontage on either
a public street or a private street. The term “lot” shall also mean parcel, plot, site, or any other similar term,
when such term is used in the proper context.
Lot Area – The area contained within the lot lines, excluding any land area contained within any existing
public or private road rights-of-way.
Lot, Corner – (See “Corner Lot”)
Lot Depth – The mean average horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines.
Lot Frontage – That portion of a lot which is immediately adjacent to a private or public street.
Lot Line – A line forming the front, rear, or side boundary of a lot.
Lot of Record – Land which constitutes a separate lot or parcel as recorded in office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania.
Lot Size – The remaining area of a lot after deducting the following features from the Gross Acreage:
A. Areas within a public or private street or other exclusive use type right-of-way.
B. Areas containing any stormwater management improvements (e.g., basins, swales, ditches, etc.)
but not including stormwater management improvements that are intended to serve individual lots.
C. In Zoning Districts that require a minimum lot size of two (2) acres:
that portion or portions of the lot in which the following features individually or cumulatively
represent fifty percent (50%) of the gross lot area; areas within the 100 year flood plain, areas of
slope in excess of twenty-five percent (25%), and all areas delineated as Wetlands.
D. In Zoning Districts that require a minimum lot size of one (1) acres:
that portion or portions of the lot in which the following features individually or cumulatively
represent twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross lot area; areas within the 100 year flood plain,
areas of slope in excess of twenty-five percent (25%), and all areas delineated as wetlands.
Lot Width – The distance between side lot lines, determined by establishing the shortest straight line
distance at both the building setback line and the street line. The lot width shall be a continuous dimension
and not the sum of two (2) or more separate dimensions. Also, lot width shall be the shortest straight line
distance, it shall not be measured on an arc.
29
Low-Level Radioactive Waste Facility - A site which must be permitted by local, state, and federal
authorities and upon which engineering principles are utilized for the disposal of low-level radioactive
waste as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) and by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP).
Maintenance Guarantee – A written, executed, document which provides to a Municipality a guarantee
(which is acceptable to the Municipality, including corporate bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar
collateral or surety agreements) by the developer or subdivider that, the improvements depicted on said
plan shall be constructed and maintained by the developer or subdivider for a period of at least eighteen
(18) months after completion of construction and installation of such improvements.
Manufactured Home – A prefabricated house, consisting of one or more modular units, which is usually
designed to be placed upon a permanent perimeter foundation.
Massage Parlor – An establishment that meets all of the following criteria:
A. Massages are conducted involving one person using their hands and/or feet and/or a mechanical
device on another person above or below his/her waist, in return for monetary compensation, and
which does not involve persons who are related to each other.
B. The use does not involve a person licensed or certified by the state as a health care professional or
a massage therapist certified by a recognized professional organization that requires substantial
professional training. Massage therapy by any such certified professional, unless said persons are
the owners, or employees, of an Adult business where they perform massages,
shall be considered “personal service.”
C. Massages as defined herein shall not be conducted within a licensed hospital or nursing home or
an office of a medical doctor or chiropractor or as an incidental accessory use to a permitted
exercise club or high school or college athletic program.
D. The massages are conducted within private or semi-private rooms.
For purposes of this Ordinance a “Massage Parlor” as defined above shall be considered to be an “Adult
Business” and is regulated as such.
Massage Therapist – A person licensed or certified by the state as a health care professional and/or one
certified by a recognized professional organization that requires substantial professional training.
Methadone Treatment Center – As used in this Ordinance, the term “methadone treatment facility” shall
mean a facility licensed by the Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment,
maintenance, or detoxification of persons. “Methadone Treatment Center” is further regulated by this
Ordinance and by PA Act 247 The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
Mineral Extraction – The extraction of minerals from the earth, from stockpiles of materials previously
extracted from the earth, or from pits or banks by activities conducted upon the surface of the land which
require the removal of the overburden, strata or material overlying, above or between, the minerals, or by
otherwise exposing and retrieving the minerals from the surface. These activities include, but are not
limited to, strip, drift, auger, and open pit mining, dredging, quarrying, leaching, mountaintop removal, box
cutting and activities related thereto. Mining activities carried out beneath the surface by means of shafts,
tunnels, or other underground mine openings are not included in this definition. The term “minerals”
includes, but is not limited to, anthracite and bituminous coal, lignite, limestone and dolomite, sand, gravel,
rock, stone, earth, slag, ore, vermiculite, clay, and other mineral resources. The terms “mineral extraction”
and “surface mining” shall have the same meaning.
Mini-Warehouse – (Also See “Self-Storage Facilities”)
30
Mink Farm – A facility designed, intended, and used for the raising and/or harvesting of mink for retail or
wholesale trade.
Mobile Home – A type of manufactured housing that can be connected to utilities and can be parked in one
place and used as a dwelling. A mobile home is a transportable unit (or units designed to be joined together
and yet are still capable of again being separated for repeated towing) that is generally towed behind a large
truck when it is being moved from one site to another.
Mobile Home Lot – A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility
connections and other appurtenances required for the placement thereon of a single mobile home. This
parcel of land shall not be considered to be a “fee simple lot” but rather is a specified parcel of land within
the overall mobile home park which is leased by the record owner of the mobile home park to the
occupants of the mobile home placed upon said mobile home lot.
Mobile Home Park – A parcel of land at least ten (10) acres in size, under single ownership, which has
been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for non-transient use and which consists of
at least two (2) or more mobile homes and with a maximum density of eight (8) mobile homes to the acre.
Modular Home – A single-family detached dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, made by
assembling one or more factory-produced three dimensional sections into an integral living unit whose
construction materials and specifications conform to those of conventionally built single family detached
dwelling units.
Mortuary – (See “Funeral Home”)
Motel – For purposes of this Ordinance, an establishment providing transient accommodations, containing
a minimum of six (6) rental rooms, and having the following requirements:
A. Access to rooms is from directly outside the rooms themselves.
B. A private bath shall be provided for each rental room.
C. Building height is a minimum of one (1) story with a maximum two (2) stories or thirty five (35)
feet.
Motor sports Facility – Any facility for the competitive operation of either “on-road” or “off-road”
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles and any other motorized vehicles or machinery for recreational or
commercial purpose where fees are usually charged for the use of said facilities, to spectators of events, and
for snacks and/or beverages, including uses such as, but not limited to, racing, “racing events” as defined in
this Ordinance, practicing, training, instruction, research and development and testing.
Movie Theater – (See “Theater”)
Municipality – Shall refer to the five (5) sovereign municipalities which comprise the Eastern Schuylkill
Planning Region (Rush Township, Schuylkill Township, , Walker Township, and the Borough of
Tamaqua).
Municipal Governing Body – The elected officials of each of the Eastern Schuylkill Planning Region
Municipalities.
Municipal Solid Waste – The un-separated and/or unprocessed combination of residential and commercial
solid waste materials generated by residences and businesses located within a municipality.
Municipal Use – A land use owned and maintained by a municipality or a municipal authority including,
but not limited to, such uses as a library, park, playground, administrative offices, and equipment storage
31
building. This includes sites for sewage treatment, solid waste and refuse disposal, and other public
facilities owned and operated for the good and well-being of the municipality and activities regularly
conducted by the municipality at such sites and/or facilities.
Museum – A building or structure which houses collections of antiquities, art, vehicles, and other items of
historical or sociological importance and which is open to the public or connected with a permitted
educational use and which is not usually operated as a private gainful business. This term shall not include
any activities, artwork, movies, videos, or other types of displays which have been defined as Adult
business related activities or items by this Ordinance.
Net Buildable Area – A calculated area upon which the density and the requirements for the various zoning
districts are computed. “Net buildable area” is the area of a lot remaining after subtracting all of the public
and private road rights-of-way, noncontiguous lands, and utility rights-of-way from the site’s gross area.
Net Floor Area – That portion of a building’s gross floor area which is designed for human occupancy
and/or commercial use, not to include elevator shafts, stairways, stairwells, or equipment rooms (See
“Gross Floor Area”).
Nightclub – A facility where entertainment is the primary use (“Primary Use Entertainment” as defined in
this Ordinance). A nightclub may serve food as well as beer, wine, and liquor and there is space set aside
for floorshows (e.g., live music performances etc.) and/or a dance floor. This term shall not include any
activities, artwork, movies, videos, or other types of displays which have been defined as Adult business
related activities or items by this Ordinance.
No-impact Home Based Business – A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an
accessory use in a residence and which is clearly secondary to the use of the home as a residential dwelling
and which involves neither customer, client, nor patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, nor pickup,
delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those types of activities normally
associated with residential use. The business or commercial activity shall satisfy the following
requirements:
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the subject property and any
and all surrounding residential properties.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial
nature.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use including, but not limited to, off-street
parking (beyond that parking which is required by Ordinance for a residential use) signs, or
lights.
E. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors, or electrical interference, including any interference with radio, television, or
telephone reception in the residential neighborhood.
F. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type,
beyond that which is normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
G. The business activity shall be conducted only within the existing residential dwelling unit and
shall not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
H. The business shall not involve any illegal activity.
The permitting of any No-impact Home Based Business by any municipality shall not supersede any deed
restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the use of land, or any master deed, by law, or other document
applicable to a common interest ownership community.
Non-Conforming Lot – A lot, the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption of this
Ordinance or is legally established through the granting of a variance by one of the five (5) ESP Region
municipality’s Zoning Hearing Board, which fails to conform to the dimensional and/or lot area
32
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such Ordinance adoption or
amendment made thereto.
Non-Conforming Structure – A structure which does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district
in which it is located, either at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, or as a result of subsequent
amendments thereto, but which lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this Ordinance. Non-conforming
structures can include, but are not limited to, non-conforming signs, non-conforming buildings, and
additions legally made to either.
Non-Conforming Use – Any use, whether conducted within a structure or upon a tract of land, which does
not conform to the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which said use is located and which use
was legally in existence at the time of enactment of this Ordinance or was, or is, legally established by one
of the five (5) ESP Region municipality’s Zoning Hearing Board through the granting of a variance.
Nursery – A type of agriculture use utilizing land or greenhouses to cultivate flowers, plants, shrubs, trees,
and similar vegetation.
Nursing Home – (See “Convalescent Home”)
Office – A building or structure, or a particular space within a building, in which the affairs of a for-profit
or non-profit business, professional person, or government agency are conducted. The primary function of
any office building or office space shall not include wholesale or retail sales activities unless said activities
are approved by one of the five (5) ESP Region municipality’s Zoning Hearing Boards through the
approval of a variance.
Office/Commercial Center- A planned development of office and related uses with some accessory
commercial uses intended primarily to serve employees of the offices.
On-Lot Sewage System (Individual) – A sewage disposal system located upon a lot which collects, treats,
and disposes of sewage (or holds sewage) generated by the occupants of only one (1) dwelling, or one (1)
business, and/or one (1) principal use located upon said lot.
On-Lot Water Supply System – A water supply system which transmits water from a source on a lot to
only one (1) dwelling, or one (1) business, and/or one (1) principal use located upon said lot.
Open Space – The area of a lot unoccupied by principal or accessory structures, streets, driveways, or
parking areas; but inclusive of areas occupied by walkways, patios, porches without roofs, playgrounds,
outdoor recreation or play apparatus, gardens or trees.
Parking Space – A space within a building or upon a lot, used for the parking of a legally registered and
inspected, fully functional motor vehicle.
Party Wall – A fire resistant common wall, floor, or ceiling separating two (2) or more dwelling units.
Patio – An unroofed structure which is usually immediately adjacent to the side or rear wall of a dwelling
unit, or other type of building and which is usually not more than two steps above ground level.
Pawn Shop – A business where loans are made using personal property as security/collateral.
Person – Means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Personal Care Services – Supervision and assistance services which may include assistance with dressing,
bathing, diet or medication prescribed for self administration.
33
Personal Services – A business which provides a service oriented to personal needs and which does not
usually involve retail businesses, the retail sales of goods, professional services, or commercial/business
services. Such uses can include, but are not limited to, a barber, beauty salon, tailor, dressmaker, shoe
repair, photographer, travel agent, jewelry and watch repair, or similar personal service providers.
Pet Cemetery – (See “Animal Cemetery”)
Pets, Keeping Of – The keeping of domesticated animals of types that are normally considered to be kept
by the residents of a dwelling for the pleasures of the resident family. These types of animals can include,
but are not necessarily limited to, dogs, cats, small birds, gerbils, rabbits and other animals commonly sold
by pet shops, however, no more than five (5) dogs, cats, small birds, gerbils, rabbits and other animals
commonly sold by pet shops may be kept upon any property, unless said property is a lawfully established
“kennel” under the terms of this Ordinance.
Piggery – For purposes of this Ordinance, any property which contains 1.0 animal units per acre and above,
of swine. Piggeries shall be considered an Intensive Agricultural activity and are only permitted within the
EAP and AP Zoning District on lots that are, at least, twenty-five (25) acres or more in size.
Planned Residential Development (PRD) – A unique type of land development conducted upon a
particular parcel of land, which is controlled by a single entity, which is intended to be developed as a
single community with a site specific number of dwelling units per acre, or a combination of residential and
non-residential uses, the development plan for which does not necessarily correspond in terms of lot size,
bulk or type of dwellings, dwelling density, lot coverage and/or required open space, to the regulations
established in any of the residential zoning districts created, from time to time, under the provisions of the
Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region Joint Zoning Ordinance.
Plans (Sketch) – An informal plan, not necessarily drawn to an exact scale, indicating salient existing
features of the tract and its surroundings and depicting approximate street and lot layout of the development
as a basis for an informal, non-binding, discussion with the municipality, prior to the submittal of a
Preliminary Plan. Sketch Plans shall not be required by either, the ESP Joint Zoning Ordinance or, the ESP
Joint SALDO, but rather maybe informally presented to the municipality.
Plan (Preliminary) – A tentative subdivision or land development plan (including all required
supplementary data), generally prepared in lesser detail than a Final Plan, depicting approximate locations
of proposed streets and lot layout and/or site development in the case of land development, as a basis for
formal consideration of same by prior to the submission of a Final Plan. Preliminary Plans shall be
prepared by a Registered Engineer, Surveyor, or Landscape Architect. Preliminary Plans shall constitute a
Formal, Official Submission of a subdivision or land development to the municipality.
Plan (Final) – A complete and exact subdivision or land development plan (including all required
supplementary data), prepared for formal consideration by the municipality and for official recording as
required by statute, to define property rights and proposed street and other improvements provided said
Final Plan is approved and endorsed by the municipality. Final Land Development Plans shall be prepared
by and shall bear the signature and seal of a Registered Engineer, Surveyor, or Landscape Architect. Final
Subdivision Plans shall be prepared by and shall bear the signature and seal of a Registered Professional
Land Surveyor.
Plan (Sketch Plan For Record and/or Sketch Plan of Record) – A type of Final Plan that may be
submitted for a Minor Subdivision (a subdivision which will create no more than two (2) residential lots).
Such plans shall meet all of the applicable Final Plan design and submittal requirements established by the
ESP Joint Zoning Ordinance and the ESP Joint SALDO.
Porch – A three sided roofed structure projecting from the front, side, or rear wall of a building without any
enclosing features more than 38 inches above the floor thereof, save the necessary columns to support the
roof and any necessary railings. A porch shall be located behind the respective building setback lines for
34
the subject lot.
Premises – A descriptive word to include all improvements, buildings, structures, and land upon and within
a lot’s boundaries.
Principal Permitted Building – A building or structure, the main or primary purpose for which any land,
structure or building is designed, arranged or intended, and for which said building may be occupied or
maintained under the terms of Ordinance.
Principal Permitted Use – The primary building, use, or structure permitted and intended for a given lot or
parcel.
Private Surface Parking Facility – A privately owned and operated parking facility constructed upon the
surface of a lot with spaces available for short-term and long-term lease.
Professional – A doctor, surgeon, dentist, architect, accountant, insurance agent, real estate broker, web
site designer, teacher, engineer, lawyer, musician, surveyor, landscape architect, land planner, or any other
type of licensed, certified and/or degreed professional.
Professional Service – The term includes any establishments primarily engaged in providing a wide variety
of services for individual, business and government establishments, and other organizations. The term
includes establishments providing business, health, legal, engineering, and other professional services.
Specifically excluded from this definition are any and all types of Adult-Business Establishments.
Pub – (See “Tavern”)
Public Hearing – A formal meeting held pursuant to the advertisement of public notice by either the
Municipal Governing Body or the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board intended to inform and obtain public
comment prior to either entity taking formal action on an ordinance, application, plan, request for relief,
variance, appeal, or conditional or special exception use which has been filed in accordance with this
Ordinance.
Public Meeting – A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84) known
as the “Sunshine Act”.
Public Notice – A notice published in the manner and duration prescribed by law in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Municipality. Such notice shall state the time, date, and place of the public hearing
and public meeting and the particular nature of matters to be considered at the public hearing or public
meeting.
Public Road – A public thoroughfare including a street, road, lane, alley, court or other similar terms,
which has been dedicated or deeded to the Municipality and subsequently accepted for dedication to the
public’s use by the Governing Body.
Public Sewerage Systems – (See “Sewage Facilities”).
Public Utilities – A use, or an extension thereof, which is operated, owned, or maintained by a municipality
or municipal authority, or which is privately owned and requires a “Certificate of Convenience” issued by
the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (PUC) for the purpose of providing public sewage disposal
and/or treatment; public potable water distribution and treatment; and/or for the purpose of providing the
transmission of energy, telephone, internet, and/or television service to individual customers.
Public Water Supply– (See “Water Supply, Public”).
Quarry – (See “Mineral Extraction”)
35
Racing Event – Any time, speed, or distance competition using motor vehicles of any type, whether or not
conducted under the auspices of a recognized sanctioning body including, but not limited to, events on the
surface of land and water. “Racing Events” shall be deemed to include any practice sessions, time trials,
qualification rounds, or any other similar activity.
Rear Lot Line – The lot line which is opposite from the front lot line. The rear line of any triangularly or
irregularly shaped lot shall be at least ten (10) feet long.
Recreation – The offering of a type of leisure-time activity to the general public. This term shall not
include the terms “Adult Business”, “Adult Establishment”, or ”Game Room/Video Arcade”. For the
purposes of this Ordinance recreation facilities shall be considered “indoor” or “outdoor” recreation:
A. Indoor Recreation - A type of recreation use that does not meet the definition of “outdoor
recreation” and is conducted principally for active or passive recreation including, but not limited
to, such uses as a bowling alley, roller skating rink, ice skating rink, indoor soccer or lacrosse
fields, and/or similar uses.
B. Outdoor Recreation – A type of recreation use that has a total building coverage of less than
fifteen (15) percent of the lot area upon which the use is being conducted and is primarily
conducted for active or passive recreation including, but not limited to, such uses as golf driving
range, miniature golf course, sports playing fields, and/or similar uses.
“Indoor Recreation” and “Outdoor Recreation” are part of the definition of “Recreation Use”.
Recreation, Active—Any recreation activity not considered to be “Passive”.
Recreation, Passive—Includes picnic pavilions; hiking, biking, and fitness trails; park benches; picnicking;
bird watching; and other similar uses, and any recreation activity not considered to be “Active”.
Recreation Use
A. Commercial – Recreational facilities, which are owned and operated by a private entity as a
commercial business and are open to the general public for a fee.
B. Public – Recreational facilities operated as a not for profit enterprise by a municipality or other
governmental entity and which are open to the general public.
C. Private-- Facilities which are only open to members of the private entity which owns said facility.
Commercial, Public, and Private Recreation Uses are part of the definition of “Indoor” or “Outdoor”
Recreation. For purposes of this ordinance “Recreation Use” where listed as a permitted use may be further
regulated as specified in this Ordinance.
No recreation activity which, in the opinion of the Municipal Governing Body, constitutes a threat to the
health, safety, and welfare of the general public or results in the degradation of the existing environment
shall be permitted.
Recreational Area
A. Private – Recreational facilities, which are either owned and operated by a private entity as a
commercial business and are open to the general public for a fee or which are facilities which are
only open to members of the private entity which owns said facility.
B. Public – Recreational facilities operated as a not for profit enterprise by a municipality or other
36
governmental entity and which are open to the general public.
Public and Private recreational facilities may include, but not be limited to, land buildings and structures
used for leisure time activities including amusements, theatre, arcades, athletic events, amphitheatres,
clubs, country clubs, dancing or music halls, studios, swimming clubs, skating clubs, horse and bicycle
riding trails, hiking trails, playgrounds, boating, and hunting and fishing clubs.
No recreation area which, in the opinion of the Municipal Governing Body, constitutes a threat to the
health, safety, and welfare of the general public or results in the degradation of the existing environment
shall be permitted.
Recreational areas, both Public and Private, shall never include any types of “Adult Businesses” as defined
by this Ordinance.
Recreational vehicle (RV) —A vehicular-type camping unit certified by the manufacturer as complying
with ANSI A119.2 or A119.5 and primarily designed to provide indoor accommodations for persons who
wish to go “camping”. An RV may either have its own mode of power or is mounted on or towed by
another vehicle. The various RV units include camping trailers, fifth-wheel trailers, motor homes, park
trailers, travel trailers, and truck campers as described below.
CAMPING TRAILER— A recreational vehicle that is mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible
partial sidewalls that fold when the trailer is being towed by another vehicle and unfold for use (e.g., a
“pop-up camper”).
FIFTH-WHEEL TRAILER — A recreational vehicle designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle that
contains a towing mechanism that is mounted above or forward of the tow vehicle's rear axle.
MOTOR HOME — A recreational vehicle built on or permanently attached to a self-propelled motor
vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van that is an integral part of the completed vehicle.
PARK TRAILER — A recreational vehicle that meets the following criteria:
A. Built on a single chassis mounted on wheels.
B. Certified by the manufacturer as complying with ANSI A119.5.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A recreational vehicle designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle containing a
towing mechanism that is usually mounted behind the tow vehicle's bumper.
TRUCK CAMPER - A recreational vehicle designed to be securely placed within the bed of a pickup
truck.
Recreational Vehicle Park - (See “Campground/Recreational Vehicle Park”)
Recycling Facility – A business that accumulates non-hazardous materials such as paper, glass, aluminum
and/or plastic or other non- hazardous material, or any containers that held any hazardous material, and
providing that said non-hazardous materials are no longer useful for their intended purpose. The materials
are then sold to another business as a raw material which can be used to manufacture a new product. (Also
see “Resource Recovery Facility”).
Resource Recovery Facility – A facility that is used for any one or a combination of the following similar
uses: composting, incineration, material separation, recycling, or trash transfer.
Restaurant - A retail food (the term “food” includes non-alcoholic beverages) service establishment,
conducted with or without the sale of beer, wine, or liquor. For purposes of this Ordinance restaurants shall
be classified as follows:
37
A. Restaurant, Fast Food – An establishment that sells food already prepared for consumption, on or
off the premises which is usually packaged in paper, Styrofoam, or similar materials. Such uses
may include drive-in, drive-through, or drive-up facilities for ordering.
B. Restaurant, General –An establishment that sells food for consumption primarily on the premises
and which may include the sale of beer, wine, or liquor. All food and beverages may be served by
waiters or waitresses and are primarily consumed inside the building while patrons are seated at
counters or tables. Food sales shall account for at least fifty-five percent (55%) of the gross
income.
C. Restaurant, Take-out – An establishment that sells food only for consumption off the premises and
which may include drive-in, drive-through, or drive-up facilities for ordering or pick-up and which
may include take-out beer as part of its operation.
Retail Business – Includes establishments engaged in selling merchandise directly to the consumer and
rendering services incidental to the sale of the goods. The establishment is usually a place of business
which is engaged in the sale of items that the general public will usually buy. Processing of items in a
manner that is incidental or subordinate to the retail sales of said items is often conducted at retail
businesses. Buying of goods for resale to the consumer is a characteristic of retail trade establishments that
particularly distinguishes them from Personal Services, Professional Services, Commercial
Businesses/Services, or Agriculture and Extractive Industries. Specifically excluded from this definition
are Adult Business Establishments as defined by this Ordinance.
Retirement Community —– A planned residential community consisting of single-family detached, single
family semi-detached, and townhouses for persons of fifty-five (55) years of age or older and their spouses
or companions and usually including communal dining, recreation areas, open space, parking, and related
facilities, and which may include Healthcare Facilities (as defined in this Ordinance).
Retreat Camp – A type of “camp” which provides food and/or lodging for persons wishing to commune
with nature while they contemplate various moral, ethical, and/or ecumenical issues or problems along with
accessory offices, dwellings, and administration uses devoted solely to operating the retreat camp, all
located in a predominately natural setting.
Riding Academy/Riding Stables/Horse Boarding Facilities – An establishment where horses are boarded
and cared for and where instruction in riding, jumping, and showing is offered; and/or where the general
public may, for a fee, hire horses for riding.
Right-of-way - The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a street, sidewalk, alley, or for other
public or semi-public purposes (e.g., water or sewer lines etc.).
Rooming House – (See Boarding House).
SALDO – ESP Region Joint Subdivision And Land Development Ordinance.
Saloon – (See “Tavern”)
Salvage Yard – (See “Junk Yard”)
Satellite Dish Antenna —A device incorporating a reflective surface which can be solid, open mesh, or
bar-configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, or horn. This term is inclusive of the pedestal
and other attachments which the device needs to be functional. Such devices shall be used to transmit
and/or receive radio or other electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbit based transmitters.
38
This definition is meant to include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as "satellite earth
stations," "television receivers only" (or "TVRO's"), and "satellite microwave antennas."
Satellite Use – A commercial establishment in a shopping center or planned commercial center, located in a
freestanding building independent of other buildings, and frequently near the road frontage of the center.
Satellite uses are often, but not always, characterized by the following:
A. A need for nearby parking.
B. Rapid customer turnover.
C. Vehicular service bays or drive-through services.
School – A principal use in which supervised education or instruction is offered including, but not limited
to, the following:
A. Public School – An elementary or secondary school supported by public funds and providing free
education for children located within a public school district.
B. Private School – An elementary or secondary school run and primarily supported by private
individuals or a corporation.
C. Parochial School – An elementary or secondary school primarily supported by a religious
organization.
D. Day School – A private school for pupils living at home.
E. Boarding School – A private school where pupils are provided with meals and lodging.
F. Business, Trade, or Vocational School – A secondary school that offers instruction in jobs relating
to either office settings or in skilled trades.
G. Technical School – A post-secondary school teaching mechanical and industrial arts and the
applied sciences.
H. Commercial School – Schools which are owned and operated privately for profit and that offer a
very specific vocational curriculum (e.g., beauty school, modeling school, art school, or truck
driving school). Commercial Schools are classified as:
1. Indoor – All instruction, practice, demonstration, and other related activities
are conducted within a building(s), including automobile driving schools
where all practice and demonstration is conducted on public and/or private
roads.
2. Outdoor – All or part of the instructions, demonstrations, practice, and other
related activities are conducted outdoors; including, but not limited to,
instruction in the operation of vehicles and other heavy equipment.
I. Junior College – An educational institution with residential facilities offering a two-year course
that is generally the equivalent of the first two years of a four-year undergraduate course.
J. Community College – A Junior College, usually without residential facilities, that is often funded
by the government.
K. College
39
1. An institution of higher learning, which usually provides students with living quarters
and meals, and that grants a bachelor’s degree in liberal arts or science, or both.
2. An undergraduate division or school of a university.
3. A school, sometimes but not always a university, offering special instruction in
professional or technical subjects.
L. University – An institution for higher learning, which usually provides students with living
quarters and meals, with teaching and research facilities, having graduate and professional schools
that award masters and doctorate degrees, and usually an undergraduate division or school that
awards bachelor’s degrees.
M. Hobby School/Hobby Studio – A for-profit facility that is primarily intended for the learning of, or
skill improvements of, a hobby and does not provide state-required education to persons under
sixteen (16) years of age. Examples include dancing school, martial arts school, and studios for
activities such as art, ceramics, and music.
Screen – Vegetative material, fencing, and/or other materials which have been planted or constructed to
screen the buildings, structures, and uses on the lot on which the screen is located from the view of persons
located on adjoining properties.
Self Storage Facilities – A building and/or series of buildings divided into separate storage units for
personal property and/or property associated with some business or other organization. These units shall be
used solely for storage and no processing, manufacturing, sales, research and development, testing, service
and repair, or other non-storage activities shall be permitted. Only non-hazardous, non-explosive, or
inherently-safe, materials may be stored at such facilities.
Sewage – Those (usually organic, water soluble solid or liquid) waste products and wastewater generated
by residential, industrial, commercial, institutional, or other establishments.
Sewage Facilities – A system of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal which will prevent
the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage or other similar waste into waters of this
Commonwealth and which otherwise provides for the safe and sanitary treatment and disposal of sewage or
other similar waste. The term includes:
A. Sewage System, Individual– A system of piping, tanks, or other facilities located upon and serving
a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil or into waters
of this Commonwealth or, in the case of a holding tank, by means of conveyance to another site
for final disposal. The term includes:
1. Individual on-lot sewage system – An individual sewage system which uses a system of
piping, tanks, or other facilities for collecting, treating, and disposing of sewage into a
soil absorption area or spray field or by retention in a retaining tank.
2. Individual sewerage system – An system which uses a method of sewage collection,
conveyance, treatment, and disposal, other than renovation in a soil absorption area or
retention in a retaining tank.
B. Sewage System, Community A privately owned sewage facility for the collection of sewage from
two (2) or more lots or two (2) or more equivalent dwelling units and the treatment or disposal, or
both, of the sewage on one (1) or more of the lots or at another site.
1. Community on-lot sewage system – A system of piping, tanks, or other facilities serving
two (2) or more lots and collecting, treating, and disposing of sewage into a soil
absorption area or retaining tank located on one (1) or more of the lots or at another site.
40
2. Community sewerage system – A privately owned community sewage facility that uses a
method other than renovation in an on-lot absorption area or retention in a retaining tank.
C. Sewage System, Public – (Public Sewerage System) – A sewage facility that is owned and/or
operated by a municipality and/or a municipal authority.
Sewerage –
A. All effluent carried by sewers, whether it is sanitary sewage, residential, commercial or industrial
wastes, or stormwater runoff.
B. The entire system of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal.
Sexually Oriented Business (See Also Adult Business and Adult Establishment )– An adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theatre, adult theatre,
escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
Shopping Center – A group of stores, two (2) or more in number, with or without satellite uses, planned
and designed as an integrated unit, with off-street parking provided for both customers and employees on
the developed property as an integral part of the unit, with provisions for delivery of goods separated from
the off-street parking areas and from customer access. The term “Shopping center” shall also mean a single
store or a single building with several stores within same where the total gross floor area of the store or
building exceeds twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
Sight Distance – The required length of roadway visible to the driver of a motor vehicle at any given point
on the roadway when the view is unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurements shall be made from
a point 4.5’ above centerline of the road surface to a point six inches (6”) above the centerline of the road
surface. Sight distance is measured wherever two (2) roadways intersect, a driveway intersects with a
roadway, and/or through a vertical curve on a roadway.
Sign – Any structure, device, display or part thereof, or device attached thereto, or painted or represented
thereon, which shall be used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public or
which displays or includes any letter, word, motto, banner, pennant, flag, insignia, device or representation
which is in the nature of an advertisement, announcement, direction or attraction, but not including the flag,
emblem, or insignia of the United States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any political
subdivision thereof.
A. Definitions and types of Signs:
Abandoned – A sign located on a property which is vacant and/or unoccupied for a period of
ninety (90) days; a sign which is damaged, in disrepair, or vandalized and not repaired within
ninety (90) days; a sign which contains an outdated message for a period exceeding thirty (30)
days.
Advertising – (See “Sign, Off-Premise” in this subsection)
A-frame – (See “Portable” in this subsection)
Area of – The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or closed, on
which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which is
incidental to the display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted on a surface of a structure, the area of the sign shall be considered to be the smallest
rectangle which can be drawn to encompass all of the letters and symbols. In computing the
41
permitted sign area of any sign with two (2) sides, the permitted total sign area shall be based upon
the sign area of only one (1) side (the larger of the two if they differ). Unless otherwise specified,
all square footages stated in this Ordinance in regards to signs shall be considered as maximum
sizes.
Awning – A sign, having its advertisement material written, lettered, painted etc., upon a surface
made of any non-rigid material such as fabric or flexible plastic, that is supported by or stretched
over a frame and in turn is attached to an exterior wall of a building or other structure. Such signs
may or may not be fixed or equipped with a mechanism for raising and holding an awning in a
retracted position against the building.
Banner – A temporary sign with its advertisement written on non-rigid material such as cloth,
plastic, fabric, or paper with no supporting framework.
Bench – A sign located on the seat or back of a bench placed on or adjacent to a public right of
way.
Bulletin Board – A particular type of changeable copy sign that displays advertisements, or newsworthy
items in a casement made of glass, Plexiglas, or other materials.
Business – (See “On-Premise Business”)
Canopy – A sign on a rigid multi-sided structure attached to a building or on any other
freestanding structure that may have a roof with support but no walls.
Center – A sign located on the premises identifying a shopping center or the commercial, business,
or industrial complex (e.g., “plaza”, “park”, “commons”) housing individual commercial
businesses or industrial businesses. A Center Sign does not include Business Signs as part of its
structure.
Changeable – A sign that is designed so that its characters, letters, illustrations, or other content
can be changed, altered, or rearranged without physically altering the permanent physical face or
surface of the sign. This includes manual, electrical, electronic, or other variable message signs.
Contractor – A temporary sign which depicts the name and relevant contact information about a
contractor, mechanic, artisan, or architect who is involved in construction work occurring on the
premises on which the sign is located. Such signs maybe placed temporarily upon properties, but
only for the duration of the work which the contractor is doing at said property.
Development – An identification sign at the entrance to a residential, commercial, industrial, or
institutional development.
Directional – A sign containing directional information locating public places owned or operated
by federal, state or local governments, or their agencies publicly owned natural phenomena,
historic, cultural, scientific, educational and religious sites; and areas of natural and scenic beauty
or which are naturally suited for outdoor recreation.
Flashing – Any sign which has intermittent or changing lighting or illumination of a duration less
than thirty (30) seconds shall be deemed a flashing sign.
Free-Standing – An independently supported sign permanently affixed to the ground with a
foundation and which is not attached to any building or structure.
Garage/Yard Sale – A temporary sign which directs attention to the sale of personal goods on the
premises of a residential property on which the sign is located.
42
Identification – Signs for public and private schools, churches, lodges, or similar institutions
identifying the subject use.
Incidental – An informational sign, no more than two square feet in size and not including any
commercial message or logo, which carries a message such as “enter”, “telephone”, “rest rooms”,
“no parking”, and on-site direction or anything similar. It does not include Security and Warning
Signs.
Informational Sign - An On-Premise or Off-Premise Sign giving directions; such signs may
contain logo/insignia of an establishment, but no advertising copy.
Illegal Sign – A sign which does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance or which is not a
legally nonconforming sign. This specifically includes a sign that remains standing when the time
limits set by the permit are exceeded and any sign not removed after notification from the
municipalities Zoning Officer to remove the sign.
Illuminated – A sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source, whether internally or
externally lit; including, but not limited to, neon signs and any sign which has characters, letters,
figures, designs, or outlines illuminated by artificial lighting.
Marquee – Any sign attached to a covered structure projecting from and supported by a building
with independent roof and drainage provisions and which is erected over a doorway or doorways
as protection against the weather.
Monument – A freestanding sign with a base affixed to the ground where the length of the base is
at least two-thirds the horizontal length of the monument.
Nonconforming – A sign that met all legal requirements when constructed, but is not in
compliance with current sign regulations. A registered nonconforming sign is not an illegal sign.
Nonprofit Organization – An off-premises sign displaying information about a church, service
club, or other nonprofit organization.
Off-Premise – A sign which directs attention to an object, product, service, place, activity, person,
institution, organization, or business that is primarily offered or located at a location other than the
lot upon which the sign is located. This includes signs commonly called “billboards” and
“advertising signs”.
On-Premise Business – A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, or industry
conducted on the premise or to products sold, manufactured, or assembled upon the same premises
upon which it is displayed.
Personal Expression – A sign which displays an individual’s political, religious, or personal belief.
Plaza – A one or two-sided structure displaying smaller signs, each of equal size.
Political – A temporary sign identifying, either single or combined, a political candidate, slate of
candidates, ballot issue, or party. These signs are used or intended to be used for the display of
any announcement, advertisement, or notice of any individual candidate or slate of candidates for
any public office or similar political purposes and shall be non-illuminated. These signs shall be
limited to a display no longer than sixty (60) days prior to a primary or general election and shall
be removed within five (5) days after said election.
43
Portable – A freestanding sign that is attached to a chassis that allows it to be towed from one
location to another or that can be transported on a flat-bed truck and that is not permanently
attached to a building or the ground.
Private Drive – On premises private drive signs are limited to one (1) per driveway entrance, shall
not exceed two (2) square feet in area, and with language limited to the words “private drive” and
the addresses of any residences using the private driveway.
Public Use, Official, Governmental – Safety signs, signs indicating points of interest, historical
plaques, public parks or recreation facilities, utilities, and signs identifying official governmental
buildings or facilities.
Real Estate - A temporary sign which provides information about a real estate activity on the
premises on which the sign is located, such as a sale, rental, open house, or property available for,
or in the process of, development.
Residential Identification – A sign, bearing only the property number, street address, and/or names
of the occupants of the residence or the name of the dwelling.
Roof – A sign which is erected, constructed, and maintained on or above the roof of a building.
For purposes of this Ordinance, Roof Signs are considered On-Premise Business Signs and are
regulated as such.
Sandwich – A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground.
Security and Warning – On-premises signs regulating the use of the premises, such as “no
trespassing”, “no hunting”, and “no soliciting” signs, as well as signs provided by home security
firms, and shall not exceed one (1) sign two (2) square feet in area in residential areas and one (1)
sign five (5) square feet in area in commercial and industrial zones. These limitations shall not
apply to the posting of conventional “no trespassing” signs in accordance with state law.
Sidewalk – (see “Sandwich”)
Special Event – A temporary sign which carries information about a special event such as an
auction, flea market, festival, carnival, meal, or fundraising event..
Street – Official highway sign, streets name, directional, or other traffic sign erected in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
Temporary – A sign which advertises community or civic projects, political events/candidates, real
estate for sale/lease, contractor signs, or other special events on a temporary basis and which are
intended and/or required to be removed after the temporary purpose has been served.
Vehicular – A vehicle to which a sign is affixed or painted and which is used or parked in such
manner that the display of such sign becomes the vehicle’s primary purpose.
Wall – A sign primarily painted on a wall of a building or a sign supported on a wall and which is
either mounted parallel with the wall or perpendicular to the wall.
A. Parallel Wall Sign – A sign mounted parallel to a wall or other vertical building surface, but
not extending beyond the edge of the wall, roof lines, or other surface
to which it is mounted and not projecting more than twelve (12)
inches from the surface to which it is mounted.
B. Projecting Wall Sign – Any sign mounted perpendicular to a wall or other vertical surface.
44
Wheeled – (See “Portable”)
Window – A sign which is readily visible and can be at least partially read from an exterior lot line
and which is attached to a window, transparent door, or that can be read through a window or
transparent door.
Skilled Nursing Facility – A facility which serves two (2) or more individuals for more than a twenty-four
hour period who require continuous intermediate or long-term skilled nursing care.
Slaughterhouse, Commercial – A principal use which involves the purchasing, slaughtering, butchering,
processing, rendering, and packaging of animal food products and by-products for commercial purposes.
This definition does not include custom butcher shops which are licensed by the state.
Social Club (PLCB Licensed) – A club or lodge or any organization not conducted for profit, which has a
membership defined by its charter bylaws, and is a licensee of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
Social Club or Association (Non-PLCB Licensed) – A club or lodge or any organization, not conducted
for profit, which has a membership defined by its charter bylaws, and is not a licensee of the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board. No alcoholic beverages are to be sold, stored or consumed on premises.
Solid Waste Disposal Facility – A properly sited and legally permitted facility where garbage, trash, or
junk is disposed of or is processed or recycled for disposal or reuse. This term shall not include facilities
where the disposal or processing of hazardous waste or highly radioactive materials takes place. A Solid
Waste Disposal Facility includes Solid Waste Landfill, Resource Recovery Facilities, and Low Level
Radioactive Waste Facilities.
Solid Waste Landfill – A properly sited and legally permitted facility where engineering principles are
utilized to bury deposits of solid waste without creating public health or safety hazards, nuisances,
pollution, or environmental degradation.
Special Exception Use – A type of land use which, if it is permitted by one of the five (5) ESP Region
municipalities’ Zoning Hearing Boards, would allow the use and occupancy of land and/or a building for
specific purposes in accordance with terms of this Ordinance whenever such use is not permitted by right.
Specialty Grocery Store – A retail business housed in a building having less than 10,500 square feet of
gross floor area which has the primary purpose of selling fresh and prepackaged foods and groceries. A
gourmet food store is an example of a specialty grocery store. There shall not be any dispensing of
gasoline or other motor fuels as part of the operation of a specialty grocery store.
Special Antenna – Private residence ground mounted television or amateur radio equipment including ham
or citizen band radio antennas.
Standard Antenna – Private residence roof-mounted television or amateur radio equipment including ham
or citizen band radio antennas.
Street – A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, (i.e., not limited to the cartway), either public or
private, intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and which provides a means of
access to abutting property. The word “street” includes the terms; thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court,
drive, expressway, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct, and any other similar terms.
A. Arterial Road – Streets designed primarily to carry medium to heavy volumes of traffic at
moderately high speeds and which generally do not provide access to land which would interfere
with the primary traffic moving functions of such a street.
45
B. Collector Road – Streets designed to carry a moderate volume of traffic between Local streets and
Arterial streets at moderate speeds and which provide only limited vehicular access to abutting
properties.
C. Local Road – Streets designed to provide direct access from abutting properties to any Collector
and/or Arterial Streets.
D. Service Road – Streets (often called “alleys”) designed to provide vehicular access to the rear or
side of properties which abut a Local or Collector Road.
Structure – Any man-made object having an ascertainable, stationary location on or in land or water,
whether or not affixed to the land. The term structure shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
buildings, houses, signs, fences, walls, towers, swimming pools, porches, garages, sheds, gazebos,
pavilions, and any other similar structures. “Structure” shall be interpreted as including the words “or part
thereof”.
Structural Alteration – Any changes made to the structural members of any structure (such as to load
bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, floors, roofs, or ceilings or to any addition to any structure), or the
moving of a structure from one location to another. The term “Structural Alteration” shall not include work
associated with normal maintenance, minor repairs, or interior alterations which do not involve any loadbearing
walls, columns, beams, girders, floors, rooves, or ceilings.
Subdivision - The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two (2) or more
lots, tracts, or parcels or other divisions of land including or, for the purpose of annexation, changes in
existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs and devisees, transfer of ownership of building or lot development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access, or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. The term
subdivision shall refer to, as appropriate in this Ordinance, to the process of subdividing land or to the land
proposed to be subdivided.
Subdivider – Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission of such landowner,
who makes or causes to be made a subdivision or land development. Unless otherwise specified in this
Ordinance, the term subdivider shall also be deemed to refer to a developer.
Supermarket – A store occupying in excess of 10,500 square feet of gross floor area which has the primary
purpose of selling fresh and prepackaged food, groceries, house wares, and toiletries, but not clothing
except as incidental items, and is designed to provide sustenance for households. A supermarket may
provide for the dispensing of gasoline or other motor fuels if the appropriate approvals have been obtained
from the local, state, or federal regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such matters.
Surface Mining – (See “Mineral Extraction”)
Swimming Pool – A facility used for swimming or bathing which has a depth in any part of twenty-four
(24) inches or more. These facilities can be built either above the ground or in the ground.
A. Household or Private – A man-made area with walls of man-made materials intended to enclose
water for bathing or swimming and that is intended to serve the residents of only one dwelling unit
and their occasional guests.
B. Non-household – A man-made area with walls of man-made materials intended to enclose water
for bathing or swimming and that does not meet the definition of a household swimming pool.
Taproom – (See “Tavern”)
46
Target Range – A place where firearms and other projectile-type weapons (e.g., guns, rifles, shotguns,
pistols, air guns, archery crossbows, etc.) can be shot for recreation, competition, skill development,
training, or any combination thereof. Nothing within this definition shall be construed to include hunting
when conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Any,
and all target ranges shall be safely and appropriately sited upon the land, shall include a backstop of either
earthen materials or other impact absorbing materials, and shall not constitute a threat to any person or
personal property located within the ESP Region.
Tavern - A Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board (PLCB) licensed establishment primarily engaged in the
retail sale and the on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages and where food sales account for less than
fifty-five percent (55%) of the gross income. This definition includes, but is not limited to, beer gardens,
bars, barroom, pubs, cocktail lounges, saloons, and taprooms. “Restaurants” (as defined in this Ordinance)
that serve alcoholic beverages, but are primarily engaged in the retail sale of prepared food, are not
included in this definition. This term shall not include any type of Adult Business activity as defined in this
Ordinance.
Telecommunications Antenna – Any device used for the transmission or reception of radio, television,
wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service, or any other wireless telecommunications
signals; including, without limitation, omni-directional or whip antennas and directional or panel antennas
owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by the FCC to operate such device. This definition
shall not include private residence mounted satellite dishes or television antennas or amateur radio
equipment including; without limitation, ham or citizen band radio antennas.
Telecommunications Facility - A tract or parcel of land that contains, as the principal use, a
telecommunication antenna its support structure, accessory building(s), equipment cabinet, and parking,
and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to telecommunication signal transmission or
processing upon said tract.
Theater – An enclosed building used for the presentation of live performances or motion pictures where
entertainment is the primary use (See “Primary Use Entertainment”). Included in this definition are
cinemas, other venues for the projection of film, dinner theaters, and theaters with stages for live theatrical
or musical performances as well as circuses and ceremonies such as graduation and awards. “Theater”
does not include outdoor drive-in theater or Adult Business.
Topsoil – Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile soils and are ordinarily rich in
organic matter or humus debris. Topsoil is usually found in the upper most soil layer often called the “A
horizon”.
Transfer Station – A properly sited and legally permitted facility where municipal solid waste is delivered
for the purpose of transferring the material into another container or vehicles for transport to a final
disposal site or processing facility. (A transfer station may include the separation and collection of material
for the purpose of recycling).
Travel Trailer – (See “Recreational Vehicle”)
Travel Trailer Park – (See Campground/Recreation Vehicle Park”)
Treatment Center – A properly sited and legally permitted facility (other than a prison or hospital)
providing housing for persons who need specialized housing, treatment, and/or counseling because of:
A. Criminal rehabilitation such as a halfway house.
B. Current addiction to alcohol or a controlled substance that was used in an illegal manner.
C. A type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person to be a threat to the physical safety
to others.
47
“Treatment Centers” are further regulated within this Ordinance.
A “Methadone Treatment Facility” is as defined in this Ordinance and is further regulated by both this
Ordinance and PA Act 247 The PA MPC.
Truck And Heavy Equipment Sales, Rental And Service Establishment – Any use of land whereon the
primary occupation is the sale, rental, or service of trucks, buses, and heavy equipment in operating
condition, including earth-moving, well-drilling, and construction equipment and cranes. For the purpose
of this chapter, truck and heavy equipment sales, rental, and service establishments shall not include
“vehicular or mobile home sales, rental, and service,” but may include “farm equipment, sales, rental, and
service,” as defined herein, the service of vehicles and equipment shall not be interpreted to include
“Automobile Service Stations” or “Truck Stops”, but may include diagnostic centers, truck and heavy
equipment parts and accessories shops where installation of parts is a distinct feature of the business and
body paint when ancillary to sales, rental and repair.
Truck Stop – A commercial use that primarily involves providing fuel to tractor-trailer trucks owned by
various companies. Such use may also include retail sales of food, beverages, and items usually found in
convenience stores; the use of rest facilities (less than twelve (12) hours), and shower facilities and
sanitation facilities for truck drivers; and emergency repair services and routine maintenance activities.
Parking is limited to those vehicles patronizing the Truck Stop and the transfer of freight and materials is
strictly prohibited.
Truck Terminal – The building plus contiguous space to which freight is brought for transfer, assembly,
and sorting for shipment by one (1) or more motor-freight carriers. This term shall also include any areas
or buildings used for truck parking and /or servicing, but shall not include the term “Truck Stop”. The
long-term storage of freight is not the primary use of such premises (See “Warehousing”).
Use – The specific purpose for which a tract of land, a sign, structure, building, or group of buildings is
designed, arranged, and/or intended for, and which may be occupied or maintained, or any activity,
occupation, business or operation may be conducted upon, thereon or therein. The term “permitted use” or
its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any type of non-conforming use.
Utility Building – An accessory use which does not include the storage of vehicle, but which does include
the storage of goods and materials associated with the principal permitted use of the lot.
Vacation Farm – A farm, still engaged primarily in agricultural production, whether principally or
incidentally thereto, which provides accommodations and services consisting of, but not limited to,
sleeping quarters, eating and recreation facilities, and general social activities on the premises used or
intended to be used for temporary or seasonal occupancy by vacationers interested in experiencing “the
farm life style”.
Variance – A form of relief, similar to a waiver of a subdivision ordinance regulation, granted by one of
the five (5) ESP Region Municipalities’ Zoning Hearing Boards, from the terms and conditions of this
Ordinance where literal enforcement would create unnecessary hardship and when granting of the waiver
would not be contrary to the public interest.
Vehicle –
A. A self-propelled conveyance that runs on tires or wheels; a motor vehicle including, but not
limited to, trucks, light trucks, cars, motorcycles, etc.
B. A device or structure not necessarily self propelled for transporting persons or things, including
the term “trailer” which is a transport vehicle designed to be hauled by a truck or other motor
vehicle and the term “boat” which is a vessel propelled by oars, paddles, sail, or motorized device.
48
Veterinary Clinic – (See “Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic”)
Video Arcade - (See “Game Room”)
Warehouse – A building or group of buildings primarily used for the indoor storage of goods and
materials either on a short-term or long-term basis as well as the transfer and distribution of products and
materials, but not including “Retail Business Sales” or a “Truck Terminal”. If the short-term storage
facilities are for a specific commercial establishment, this establishment is then considered a “Distribution
Center”.
Warehousing – The indoor storage as well as the transfer and distribution of products and materials where
it is the primary use and activity of the lot. The servicing of trucks is not a primary use or an accessory use
of Warehousing (See “Truck Terminal”).
Water Supply, Individual On-Lot– A system which supplies and distributes water to a single dwelling or
other building from a source located on the same lot.
Water Supply, Community – A privately owned system for supplying and distributing water from a
common source to two (2) or more dwellings and/or structures.
Water Supply, Public – A system for providing potable water to various homes and businesses which is
owned and/or operated by a municipality or a municipal authority.
Water Extraction – The permanent removal of surface or ground water as a commodity from a lot or parcel
of land for any purpose.
Wetlands – An area of ground exhibiting certain natural conditions which cause same to be identified as
wetlands as defined in applicable State and Federal laws and regulations setting forth criteria for the
identification of wetlands and for the establishment of wetlands limits.
Wholesale Business Establishment – An establishment that is primarily engaged in selling merchandise to
retailers; industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; or other wholesalers. Such an
establishment may also act as agents or brokers or buy merchandise for, or sell merchandise to, such
businesses.
Wind Energy Facility - An electric generating facility whose main purpose is to supply electricity and
which consists of one or more Wind Turbines and other accessory structures and buildings, including
substations, meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines, and other appurtenant
structures and facilities.
Wildlife Sanctuary – Includes nature center, outdoor education laboratory or research facility, woodland
preserve, arboretum, or a place of refuge for native animals indigenous to Pennsylvania.
Yard – An open space, as may be required by this Ordinance, of uniform width or depth on the same lot
with a building or group of buildings, where open space lies between the principal and/or accessory
buildings or group of buildings and the nearest lot line. This area of open space is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward.
Yard, Front – An open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the front lot line,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward with no buildings or structures erected upon it
except as may be specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.
Yard, Side – An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the
nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward with no buildings or structures
erected upon it except as may be specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.
49
Yard, Rear – An open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the rear lot line,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward with no buildings or structures erected upon it
except as may be specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.
Zoning District – A portion of the territory of the Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region within which
certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of
the ESP Region Joint Zoning Ordinance.
A. Public Airport – Any airport that does not meet the definition of a private airport.
B. Private Airport – An airport which is limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) total landings and takeoffs
in any seven-day period, and which shall not be made available for use by the general public.
50
CHAPTER III. ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 300. Types of Zoning Districts. In order to carry out the objectives of this Zoning Ordinance, the
ESP Region has been divided into the following Zoning Districts:
W-P – Woodland Preservation
EAP – Enhanced Agricultural Preservation
A-P – Agricultural Preservation
R-1 – Residential, Low Density Rural
R-2 – Residential, Low Density Suburban
R-3 – Residential, Medium Density Suburban
R-4 – Residential/Commercial, Medium to High Density Suburban
R-5 – Residential/Commercial, High Density Urban
H-C – Highway Commercial
G-C – General Commercial
L-I – Light Industrial
G-I – General Industrial
Section 301. Official Zoning Map
A. The boundaries of the Zoning Districts shall be as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the ESP Region. The
Official Zoning Map and all notations, references, and data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by
reference into this Ordinance.
B. The Official Zoning Map shall be so labeled and identified by the signatures of the Chairmen of the Boards of
Supervisors or Council President, attested by the Secretaries of the Boards of Supervisors and the Secretary of
the Council, and bear the seals of the Townships and the Borough under the following words:
“This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the Eastern Schuylkill Planning Region adopted
__/__/____.”
C. If an amendment is made to the Official Zoning Map, an entry indicating the change made and the date of any
change shall be made on the map and the entry shall include the signatures of the Chairmen and Secretaries of
the Boards of Supervisors and the President and Secretary of the Borough Council.
D. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret by reason
of the nature and number of changes and additions made thereon, the Boards of Supervisors and Borough
Council may by resolution adopt a new Official Zoning Map which will supersede such prior map. The new
Official Zoning may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no
such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent
amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signatures of the Chairmen of
the Boards of Supervisors and Borough Council President, attested by the Secretaries of said Board and
Council, and bear the seals of the Townships and Council under the following words:
“This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the Eastern Schuylkill Planning Region adopted
__/__/____.”
Section 302. District Boundaries – Rules for Interpretation. Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries of the various zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding with the center lines of streets,
highways, or alleys, such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding with plotted lot lines, such lot lines
shall be construed to be such boundaries.
51
C. Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately parallel to the centerline of or to the rightof-
way lines of streets or highways, such districts boundaries shall be construed as being parallel to the
centerline of or to the right-of-way lines and at such distance from the centerline of or to the right-of-way
lines as is indicated on the Official Zoning Map. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official
Zoning Map shall be determined by using the scale of the map.
D. Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately perpendicular to the centerlines of or to the
right-of-way lines of streets or highways such district boundaries shall be construed as being perpendicular
to the centerlines of, or the right-of-way lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately following ESP Region limits shall be construed as following such
limits.
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Subsections (A) through (E) above
shall be so construed.
G. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official
Zoning Map or in other circumstances not covered by Subsections (A) through (F) above, the Zoning
Officer shall interpret the district boundaries.
H. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the effective date of this
Ordinance, at the election of the property owner the regulations of either zoning district may be extended a
distance of not more than one hundred (100’) feet beyond the district boundary line into the remaining
portion of the lot.
Section 303. Application of District Regulations.
A. No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be
erected, constructed, assembled, moved, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered without the
issuance of a Zoning Permit and/or Certificate of Use and Occupancy.
B. No part of a yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with one
(1) structure, building, or use of land shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or
loading space similarly required for any other structure, building, or use of the land except as permitted or
required by this Ordinance or other Municipal ordinance regulations.
C. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance which meets the requirements of this
Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this
Ordinance. A yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance which does not meet the
minimum requirements of this Ordinance shall not be further reduced below the minimum requirements of
this Ordinance.
D. Where district regulations specify a minimum lot width at the street line, the minimum lot width shall be
contiguous along one (1) street line. It is prohibited, when calculating the width of a lot, to add widths
along two (2) street lines (See “Lot Width” in Section 201).
E. Where district regulations specify a minimum lot width at the building setback line, the minimum lot
widths shall be contiguous along one (1) building setback line. It is prohibited, when calculating the width
of a lot, to add widths along two (2) building setback lines (See “Lot Width” in Section 201).
52
CHAPTERS IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX.
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 400. W-P (Woodland Preservation) Zoning District.
Section 401. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of the W-P Zoning District to discourage intensive
development in areas which present severe limitations to development because of such factors as steep slope,
shallow depth to bedrock, and stoniness, which are generally classified as having severe limitations for on-site
sewage disposal, are not proposed to be sewered, and which are not served by a road network. It is also the intent of
the W-P Zoning District to encourage the preservation of ecologically critical factors such as the headwaters of
streams and the surrounding watersheds, wetlands, wildlife habitats, and extensive wooded areas. The wooded areas
have even increased importance because they are located on steep slopes and in the watersheds surrounding the
headwaters of streams. By preserving these factors, wildlife populations within the ESP Region can be maintained,
stream quality can be protected, the adverse effects of increased stormwater run-off, erosion and sedimentation can
be minimized, and the recreation potential of the area maintained.
Section 402. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the W-P Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. Hunting Lodges, Gun Clubs, Archery Clubs and other similar organizations, subject to Section 1660.
B. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing structures,
subject to Section 1678.C.
C. Municipal Use, subject to Section 1700.
D. Accessory uses and structures to any of the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted use.
E. No-impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
F. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
Section 403. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses are permitted in the W-P Zoning
District when special exceptions are granted by the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in
determining whether a special exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated
below as well as Section 2002 of this Ordinance:
A. Single Family Detached Dwelling
B. New Telecommunications Towers with or without Telecommunication Antennas, subject to Section
1678.C.
C. Campground, subject to Section 1661.
D. Bed and Breakfast, subject to Section 1648.
E. Game Preserve, subject to Section 1660.
F. Wildlife Sanctuary, subject to Section 1660.
G. Home Occupation, subject to Section 1601.
Section 404. Conditional Use (Reserved)
53
Section 405. Area, Yard and Height Regulations.
On-Lot Sewage Disposal and On-Lot Water Supply
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Building Height 35 Feet
Impervious Coverage 5 Percent
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size 10 Acres
Lot WidthA
t Street Line 500 Feet
At Building Setback Line 500 Feet
Building Setback Line 100 Feet
Side Yard
One Side 100 Feet
Total 200 Feet
Rear Yard 100 Feet
Section 406. General Regulations. The following General Regulations found in this Ordinance shall
apply to the W-P District:
Section 407 through 449. (Reserved)
Section 450. EAP (Enhanced Agricultural Preservation) Zoning District
Section 451. Specific Intent. The purposes of the EAP Zoning District are:
A. To strengthen and preserve strong agricultural activity where farming is a viable component of the local
economy.
B. To protect and stabilize agriculture as an on-going economic activity by generally permitting only these
land uses and activities which are either agricultural in nature or act in direct support thereof.
C. To protect and stabilize the essential characteristics of these areas, to minimize conflicting land uses
detrimental to agriculture enterprises, to limit development which requires highways and other public
facilities in excess of those required by agricultural uses, and to maintain large contiguous agriculture
parcels.
D. To separate agricultural land use and activities from incompatible residential, commercial and industrial
development, and public facilities.
E. The regulations set forth in this section seek to achieve the protection of land for agricultural purposes
which is a legitimate zoning objective under the State Planning Statutes.
Section 452. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the EAP Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. General Agriculture, subject to Section 1616.
B. Intensive Agriculture, subject to Section 1615.
54
C. Single Family Detached Dwelling
D. Nursery/Greenhouse, subject to Sections 1616.
E. Family Farm Support Business, subject to Section 456.
F. Mushroom House, subject to Section 1615.
G. Farm Stands, subject to Section 1616.
H. Municipal Use, subject to Section 1700.
I. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing structures,
subject to Section 1678.C.
J. Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic, subject to Section 1675.
K. Cluster Development, subject to Section 1608.
L. Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted use.
M. The Sending (Transfer) of Transferable Development Rights (TDR) subject to Section 1609.
N. No-impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
O. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
P. Wind Energy Facility, subject to Section 1692.
Section 453. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses are permitted in the EAP Zoning
District when special exceptions are granted by the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in
determining whether a special exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated
below as well as Section 2002 of this Ordinance:
A. Farm-related Businesses, subject to Section 458.
B. Vacation Farms, subject to Section 1618.
C. Bed and Breakfast, subject to Section 1648.
D. Golf Course, subject to Section 1665.
E. Water Extraction, subject to Section 1685.
F. New Telecommunication Towers with or without Telecommunication Antennas, subject to Section 1678.D.
G. Riding Academy’s, riding Stables, Horse Boarding Facilities, subject to Section 1662.
H. Farm Labor housing, subject to Section 1619.
I. Home Occupation, subject to Section 1601.
J. Ethanol Facilities, subject to Section 1693.
Section 454. Conditional Use (Reserved)
55
Section 455. Area, Yard and Height Regulations for the EAP District. Each of the following
maximum and minimum dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted use in the EAP Zoning District,
except as specifically provided for in this Ordinance.
Individual On-Lot Sewage Disposal and Individual On-Lot Water Supply
EAP Agricultural Lot Single Family
Dwelling Lots
(“SFD Lots”)
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Lot Size* Unlimited 2 Acres
Building Height *
(except barns, silos, and grain elevators)
35 Feet 35 Feet
Impervious Coverage* 25 Percent 35 Percent
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size* 25 Acres 1 ½ Acre
Lot Width*
At Street Line 200 Feet 200 Feet
Building Setback Line* 100Feet 30 Feet
Rear Yard* 100 Feet 20 Feet
Side Yard*
Total
One Side
100 Feet
200 Feet
20 Feet
40 Feet
Individual On-Lot Sewage Disposal and Individual On-Lot Water Supply
EAP Parent Tract Farm-Related Business All Other Uses
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Lot Size* Unlimited 3 Acres 2 Acres
Building Height (except
Barns, silos, and grain
Elevators)*
35 Feet 35 Feet 35 Feet
Impervious Coverage* 25 Percent 40 Percent 40 Percent
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size* 5 Acre 1 Acre 1 Acre
Lot Width*
At Street Line 200 Feet 200 Feet 200 Feet
Building Setback Line 30 Feet 50 Feet 50 Feet
Rear Yard* 30 Feet 50 Feet 50 Feet
Side Yard*
Total
One Side
40 Feet
20 Feet
100 Feet
50 Feet
100 Feet
50 Feet
56
* Intensive Agricultural Uses and Family-farm Support Business have their own area, yard, and height requirements
as specified in this Ordinance (See other note below).
Note: Any intensive agricultural uses not actually established and in operation prior to the date of adoption
of this ordinance must be located at least three hundred (300) feet from the boundary of any residential
zoning district.
Section 456. Family Farm Support Business
A. The Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region recognizes the need to establish regulations pertaining to
farm-based occupations as a result of the increased need for the diversity of income for farmers to help
offset the rising cost of living. Such regulations must be developed in a manner which protects adjacent
agricultural uses from adverse effects. Since farm-based occupations in sparsely populated areas do not
typically represent a significant threat to adjacent property owners, the ESP Region has created regulations
for Family Farm Support Businesses in order to promote and preserve family farms within the
municipalities. Within the EAP Zoning District, a Family Farm Support Business is permitted as a Use by
Right, subject to the following standards:
1. For the purposes of this Ordinance, Family Farm Support Business may involve any one of a wide
range of uses, so long as the use is compatible with the primary agricultural use of the land. The
applicant must demonstrate that the Family Farm Support Business is compatible with the
existing rural setting of the municipality and will not create nuisances for nearby residences.
2. The Family Farm Support Business must be owned and operated by a person in residence of the
property.
3. Examples of Family Farm Support Businesses shall include the following: agricultural equipment
repair, welding, small machine repair, painting service, fencing service, sharpening service,
livestock grooming, shearing or trimming services, agricultural consulting services, specialized
small agricultural equipment and/or parts manufacturing, small-scale feed or fertilizer franchise,
butcher shops, blacksmith shops, carriage shop or harness shop, riding academies, riding stables,
horse boarding facility, woodworking.
4. No more than the equivalent of three (3) full time non-resident employees shall be employed by
the Family Farm Support Business.
5. The Family Farm Support Business shall occupy an area no greater than a maximum of four
thousand (4,000) square feet of gross floor area of any structure that is used for said business.
6. The maximum acreage devoted to a Family Farm Support Business (including the structure,
parking, storage, and driveway; if separate) shall be no more than five (5) contiguous acres.
7. Where practical, Family Farm Support Business shall be conducted within an existing farm
building; however, any new building constructed for use by the farm occupation shall:
a. Be located at least one hundred (100) feet from rear and side
property lines.
b. Meet, or exceed, the current EAP District front yard setback
requirements, as established in Section 455 of this Ordinance.
c. Be located within one hundred (100) feet of existing farm
buildings.
d. Not devote more than four thousand (4,000) square feet of the
57
gross floor area of said new structure to said business.
8. It must be shown to the Zoning Officer’s satisfaction that adequate space for employee parking,
customer parking, and turn-around areas for deliveries can be provided for use with existing
buildings and conditions. If new areas for parking and turn-around are to be created, they must
meet the requirements of Section 1509 of this Ordinance.
9. No outdoor storage of supplies, materials, or products shall be located within fifty (50) feet from
property lines. Such outdoor storage shall also be screened from adjoining roads and properties
per ESP SALDO.
10. One (1) free-standing sign shall be permitted for a Family Farm Support Business. Such signs
shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in total area and shall be regulated as per Section 1507 of
this Ordinance
11. No construction or other improvements required to support a Family Farm Support Business other
than those in existing farm buildings shall be permitted except pursuant to an approved Land
Development Plan.
12. The Zoning Officer shall review the application for compliance with this section, visit the
property, and approve or deny the application for the Family Farm Support Business Zoning
Permit.
Section 457. Subdivision and Land Development Permitted Within the EAP Zoning District.
Subdivision and land development shall be permitted in the EAP Zoning District, subject to the development
limitations and controls specified within this section of the Ordinance. Subdivision and land development is limited
to those “EAP Parent Tracts” as defined in subsection 457.A or to parcels which were allocated EAP Development
Units from said “EAP Parent Tracts” after the date of adoption of this ordinance.
A. Definition of “EAP Parent Tract”. EAP Parent Tracts are contiguous tracts or land deeded either as a single
tract or as one deed with multiple purparts existing as of the date of adoption of this ordinance that are
situate within the EAP Zoning District. In cases where individually deeded tracts of land are under single
ownership, each individually deeded tract will be considered to be its own EAP Parent Tract.
B. Subdivision and land development within the EAP District is allowed for the creation of the types of
subdivision/land development listed in this subsection below:
1. “EAP SFD Lots” as defined within Section 201 of this Ordinance and which meet the requirements of
Section 455 of this Ordinance.
2. “EAP Agricultural Lots” as defined within Section 201 of this Ordinance.
3. “Annexation Parcels” as defined within Section 201 of this Ordinance and as regulated by subsection
457.F of this Ordinance.
4. “EAP Agricultural Annexation Parcels” as defined within Section 201 of this Ordinance and as
regulated by subsection 457.G of this Ordinance.
5. “Farm-related Businesses” as defined within Section 201 and regulated in Section 458 of this
Ordinance.
6. “Cluster Development” as defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance and as regulated by Section 1608
of this Ordinance.
58
7. “The Sending (Transfer) of Transferable Development Rights (TDR)”, subject to Section 1607 of this
Ordinance.
C. Subdivision and land development described in subsection 457.B above, is allowed in only one (1) of three
(3) ways:
1. The utilization of EAP Development Units for those types of subdivision/land development in
subsection 457.B.1, 2, 3, 4, and 5.
2. “Cluster Development”.
3. “The Sending (Transfer) of Transferable Development Rights” (TDR)”
D. The owner of land who has the right to subdivision/land development may only choose one (1) method as
listed below:
. 1. The utilization of EAP Development Units. If a landowner chooses this option, “Cluster
Development” and “TDR” cannot be utilized. The following are to be considered EAP
Development Units and are to be deducted from the allocation assigned to the EAP Parent Tract in
subsection 457.D:
a. All lots approved prior to the adoption of this ordinance, as well as any single family
dwelling in existence prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance on a “EAP Parent
Tract”, is/are not to be considered a “EAP Development Unit”. However, if said
dwelling is placed on its own “EAP SFD Lot” after the date of adoption of this ordinance
and meets the requirements of Section 455 and all other sections of this Ordinance and
the ESP SALDO, an EAP Development Unit will be deducted from the allocation
assigned to the EAP Parent Tract.
b. Additional Single Family Dwellings erected on any existing “EAP Parent Tract” which
already has any existing Single Family Dwelling(s) erected upon it, shall meet the
requirements as described in Section 1502 of the Zoning Ordinance.
c. An “EAP Agricultural Lot” as defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance. Upon creation
of an “EAP Agricultural Lot”, one EAP Development Unit will be deducted from the
allocation of the EAP Parent Tract and one (1) EAP Development Unit shall be assigned
to the EAP Agricultural Lot; the “EAP Agricultural Lot’s” EAP Development Unit can
only be utilized for erecting a single family dwelling on it which meets the requirements
of Section 455 of this Ordinance and all other provisions of this Ordinance. The EAP
Development Unit may not be used for any other purpose than the placement of a Single
Family Dwelling upon the EAP Agricultural Lot; however “Agricultural Buildings” as
defined in Section 201 which meet the requirements of this Ordinance may be erected on
an “EAP Agricultural Lot”.
d. The creation of “EAP SFD Lots” from a EAP Parent Tract. under Subsection 458.B.1 of
this Ordinance.
e. “Annexation Parcels” as regulated in subsection 457.E of this Ordinance.
f. “EAP Agricultural Annexation Parcels” as regulated in subsection 458.F of this
Ordinance.
g. Any single-family dwelling allowed to be erected by actions of the Zoning Hearing Board.
2. “Cluster Development”
59
a. If an eligible landowner chooses this option, the utilization of EAP Development Units
and TDR cannot be a method of subdivision/land development.
b. Cluster Development shall meet the regulations of Section 1608.
3. TDR – The Sending (Transfer) of Transferable Development Rights
a. If an eligible landowner chooses this option, the utilization of EAP Development Units
and Cluster Development cannot be a method of subdivision/land development.
b. TDR shall meet the regulations of Section 1609.
E. EAP Development Units Allocation Chart
Size of original EAP Maximum number of “EAP
Parent Tract within the Development Units”
EAP Zoning District Allocated to the EAP Parent
(as defined) Tract’s portion within the
EAP Zoning District
= 5 to > 25 acres 1
= 26 to > 50 acres 2
= 51 to > 75 acres 3
= 76 to > 100 acres 4
= 101 to > 125 acres 5
= 126 to > 150 acres 6
= 151 to > 175 acres 7
= 176 to > 200 acres 8
= 201 to > 225 acres 9
226 acres or more 10
F. A subdivision, creating an “Annexation Parcels” as defined in this Ordinance, for the sole purpose of
transferring land are subject to:
1. The Annexation Parcel has no minimum or maximum size.
2. The Annexation Parcel created from the EAP Parent Tract under this subsection will be deducted
from the EAP Development Units allocated to the EAP Parent Tract under subsection 457.E.
3. The Annexation Parcel annexed to a EAP Parent Tract shall not increase the EAP Development
Units allocated to the receiving EAP Parent Tract under subsection 457.E.
G. A subdivision, creating “EAP Agricultural Annexation Parcels”, the sole purpose of
which is to transfer land to increase the size of a lot being used for agricultural purposes, where both the
EAP Parent Tract from which the land is taken and the lot to which the land is added will be greater than
twenty-five (25) acres in size after such subdivision, shall not be deducted from the EAP Development
Units allocated to the EAP Parent Tract as set forth in subsection 457.E. of this Ordinance. This type of
annexation shall not result in an increase in the allocation of the EAP Development Units permitted by
subsection 457.E. of this Ordinance to the EAP Parent Tract which is increased in size by the annexation,
nor will the “EAP Agricultural Annexation Parcel” be assigned EAP Development Units.
H. Any subdivision to create a lot which will be transferred to a municipality or a municipal authority created
by the Municipal Governing Body shall not be deducted from the EAP Development Units allocated to the
EAP Parent Tract as set forth in subsection 457.E of this Ordinance.
60
I. Any subdivision plan hereafter filed with a municipality shall specify which lot or lots shall carry with it a
right of further subdivision and/or erection of single-family dwellings if any such right remains from the
EAP Development Units allocated to the EAP Parent Tract. The right of further subdivision or erection of
single-family dwellings and/or an indication that no further subdivision or erection of single-family
dwellings, if any, is permissible shall also be included in the legal description of the deed of the newly
created lot or lots as well as in the legal description of the deed of the EAP Parent Tract from which the
subdivision was created.
J. In no event shall any tract of land which is divided or re-divided after the same becomes subject to the
provisions of Section 457, nor any of the lots which are created by such division or re-division, result in an
increase in the allocation of EAP Development Units permitted by subsection 457.E of this Ordinance.
K. Single-family dwelling development shall make a reasonable effort to follow these guidelines:
1. Any “EAP SFD Lot” or a single-family dwelling located on an “EAP Agricultural Lot” should be
located on the least productive area(s) of the EAP Parent Tract or EAP Agriculture Lot.
2. Any proposed “EAP SFD Lots” should be clustered or grouped in such a manner as to preserve the
greatest extent of productive and valuable farm land as possible on the EAP Parent Tract or any EAP
Agricultural Lots.
L. General Agricultural and Intensive Agricultural land development activity shall be permitted within the
Effective Agricultural Preservation (EAP) Zoning District subject to the limitations and controls specified
under Section 457 and Sections 1615 and 1616 of this Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified within this
Ordinance, no other land use or activity shall be permitted within the EAP Zoning District.
M. A property owner submitting a subdivision plan will be required to specify on their plan the EAP
Development Units not allocated to the EAP Parent Tract or to those lots created from said EAP Parent
Tract. Any subdivision plans filed with a Municipality shall include a conspicuous “Agricultural Use
Notification” as follows: “All lands within the EAP Zoning District of the ESP Region are located in an
area where land is, or may be, used for agricultural production. Owners, residents, and other users of this
property or neighboring property owners may be subjected to occasional inconvenience, discomfort, and
the possibility of injury to property and health arising from normal and accepted local agricultural practices
and operations; including, but not limited to noise, odors, dust; the operation of machinery of any kind,
including aircraft; the storage and disposal of manure, and the application of fertilizer, soils amendments,
herbicides and pesticides. Owners, occupants, and users of this property should be prepared to accept such
conditions and inconveniences, discomfort, and possibility of injury from normal agricultural operations,
and are hereby put on official notice that the Pennsylvania Right-to-Farm Law (PA Act 133 of 1982) may
bar them from obtaining a legal judgment against persons, farms, or corporations which are performing
such normal agricultural operations.”
Section 458. Farm-related Business. Within the EAP Zoning District, Farm-related Businesses may be
permitted by Special Exception. All activities and services should be directed at meeting the needs of those engaged
in local farming. “Local farming” is considered to include customers whose primary farming activity is conducted
within twenty-five (25) miles of the location of the proposed farm-related business. The proposed Farm-related
Business should be directed at providing materials and services necessary to local farming and the processing and
distribution of goods produced on said farms; therefore, the applicant must provide evidence to the Municipal
Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed farm-related business is important to local farming and is specifically sized
to serve primarily local users. Additionally, Farm-related Businesses are subject to the following standards:
A. For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, Farm-related Businesses may only involve the following types
of uses:
61
1. Facilities for the manufacturing, warehousing, sales, or repair and service of agricultural
equipment, vehicles (including carriages and buggies), or supplies
2. Blacksmith shops, farrier, harness making;
3. Butcher shops;
4. Grain mills;
5. Facilities devoted to the processing of locally produced agricultural products;
6. Feed supply, fuel and fertilizer distributors;
7. Other uses similar in character to those listed above.
B. The Farm-related Business shall occupy no more than five (5) acres. The applicant shall justify to the
Municipal Zoning Hearing Board that the size of the site is the minimum needed to conduct the farmrelated
business.
C. Any access drive which serve the farm-related business shall be of a sufficient length to accommodate
stacking of delivery and customer vehicles.
D. Farm-related Businesses shall not be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any property line.
E. Composting and other waste storage facilities shall not be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of any
property line. Additionally, any use permitted under subsection 458.A may require setbacks of a greater
width as may be determined by the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board.
F. Vegetative screening per the ESP Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance must be provided when a
farm-related business abuts any property used principally for residential purposes. Certain pieces of
apparatus used for farm-related businesses which create noxious dust, odor, light, or noise, may require
setbacks and vegetative screening of a greater width or density as may be determined by the Municipal
Zoning Hearing Board.
G. Off-street parking, loading areas, and driveways shall be designated in accordance with Sections 1508 and
1509 of this Ordinance.
H. Any outdoor storage of supplies, materials, and products shall be screened from adjoining roads and
properties per the ESP Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The display of mechanized farm
equipment for sale shall be excluded from this screening provision.
I. One (1) free-standing sign shall be permitted for a Farm-related Business. Such sign shall not exceed fifteen
(15) square feet in total area and shall be regulated as per Section 1507 of this Ordinance.
J. If, in the opinion of the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board, a proposed Farm-related Business presents a fire
hazard, emits smoke, dust or other air pollutants, noise, light or glare, or creates a nuisance as a result of the
hours of operation, the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board may attach reasonable conditions as it deems
appropriate to adequately control and/or mitigate the potentially detrimental effects that any such Farmrelated
Business may have on the surrounding area.
K. No construction or other improvements greater than four thousand (4,000) square feet required to support a
Farm-related Business shall be permitted except pursuant to an approved Land Development Plan.
Section 459. General Regulations
62
Section 460 through 499. (Reserved)
Section 500. A-P (Agricultural Preservation) Zoning District
Section 501. Specific Intent. It is the intent of the A-P District to encourage the preservation of
productive farmland within the ESP Region. The A-P District has also been created to preserve the agricultural
sector of the economy of the ESP Region and to retain the value of agricultural land that remains in the ESP Region
by limiting adverse effects resulting from the encroachment of development on agricultural uses. However, the
presence of residential dwellings already located within the A-P District is noted, therefore, it is also the intent of the
A-P District to be less restrictive than the EAP District in respect to the issue of future residential development.
Section 502. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as principal use, their accessory uses and no other,
are permitted in the A-P Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. General Agriculture, subject to Section 1616.
B. Nurseries and Greenhouses, subject to Sections 1616.
C. Family Farm Support Business, subject to Section 506.
D. Farm Stands, subject to Section 1524.D.
E. Municipal Use, subject to Section 1700.
F. Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic, subject to Section 1675.
G. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing structures,
subject to Section 1678.C.
H. Single Family Detached Dwelling
I. Cluster Development, subject to Section 1608.
J. Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted use.
K. The Sending (Transfer) of Transferable Development Rights (TDR), subject to Section 1609.
L. No-impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
M. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
N. Wind Energy Facility, subject to Section 1692.
Section 503. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses are permitted in the A-P
Zoning District when special exceptions are granted by the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used
in determining whether a special exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated
below as well as Section 2002 of this Ordinance:
A. Intensive Agriculture, subject to Section 1615.
B. Farm-related Business, as subject to Section 508.
C. Campground, subject to Section 1661.
63
D. Bed and Breakfast, subject to Section 1648.
E. Places of Worship, subject to Section 1630.
F. Cemeteries, subject to Section 1630.
G. Kennel, subject to Section 1675.
H. Golf course, subject to Section 1665.
I. New Telecommunications Towers with or without Telecommunication Antennas, subject to Section
1678.D.
J. Water Extraction, subject to Section 1685.
K. Riding Academy, Riding Stables, Horse Boarding Facilities, subject to Section 1662.
L. Farm Labor Housing, subject to Section 1619.
M. Home Occupation, subject to Section 1601.
N. Ethanol Facilities subject to Section 1693.
Section 504. Conditional Uses (Reserved)
Section 505. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations for the A-P Zoning District
Individual On-Lot Sewage Disposal and Individual On-Lot Water Supply
A-P Agricultural Lot Single Family
Dwelling Lots
(“SFD Lots”)
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Lot Size* Unlimited 2 Acres
Building Height *
(except barns, silos, and grain elevators)
35 Feet 35 Feet
Impervious Coverage* 25 Percent 35 Percent
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size* 10 Acres 1 ½ Acre
Lot Width*
At Street Line 200 Feet 200 Feet
Building Setback Line* 100Feet 30 Feet
Rear Yard* 100 Feet 30 Feet
Side Yard*
Total
One Side
100 Feet
200 Feet
20 Feet
40 Feet
64
Individual On-Lot Sewage Disposal and Individual On-Lot Water Supply
A-P Parent Tract Farm-Related Business All Other Uses
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Lot Size* None 3 Acres 2 Acres
Building Height (except
Barns, silos, and grain
Elevators)*
35 Feet 35 Feet 35 Feet
Impervious Coverage* 25 Percent 40 Percent 40 Percent
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size* 3 Acre 1 Acre 1 Acre
Lot Width*
At Street Line 200 Feet 200 Feet 200 Feet
Building Setback Line 30 Feet 50 Feet 50 Feet
Rear Yard* 30 Feet 50 Feet 50 Feet
Side Yard*
Total
One Side
40 Feet
20 Feet
100 Feet
50 Feet
100 Feet
50 Feet
* Intensive Agricultural Uses and Family-Farm Support Business have their own area, yard, and height requirements
as specified in this Ordinance (See other note below).
Note: Any intensive agricultural uses not actually established and in operation prior to the date of
adoption of this ordinance must be located at least three hundred (300) feet from the boundary of any
residential zoning district.
Section 506. Family Farm Support Business
A. The Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region recognizes the need to establish regulations pertaining to
farm-based occupations as a result of the increased need for the diversity of income for farmers to help
offset the rising cost of living. Such regulations must be developed in a manner which protects adjacent
agricultural uses from adverse effects. Since farm-based occupations in sparsely populated areas do not
typically represent a significant threat to adjacent property owners, the ESP Region has created regulations
for Family Farm Support Businesses in order to promote and preserve family farms within the
Municipalities. Within the A-P Zoning District, a Family Farm Support Business is permitted as a Use by
Right, subject to the following standards:
1. For the purposes of this Ordinance, Family Farm Support Business may involve any one of a wide
range of uses, so long as the use is compatible with the primary agricultural use of the land. The
applicant must demonstrate that the Family Farm Support Business is compatible with the existing
rural setting of the Municipality and will not create nuisances for nearby residences.
2. The Family Farm Support Business must be owned and operated by a person in residence of the
property.
3. Examples of Family Farm Support Businesses shall include the following: agricultural equipment
repair, welding, small machine repair, painting service, fencing service, sharpening service,
livestock grooming; shearing or trimming services; agricultural consulting services; specialized
small agricultural equipment and/or parts manufacturing, small-scale feed or fertilizer franchise,
65
butcher shops, blacksmith shops, carriage shop or harness shop, riding academies, riding stables,
horse boarding facility, woodworking.
4. No more than the equivalent of three (3) full time non-resident employees shall be employed by
the Family Farm Support Business.
5. The Family Farm Support Business shall occupy an area no greater than a maximum of four
thousand (4,000) square feet of gross floor area of any structure that is used for said business.
6. The maximum acreage devoted to a Family Farm Support Business (including the structure,
parking, storage, and driveway; if separate) shall be no more than five (5) contiguous acres.
7. Where practical, Family Farm Support Business shall be conducted within an existing farm
building; however, any new building constructed for use by the farm occupation shall:
a. Be located at least one hundred (100) feet from rear and side
property lines.
b. Meet, or exceed, the current A-P District front yard setback
requirements, as established in Section 505 of this Ordinance.
c. Be located within one hundred (100) feet of existing farm
buildings.
d. Not devote more than four thousand (4,000) square feet of the
gross floor area of said new structure to said business.
8. It must be shown to the Zoning Officer’s satisfaction that adequate space for employee parking,
customer parking, and turn-around areas for deliveries can be provided for use with existing
buildings and conditions. If new areas for parking and turn-around are to be created, they must
meet the requirements of Section 1509 of this Ordinance.
9. No outdoor storage of supplies, materials, or products shall be located within fifty (50) feet from
property lines. Such outdoor storage shall also be screened from adjoining roads and properties
per the ESP Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
10. One (1) free-standing sign shall be permitted for a Family Farm Support Business. Such signs
shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in total area and shall be regulated as per Section 1507 of
this Ordinance
11. No construction or other improvements required to support a Family Farm Support Business other
than those in existing farm buildings shall be permitted except pursuant to an approved Land
Development Plan.
12. The Zoning Officer shall review the application for compliance with this Section, visit the property,
and approve or deny the application for the Family Farm Support Business Zoning Permit.
Section 507. Subdivision and Land Development Permitted Within the A-P Zoning District.
Subdivision and land development shall be permitted in the Agricultural Preservation District (A-P), subject to the
development limitations and controls specified within this section of the Ordinance. Subdivision and land
development is limited to those “A-P Parent Tracts” as defined in Section 507.A or to parcels which were allocated
A-P Development Units from said “A-P Parent Tracts” after the date of adoption of this ordinance.
A. Definition of “A-P Parent Tract”. A-P Parent Tracts are contiguous tracts or land deeded either as a single
tract or as one deed with multiple purports existing as of the date of adoption of this ordinance that are
66
situate within the A-P Zoning District. In cases where individually deeded tracts of land are under single
ownership, each individually deeded tract will be considered to be its own A-P Parent Tract.
B. Subdivision and land development within the A-P District is allowed for the creation of the types of
subdivision/land development listed in this subsection below.
1. “A-P SFD Lots” as defined within Section 201 of this Ordinance and which meet the requirements
of Section 505 of this Ordinance.
2. “A-P Agricultural Lots” as defined within Section 201 of this Ordinance.
3. “Annexation Parcels” as defined within Section 201 of this Ordinance and as regulated by
subsection 507.I of this Ordinance.
4. “A-P Agricultural Annexation Parcels” as defined within Section 201 of this Ordinance and as
regulated by subsection 507.J of this Ordinance.
5. “Farm-related Businesses” as defined within Section 201and as regulated in Section 508 of this
Ordinance.
6. “Cluster Development” as defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance and as regulated by Section
1608 of this Ordinance.
7. “The Sending (Transfer) of Transferable Development rights (TDR), subject to Section 1609 of
this Ordinance.
C. Subdivision and land development described in subsection 507.B, above is allowed in only one (1) of the
three ways:
1. The utilization of EAP Development Units for those types of subdivision/land development in
subsection 507.B.1, 2, 3, 4, and 5.
2. “Cluster Development”
3. The Sending (Transfer) of Transferable Development Rights” (TDR)
D. The Utilization of A-P Development Units. If a landowner chooses this option, “Cluster Development” and
“TDR” cannot be a method of subdivision/land development. The following are to be considered A-P
Development Units and are to be deducted from the allocation assigned to the A-P Parent Tract in Section
507.G:
1. All lots approved prior to the adoption of the Ordinance as well as any single family dwelling in
existence prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance on a “A-P Parent Tract” is not to be
considered a “A-P Development Unit”. However, if said dwelling is placed on its own “A-P SFD
Lot” after the date of adoption of this ordinance and said lot meets the requirements of Section 505
and all other sections of this Ordinance and the ESP SALDO, an A-P Development Unit will be
deducted from the allocation assigned to the A-P Parent Tract.
2. Additional Single Family Dwellings erected on any existing “A-P Parent Tract” which already has
any existing Single Family Dwelling(s) erected upon it, shall meet the requirements as described
in Section 1502 of the Zoning Ordinance.
3. Any “A-P Agricultural Lot” as defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance. Upon creation of an “AP
Agricultural Lot”, one A-P Development Unit will be deducted from the allocation of the A-P
Parent Tract and one (1) A-P Development Unit shall be assigned to the A-P Agricultural Lot; the
67
“A-P Agricultural Lot’s” A-P Development Unit can only be utilized for erecting a single family
dwelling on it which meets the requirements of Section 505 of this Ordinance and all other
provisions of this Ordinance. The A-P Development Unit may not be used for any other purpose
than the placement of a Single Family Dwelling upon the A-P Agricultural Lot; however
“Agricultural Buildings” as described in Section 201 which meet the requirements of this
Ordinance may be erected on an “A-P Agricultural Lot”.
4. The creation of “A-P SFD Lots” from a A-P Parent Tract under Subsection 507.B.1 of this
Ordinance.
5. “Annexation Parcels” as regulated in subsection 507.E of this Ordinance.
6. “A-P Agricultural Annexation Parcels” as regulated in Subsection 507.G of this Ordinance.
7. Any single-family dwelling allowed to be erected by actions of the Zoning Hearing Board.
Any combination of subdivision/land development in this subsection is allowed as long as it does not
exceed the A-P Development Units assigned to the A-P Parent Tract.
E. “Cluster Development”
1. If an eligible landowner chooses this option, the utilization of A-P Development Units and TDR
cannot be a method of subdivision/land development.
2. Cluster Development shall meet the regulations of Section 1608.
F. TDR – The Sending (Transfer) of Transferable Development Rights
1. If an eligible landowner chooses this option, the utilization of A-P Development Units and Cluster
Development cannot be a method of subdivision/land development.
2. TDR shall meet the regulations of Section 1609.
G. A-P Development Units Chart
Size of original A-P Maximum number of “A-P
Parent Tract within the Development Units”
A-P Zoning District Allocated to the A-P Parent
(as defined) Tract’s portion within the
A-P Zoning District
= 3 to > 10 acres 1
= 11 to > 15 acres 2
= 16 to > 20 acres 3
= 21 to > 25 acres 4
= 26 to > 30 acres 5
= 31 to > 40 acres 6
= 41 to > 50 acres 7
= 51 to > 60 acres 8
= 61 to > 70 acres 9
71 acres or more 10
H. A subdivision, creating an “Annexation Parcels”, as defined for the sole purpose of transferring land are
subject to:
68
1. The Annexation Parcel has no minimum or maximum size.
2. The Annexation Parcel created from the A-P Parent Tract under this subsection will be deducted
from the A-P Development Units allocated to the A-P Parent Tract under section 507.G.
3. The Annexation Parcel annexed to an A-P Parent Tract shall not increase the AP Development
Units allocated to the A-P Parent Tract under section 507.G.
I. A subdivision, creating “A-P Agricultural Annexation Parcels”, the sole purpose of which is to transfer
land to increase the size of a lot being used for agricultural purposes, where both the A-P Parent Tract from
which the land is taken and the lot to which the land is added will be greater than twenty-five (25) acres in
size after such subdivision, shall not be deducted from the A-P Development Units allocated to the A-P
Parent Tract as set forth in subsection 507.G of this Ordinance. This type of annexation shall not result in
an increase in the allocation of the A-P Development Units permitted by subsection 507.G of this
Ordinance to the A-P Parent Tract which is increased in size by the annexation, nor will the “A-P
Agricultural Annexation Parcel” be assigned A-P Development Units.
J. Any subdivision to create a lot which will be transferred to a municipality or a municipal authority created
by the Municipal Governing Body shall not be deducted from the A-P Development Units allocated to the
A-P Parent Tract as set forth in subsection 507.G of this Ordinance.
K. Any subdivision plan hereafter filed with a municipality shall specify which lot or lots shall carry with it a
right of further subdivision and/or erection of single-family dwellings if any such right remains from the AP
Development Units allocated to the A-P Parent Tract. The right of further subdivision or erection of
single-family dwellings and/or an indication that no further subdivision or erection of single-family
dwellings, if any, is permissible shall also be included in the legal description of the deed of the newly
created lot or lots as well as in the legal description of the deed of the A-P Parent Tract from which the
subdivision was created.
L. In no event shall any tract of land which is divided or re-divided after the same becomes subject to the
provisions of Section 507, nor any of the lots which are created by such division or re-division, result in an
increase in the allocation of A-P Development Units permitted by subsection 507.G of this Ordinance.
M. Single-family dwelling development shall make a reasonable effort to follow these guidelines:
1. Any “A-P SFD Lot” or a single-family dwelling located on an “A-P Agricultural Lot” should be
located on the least productive area(s) of the A-P Parent Tract or A-P Agriculture Lot.
2. Any proposed “A-P SFD Lots” should be clustered or grouped in such a manner as to preserve the
greatest extent of productive and valuable farm land as possible on the A-P Parent Tract or any AP
Agricultural Lots.
N. General Agricultural and Intensive Agricultural land development activity shall be permitted within the
Agricultural Preservation (A-P) Zoning District, subject to the limitations and controls specified under
Section 507 and Sections 1615 and 1616 of the Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified within this
Ordinance, no other land use or activity shall be permitted within the A-P Zoning District.
O. A property owner submitting a subdivision plan will be required to specify on their plan the A-P
Development Units not allocated to the A-P Parent Tract or to those lots created from said A-P Parent
Tract. Any subdivision plans filed with a Municipality shall include a conspicuous “Agricultural Use
Notification” as follows: “All lands within the A-P Zoning District of the ESP Region are located in an
area where land is, or may be, used for agricultural production. Owners, residents, and other users of this
property or neighboring property owners may be subjected to occasional inconvenience, discomfort, and
the possibility of injury to property and health arising from normal and accepted local agricultural practices
69
and operations; including, but not limited to noise, odors, dust; the operation of machinery of any kind,
including aircraft; the storage and disposal of manure, and the application of fertilizer, soils amendments,
herbicides and pesticides. Owners, occupants, and users of this property should be prepared to accept such
conditions and inconveniences, discomfort, and possibility of injury from normal agricultural operations,
and are hereby put on official notice that the Pennsylvania Right-to-Farm Law (PA Act 133 of 1982) may
bar them from obtaining a legal judgment against persons, farms, or corporations which are performing
such normal agricultural operations.”
Section 508. Farm-related Business - Within the A-P Zoning District, Farm-related Businesses may be
permitted by Special Exception. All activities and services should be directed at meeting the needs of those engaged
in local farming. “Local farming” is considered to include customers whose primary farming activity is conducted
within twenty-five (25) miles of the location of the proposed farm-related business. The proposed Farm-related
Business should be directed at providing materials and services necessary to local farming and the processing and
distribution of goods produced on said farms; therefore, the applicant must provide evidence to the Municipal
Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed Farm-related Business is important to local farming and is specifically
sized to serve primarily local users. Additionally, Farm-related Businesses are subject to the following standards:
A. For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, farm-related businesses may only involve the following types of
uses:
1. Facilities for the manufacturing, warehousing, sales, or repair and service of agricultural
equipment, vehicles (including carriages and buggies), or supplies
2. Blacksmith shops, farrier, harness making;
3. Butcher shops;
4. Grain mills;
5. Facilities devoted to the processing of locally produced agricultural products;
6. Feed supply, fuel and fertilizer distributors;
7. Other uses similar in character to those listed above.
B. The Farm-related Business shall occupy no more than five (5) acres. The applicant shall justify to the
Municipal Zoning Hearing Board that the size of the site is the minimum needed to conduct the farm-related
business.
C. By access drive which serve the Farm-related Business shall be of a sufficient length to accommodate
stacking of delivery and customer vehicles.
D. Farm-related Businesses shall not be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any property line.
E. Composting and other waste storage facilities shall not be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of any
property line. Additionally, any use permitted under subsection 508.A may require setbacks of a greater
width as may be determined by the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board.
F. Vegetative screening must be provided when a Farm-related Business abuts any property used principally
for residential purposes. Certain pieces of apparatus used for Farm-related Businesses which create
noxious dust, odor, light, or noise, may require setbacks and vegetative screening per the ESP Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance of a greater width or density as may be determined by the Municipal
Zoning Hearing Board.
70
G. Off-street parking, loading areas, and driveways shall be designated in accordance with Sections 1508 and
1509 of this Ordinance.
H. Any outdoor storage of supplies, materials and products shall be screened from adjoining roads and
properties. The display of mechanized farm equipment for sale shall be excluded from this screening
provision.
I. One (1) free-standing sign shall be permitted for a Farm-related Business. Such sign shall not exceed
fifteen (15) square feet in total area and shall be regulated as per Section 1507 of this Ordinance.
J. If, in the opinion of the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board, a proposed Farm-related Business presents a fire
hazard, emits smoke, dust or other air pollutants, noise, light or glare, or creates a nuisance as a result of the
hours of operation, the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board may attach reasonable conditions, as it deems
appropriate to adequately control and/or mitigate the potentially detrimental effects that any such Farmrelated
Business may have on the surrounding area.
K. No construction or other improvements required to support a Farm-related Business shall be permitted
except pursuant to an approved Land Development Plan.
Section 509. General Regulations
Sections 510 through 549 (Reserved)
Section 550. R-1 Rural Agricultural (Low Density) Zoning District
Section 551. Specific Intent It is the purpose of the R-1 Zoning District to maintain the rural character of
sparsely developed areas which contain a mixture of farmland and woodland by providing for rural, low density,
residential development and certain other relatively compatible non-residential activities.
Section 552. Uses Permitted by Right The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the R-1 Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. General Agriculture, subject to Section 1616.
B. Single family detached dwellings
C. Municipal Use, subject to Section 1700.
D. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing
structures, subject to Section 1678.C.
E. Accessory uses and structures to any of the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted
use.
F. No-impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
G. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
Section 553. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses are permitted in the R-1 Zoning
District when special exceptions are granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in determining
whether a special exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated below as well as
Section 2002 of this Ordinance:
A. Place of Worship, subject to Section 1630.
71
B. Cemeteries, subject to Section 1630.
C. Public Utility, subject to Section 1901.
D. Home Occupation, subject to Section 1601.
Section 554. Conditional Uses. (Reserved)
Section 555. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations for the R-1 District
Individual On-Lot Sewage Disposal and Individual On-Lot Water Supply
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Building Height
Silos & Other Ag. Buildings None
All Other Buildings 35 Feet
Impervious Coverage 15 Percent
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size 1 ½ Acres
Lot WidthA
t Street Line 200 Feet
At Building Setback Line 200 Feet
Building Setback Line 75 Feet
Rear Yard 75 Feet
Side Yard
One Side 50 Feet
Total 100 Feet
Section 556. General Regulations
Section 557 through 599. (Reserved)
Section 600. R-2 (Low Density Suburban Residential) Zoning District
Section 601. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of the R-2 Zoning District to maintain the rural character of
sparsely developed areas which contain a mixture of farmland and woodland by providing for low density
residential development and certain other relatively compatible nonresidential activities.
Section 602. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the R-2 Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
72
A. Single family detached dwellings
B. Municipal Use, subject to Section 1700.
C. Telecommunications Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing
structures, subject to Section 1678.C.
D. Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted use.
E. No-impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
F. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
Section 603. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses are permitted in the R-2 Zoning
District when special exceptions are granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in determining
whether a special exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated below as well as
Section 2002 of this Ordinance:
A. Place of Worship, subject to Section 1630.
B. Cemeteries, subject to Section 1630.
C. Schools, subject to Section 1631.
D. Public Utility, subject to Section 1701.
E. Home Occupation, subject to Section 1601.
Section 604. Conditional Uses. (Reserved)
Section 605. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations for the R-2 District
Individual On-Lot Sewage Disposal and Individual On-Lot Water Supply
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Building Height
Silos & Other Ag. Buildings None
All Other Buildings 35 Feet
Impervious Coverage 25 Percent
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size 1 Acre
Lot WidthAt Street Line 100 Feet
At Building Setback Line 100 Feet
Building Setback Line 50 Feet
Rear Yard 50 Feet
73
Side Yard
Total 50 Feet
One Side 25 Feet
Section 606. General Regulations
Section 607 through 649. (Reserved)
Section 650 R-3 (Medium Density Suburban Residential) Zoning District
Section 651. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of the R-3 Zoning District to provide an area for residential
development at medium densities. It is also the purpose of the R-3 Zoning District to provide an area for
commercial facilities for local residents which provide goods and services for the daily needs of the surrounding
neighborhood. Lot sizes may be decreased when public or community sewerage systems and public or community
water facilities are utilized.
Section 652. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the R-3 Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Municipal Use, subject to Section 1700.
C. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing structures
subject to Section 1678.C.
D. Accessory uses and structures to any of the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted use.
E. No-impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
Section 653. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses are permitted in the R-3 Zoning
District when special exceptions are granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in determining
whether a special exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated below as well as
Section 2002 of this Ordinance:
A. Place of Worship, subject to Section 1630.
B. Cemeteries, subject to Section 1630.
C. Child Day-Care Facility, subject to Section 1627.
D. Adult Day Care Facility, subject to Section 1626.
E. Hospitals and Healthcare Facilities, subject to Section 1628.
F. Healthcare Services, subject to Section 1628.
G. Planned Residential Development, subject to Section 1604.
H. Schools, subject to Section 1631.
I. Public Utility, subject to Section 1701.
74
J. Utilization of Transferable Development Rights (TDR), subject to Section 1609.
K. Home Occupation, subject to Section 1601.
Section 654. Conditional Use (Reserved)
Section 655. Area, Yard and Height Regulations for the R-3 Zoning District
Individual On-Lot Sewage
Disposal and Individual On-Lot
Water Supply
Public or Community Sewerage System
and Public or Community Water Supply
Single Family
Detached
Other uses* Single Family Detached Other Uses*
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Building Height 35 Feet 35 feet 35 Feet 35 feet
Impervious Coverage 20% 40% 30% 40%
MINIMUM
REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size 1 Acre 5 Acres ½ Acre 3 Acres
Lot Width At Street Line 100 Feet 250 Feet 80 Feet 150 Feet
Lot Width At Building
Setback Line
100 Feet 250 Feet 80 Feet 150 Feet
Building Setback Line 50 Feet 100 Feet 40 Feet 75 Feet
Rear Yard 50 Feet 100 Feet 40 Feet 75 Feet
Side Yard
Total
One Side
50 Feet
25 Feet
100 Feet
50 Feet
10 Feet
20 Feet
50 Feet
25 Feet
*Please Note = Other uses may have specific dimensional requirements as specified elsewhere in this
Ordinance.
Section 656. General Regulations.
Section 657 through 699. (Reserved)
Section 700. R-4 (Medium to High Density Suburban Residential/Commercial) Zoning District
Section 701. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of the R-4 Zoning District to provide an area for residential
development at medium to high densities. It is also the purpose of the R-4 District to provide an area for
commercial facilities which provide goods and services to the surrounding neighborhood. Lot sizes may be
decreased when public or community sewerage systems and public or community water facilities are utilized.
Section 702. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the R-4 Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. Automobile accessory store (retail).
75
B. Banks or other financial establishment (all with or without drive-through facilities)
C. Barber and Beauty shop
D. Beverage Distributor
E. Convenience stores without fuel sales, subject to Section 1642.
F. Dry goods and variety shops, subject to Section 602.
G. Flower, card and gift shops
H. Grocery Stores and Specialty Grocery Stores (both subject to Section 1642); meat, fish, poultry markets;
and produce and farmers markets (all indoor sales and limited to 10,500 sq. ft. of net floor area)
I. Hardware, plumbing, and electrical supplies (retail)
J. Liquor stores
K. Medium-Density Apartments, subject to Section 1603.
L. Municipal use, subject to Section 1700.
M. Restaurants (General, Take-out, and Fast food with or without drive-through facilities), subject to Section
1649.
N. Self-service Laundromat, dry cleaners, and tailors (limited to 2,000 sq. ft. of service production area)
O. Single-family detached dwelling
P. Single-family semi-detached dwelling
Q. Small appliance sales, repair, and service shops
R. Sporting goods shops
S. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing structures,
subject to Section 1678.C.
T. Townhouses, subject to Section 1602.
U. Accessory uses and structures to any of the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted use.
V. Utilization of Transferable Development Rights (TDR), subject to Section 1609.
W. No impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
X. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
Section 703. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses are permitted in the R-4 Zoning
District when special exceptions are granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in determining
whether a special exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated below as well as
Section 2002 of this Ordinance:
A. Place of Worship, subject to Section 1630.
76
B. Cemeteries, subject to Section 1630.
C. Child Day-Care facility, subject to Section 1627.
D. Adult Day Care Facility, subject to Section 1626.
E. Hospitals and Healthcare Facility, subject to Section 1628.
F. Healthcare Services, subject to Section 1628.
G. Schools, subject to Section 1631.
H. Adaptive Re-use, subject to Section 1607.
I. Boardinghouse, subject to Section 1607.
J Residential Conversion, subject to Section 1607.
K. Mobile Home Park, subject to Section 1605.
L. Planned Residential Development, subject to Section 1604.
M. Public Utility, subject to Section 1701.
N. Game Room/Video Arcade, subject to Section 1664.
O. Home Occupation, subject to Section 1601.
P. Convenience store without fuel sales, subject to section 1642.
Q. Automobile Service Station without fuel sales, Minor Repair, subject to Section 1645.
Section 704. Conditional Uses (Reserved)
Section 705. Area, Yard and Height Requirements for the R-4 District
Individual On-Lot
Sewage Disposal and
Individual On-Lot Water
Supply
Public or Community Sewerage System
Public or Community Water Supply
Single
Family
Detached
Other
uses
Single Family
Detached
Single-
Family Semi-
Detached
Other
Uses
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Building Height 35 Feet 35 Feet 35 Feet 35 Feet 35 Feet
Impervious
Coverage
25% 45% 35% 35% 50%
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size 1 Acre 2 Acre 5,000 sq. ft. 2,500 sq. ft. 1 Acre
Lot Width At 100 Feet 150 Feet 55 Feet 60 Feet 100 Feet
77
Street Line
Lot Width At
Building
Setback Line
150 Feet 250 Feet 70 Feet 60 Feet 150 Feet
Rear Yard 30 Feet 50 Feet 25 Feet 25 Feet 40 Feet
Building Setback
Line
30 Feet 50 Feet 25 Feet 25 Feet 40 Feet
Side Yard
Total
One Side
40 Feet
20 Feet
50 Feet
25 Feet
20 Feet
10 Feet
10 Feet
10 Feet
40 Feet
20 Feet
Public or Community Sewerage System and Public or Community Water Supply
Townhouses Single Family
Attached
Duplex
MAXIMUM
PERMITTED
Building Height 35 Feet 35 Feet 35 Feet
Impervious
Coverage
25% 25%
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size 2,000 sq. ft. 2,000 sq. ft. 2,000 sq. ft.
Lot Width
At Street Line
25 Feet 25 Feet 25 Feet
At Building
Setback Line
25 Feet 25 Feet 25 Feet
Building Setback
Line
15 Feet 15 Feet 15 Feet
Rear Yard 10 Feet 10 Feet 10 Feet
Side Yard
Each
Total
N/A N/A N/A
Section 706. General Regulations
Section 707 through 749. (Reserved)
Section 750. R-5 (High Density Urban Residential / Commercial) Zoning District
Section 751. Specific Intent It is the specific intent of the R-5 Zoning District to provide an area for
residential and commercial development at medium to high densities. Lot sizes may be decreased when public or
community sewerage systems and public or community water systems are utilized. It is the purpose of the R-5
Zoning District to provide for single and multi-family dwellings as well as offices, business services, consumer
services, and smaller retail stores that relate to the downtown area to serve the daily needs of nearby residents.
Section 752. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the R-5 Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. Single-family detached dwelling
B. Single-family semi-detached dwelling
78
C. Townhouses, subject to Section 1602.
D. Duplexes, subject to Section 1602.
E. Single-family attached dwelling, subject to Section 1602.
F. Medium-Density Apartments, subject to Section 1603.
G. High-Density Apartments, subject to Section 1603.
H. Automotive accessory store (retail)
I. Bakeries and retail baked goods (limited to 750 sq. ft. production floor area)
J. Banks or other financial establishment (all with or without drive-through)
K. Barber and beauty shop; Nail Salon
L. Camera Shop/Photo Finishing
M. Confectionary stores
N. Convenience stores without fuel sales, subject to Section 1642.
O. Drug stores and pharmacies
P. Self-service Laundromat, dry cleaners, and tailors (limited to 1,000 sq. ft. of service production area)
Q. Dry goods and variety stores
R. Flower, card, and gift shops
S. Furniture and household supply stores (retail)
T. Grocery stores and Specialty Grocery Stores (both subject to Section 1642); meat, fish, poultry markets;
and produce and farmers markets (all indoor sales and limited to 10,500 sq. ft. of net floor area)
U. Haberdashery, apparel, shoe, and jewelry stores
V. Hardware, plumbing, and electrical supplies (retail)
W. Liquor stores
X. Beverage Distributors
Y. Theaters
Z. Municipal Use
AA. Office and stationery supplies (retail)
BB. Parking Garage, subject to Section 1681.
CC. Copy centers and job printers
79
DD. Private surface parking facility subject to Section 1681.
EE. Fitness/Health Center
FF. Radio & television stations
GG. Restaurants (General, Take-out, and Fast food) with and without drive through, subject to Section 1649.
HH. Shoe repair shops
II. Small appliance sales, repair, and service shops
JJ. Special merchandise stores such as newsstands, book, music and video stores, and tobacco shops
KK. Sporting goods stores
LL. Toy and hobby shops
MM. Studios and shops of artists and artisans (not to exceed 3,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area)
NN. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing structures,
subject to Section 1678.C.
OO. Accessory uses to any of the above permitted uses.
PP. No-impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
QQ. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
Section 753. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses are permitted in the R-5 Zoning
District when special exceptions are granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in determining
whether a special exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated below as well as
Section 2002 of this Ordinance.
A. Adaptive Re-use, subject to Section 1607.
B. Boarding house, subject to Section 1607.
C. Residential Conversion, subject to Section 1607.
D. Game Room/Video Arcade, subject to Section 1607.
E. Hospital and Healthcare Facility, subject to Section 1628.
F. Healthcare Services, subject to Section 1628.
G. Public Utilities, subject to Section 1701.
H. Child Day Care Facility, subject to Section 1627.
I. Schools, subject to Section 1631.
J. Game Room/Video Arcade, subject to Section 1664.
80
K. Home Occupation, subject to Section 1601.
L. Convenience store with fuel sales, subject to section 1642.
M. Automobile Service Station without fuel sales, Minor Repair, subject to Section 1645.
Section 754. Conditional Uses (Reserved)
Section 755. Area, Yard and Height Requirements for the R-5 District
Public Sewerage System and Public Water Supply
Permitted Uses: Min. lot
size Sq.
Ft.
Maximum
Impervious
coverage
Max.
height
Min.
lot
width
Front
yard
setback
Rear
yard
setback
Side yard
setback
ea.
Single-family detached 2,500 50 40’ 25’ 15’ 15’ 10’
Single family semi-detached 2,000 50 35’ 20’ 10’ 10’ 5’
Single-family attached 1,500 75 40’ 18’ 10’ 10’ n/a
Mid-rise apartments 1 Acre 80 40’ 100’ 30’ 30’ 15’
High-rise apartments 2 Acres 80 65’ 200’ 50’ 50’ 25’
Automotive accessory store (retail
only)
20,000 80 40’ 80’ 25’ 25’ 10’
Bakeries (limited to 750 sq. ft.
production floor area) & retail
baked goods
10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Barber & beauty shops 2,000 80 40’ 20’ 10’ 10’ 5’
Business & professional offices * 2,000 80 40’ 20’ 10’ 10’ 5’
Business, professional,
technical/vocational, and/or fine
arts schools (no heavy machinery
or heavy equipment), for day
students
10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Confectionery stores 2,000 80 40’ 20’ 10’ 10’ 5’
Convenience stores without fuel
sales
20,000 80 40’ 80’ 25’ 25’ 10’
Drug stores and pharmacies 20,000 80 40’ 80’ 25’ 25’ 10’
Dry cleaners; self-service
laundries (limited to 2,000 sq. ft.
of service/production area) &
tailors
20,000 80 40’ 80’ 25’ 25’ 10’
Dry goods & variety shops 20,000 80 40’ 80’ 25’ 25’ 10’
Flower, card, and gift shops 10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Furniture and household supply
store
1 Acre 80 40’ 100’ 30’ 30’ 15’
Grocery stores, meat, fish,
poultry, & produce
Markets; farmers markets
1 Acre 80 40’ 100’ 30’ 30’ 15’
Haberdashery, Apparel, shoe, and
jewelry stores
10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Hardware, plumbing, & electrical 20,000 80 40’ 80’ 25’ 25’ 10’
81
supplies (retail only)
Liquor stores 10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Medical & dental offices, clinics,
& laboratories
20,000 80 40’ 80’ 25’ 25’ 10’
Movie theatres/Performing arts
facilities
1 Acre 80 40’ 100’ 50’ 50’ 25’
Office & stationary supplies 10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Private surface parking facility 1 Acre 80 0 70’ 10’ 10’ 5’
Public parking garages & lots 12,000 80 60’ 100’ 25’ 25’ 25’
Public office buildings &
facilities
10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Radio & television stations 10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Recreational facilities, athletic
clubs & fitness centers, public &
private
20,000 80 40’ 80’ 25’ 25’ 10’
Restaurants (eat in & take out) &
delicatessens, without
entertainment
10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Shoe repair shops 2,000 80 40’ 20’ 10’ 10’ 5’
Small appliance sales, repair, &
service shops
4,000 80 40’ 20’ 10’ 10’ 5’
Special merchandise stores such
as newsstands, book, music &
video stores, tobacco shops
2,000 80 40’ 20’ 10’ 10’ 5’
Sporting goods & toy and hobby
shops
10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Special Exception Uses:
Boarding houses 2,500 50 40’ 25’ 15’ 15’ 10’
Group care facilities 2,500 50 40’ 25’ 15’ 15’ 10’
Public utilities 2,000 50 40’ 25’ 15’ 15’ 10’
Taverns, bars, pubs 10,000 80 40’ 70’ 20’ 20’ 10’
Adaptive reuse 2,500 50 40’ 25’ 15’ 15’ 10’
Day care facilities 2,500 50 40’ 25’ 15’ 15’ 10’
Educational facilities: college or
university
1 Acre 80 65’ 100’ 30’ 30’ 15’
Schools 1 Acre 80 65’ 100’ 30’ 30’ 15’
Hospitals 2 Acre 80 65’ 200’ 50’ 50’ 25’
Places of worship 20,000 80 40’ 80’ 25’ 25’ 10’
Section 756. General Regulations
Section 757 through 799. (Reserved)
Section 800. G-C (General Commercial) Zoning District
Section 801. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of the G-C Zoning District to provide an area where a wide
range of commercial activities may locate and to recognize areas where a nucleus of such a mix of uses now exists.
Section 802. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the G-C Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. Automobile Accessory Store (retail)
82
B. Automobile Service Station, Minor Repair, subject to Section 1645.
C. Club and Lodge provided that all activities shall be conducted within buildings or structures
D. Bakeries and retail baked goods (limited to 1,000 sq. ft. production floor area).
E. Farmers Market (outdoor), subject to Section 1643.
F. Banks or other financial establishment with or without drive-through facilities
G. Funeral Home
H Self-service Laundromats, dry cleaners and tailors (limited to 2,000 sq. ft. of service/production area)
I. Fitness/Health center
J. Confectionary store
K. Hotel or motel, subject to Section 1648.
L. Convenience stores with or without fuel sales, subject to Section 1642.
M. Indoor places of amusement
N. Drug stores and pharmacies
O. Lumber and building materials supply establishment (retail)
P. Dry goods and Variety Stores
Q. Vehicular and Mobile Home Sales, Rental, and Display, subject to Section 1646.
R. Flower, card, and gift shops
S. Public and Non-public Recreational Areas
T. Furniture and household appliance store (retail)
U. Toy and hobby shops
V. Theaters
W. Car and Vehicle Washing Facility, subject to Section 1644.
Y. Grocery Stores and Specialty Grocery Stores (both subject to Section 1642); meat, fish, poultry markets;
and produce and farmers markets (all indoors).
Z. Haberdashery, apparel, shoe, and jewelry stores
AA. Wholesale business establishment
BB. Hardware, plumbing and electrical supplies (retail)
CC. Liquor Stores
83
DD. Beverage Distributors
EE. Municipal Use, subject to Section 1700.
FF. Office and Stationery supplies (retail)
GG. Restaurants (General, Takeout, Fast-food) with or without drive through, subject to Section 1649.
HH. Shoe repair shop
II. Small appliance sales, repair, and service shops
JJ. Special merchandise stores such as newsstands, book, music and video stores, and tobacco shops
KK. Sporting goods store.
LL. Studios and shops of artists and artisans
MM. Barber and beauty shop; Nail salon
NN. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing structures,
subject to Section 1678.C.
OO. Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted use.
PP. No-impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
QQ. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
Section 803. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses are permitted in the G-C Zoning
District when special exceptions are granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in determining
whether a special exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated below as well as
Section 2002 of this Ordinance.
A. The storage of fireworks and explosives shall be permitted in accordance with Pennsylvania Code, Title 34.
Labor and Industry. Chapter 5 Blasting, Demolition, Fireworks and Explosives, Subchapter “C”.
Fireworks. and Subchapter “D”. Explosives.
B. New Telecommunication Towers with or without Telecommunication Antennas, subject to Section 1678.D.
C. Taverns, subject to Section 1650.
D. Nightclubs, subject to Section 1650.
E. Adult Business and Adult Establishment, subject to Section 1680.
F. Commercial Conversion, subject to Section 1607.
G. Home occupation, subject to Section 1601.
Section 804. Conditional Uses (Reserved)
84
Section 805. Area, Yard and Height Regulations for the G-C Zoning District
Individual On-Lot Sewage Disposal and Individual On-Lot Water Supply
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Building Height 35 Feet
Impervious Coverage 70 Percent
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size 2 Acre
Lot WidthA
t Street Line 150 Feet
At Building Setback Line 150 Feet
Building Setback Line 40 Feet
Rear Yard 40 Feet
Side yard
One Side 20 Feet
Total 40 Feet
Distance Between Highway Access Points 75 Feet
Improvements Setback Line 10 Feet
Section 806. General Regulations. The following General Regulations found in this Ordinance shall
apply to the G-C District:
Section 807 through 849. (Reserved)
Section 850. H-C (Highway Commercial) Zoning District
Section 851. Specific Intent. The specific intent of the Highway Commercial District is to provide for a
variety of commercial and residential uses at acceptable and convenient locations along major highways and to
promote well planned and designed commercial areas, as well as limited residential development.
Section 852. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the H-C Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. Vehicular and Mobile Home Sales, Rentals and Display, subject to Section 1646.
B. Automobile Service Station – Minor and Major Repair, subject to Section 1645.
C. Bakeries (limited to 1,000 sq. ft. production floor area) and retail baked goods
D. Bank or other financial establishment with or without drive-through facilities
E. Barber and Beauty Shops; Nail Salons
F. Beverage Distributor
G. Camera shop and photo finishing services
H. Club or Lodge provided that all activities shall be conducted within buildings or structures
85
I. Confectionary Store
J. Convenience store with or without fuel sales, subject to Section 1642.
K. Drug stores and pharmacies
L. Dry goods and variety stores
M. Flower, card, and gift shops
N. Furniture and household supply stores (retail)
O. Funeral Home
P. Grocery Store and Specialty Grocery Store (both subject to Section 1642); meat, fish, poultry market; and
produce and farmers market (all indoors)
Q. Greenhouse/Nursery/Garden Supply (retail)
R. Fitness/Health Center
S. Haberdashery, apparel, shoe, and jewelry stores
T. Hotel or Motel, subject to Section 1648.
U. Hardware, plumbing, and electrical supplies (retail)
V. Indoor places of amusement
W. Liquor store
X. Lumber and building materials supply establishment (retail)
Y. Self-storage Facilities, subject to section 1677.
Z. Municipal Use, subject to Section 1700.
AA. Non-public Recreational Area
BB. Office and stationery supply (retail)
CC. Copy centers and job printers
DD. Restaurant (General, Take-out, Fast-food), with or without drive through service, subject to Section 1649.
EE. Self-service Laundromats, dry cleaners, tailors
FF. Small appliance sales, repair, and service shop
GG. Shoe repair shop
HH. Shopping Center, subject to Section 1641.
II. Sporting goods store
86
JJ. Supermarket, subject to Section 1642.
KK. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing structures,
subject to Section 1678.C.
LL. Toy and Hobby Shop
MM. Theaters
NN. Car and Vehicle Washing Facility, subject to Section 1644.
OO. Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted use.
PP. No-impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
QQ. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
Section 853. Special Exception Uses. The following uses are permitted in the H-C Zoning District when
special exceptions are granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in determining whether a special
exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated below as well as Section 2002 of
this Ordinance.
A. Adult Business or Adult Establishment, subject to Section 1680.
B. Animal Hospital/Veterinarian Clinic, subject to Section 1675.
C. Business, Vocational, or Trade School, subject to Section 1631.
D. Child Day Care Facility, subject to Section 1627.
E. Farmers Market (outdoors), subject to Section 1643.
F. Flea Market (outdoors), subject to Section 1643.
G. Game Room/Video Arcade, subject to Section 1664.
H. Nightclub, subject to Section 1650.
I. Public Utility, subject to Section 1701.
J. Storage of fireworks and explosives, in accordance with Pennsylvania Code, Title 34. Labor and Industry.
Chapter 5 Blasting, Demolition, Fireworks and Explosives, Subchapter “C”. Fireworks. and Subchapter
“D”. Explosives.
K. New Telecommunication Towers with or without Telecommunication Antennas, subject to Section 1678.D.
L. Commercial Conversion, subject to Section 1607.
M. Home Occupation, subject to Section 1601.
Section 854. Conditional Use. (Reserved)
87
Section 855. Area, Yard and Height Regulations for the H-C Zoning District
Any Permitted Use Min. Lot Areas
sq. ft.
Min. Lot Width Max Impervious
Coverage (%) (all
permitted
structures)
Max Building
Height (feet)
With Individual On-
Lot Sewage Disposal
& Individual On-Lot
Water Supply
2 Acre 200 Feet 80 40 Feet
With Individual On-
Lot Sewage Disposal
& Public or
Community Water
1 Acre 150 Feet 80 40 Feet
With Public or
Community
Sewerage System &
Individual On-Lot
Water Supply
1 Acre 150 Feet 80 40 Feet
With Public or
Community
Sewerage System &
Public or
Community Water
25,000 100 Feet 80 40 Feet
Section 856. General Regulations
Section 857 through 899. (Reserved)
Section 900. L-I (Light Industrial) Zoning District
Section 901. Specific Intent. It is the specific intent of the L-I District to provide an area for light
industrial uses such as the manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging or testing of goods or
equipment; including research activities which can be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure; with no
outside storage, serviced by a modest volume of trucks or vans, and imposing a negligible impact on the surrounding
environment by noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or pollutants.
Section 902. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the L-I Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. Assembly and packaging establishments
B. Bakeries
C. Bulk photo processing
D. Food processing, excluding slaughterhouse, meat and fish packing, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the
rendering of fats and oils
E. Furniture manufacturing
F. Metal fabrication
88
G. Millwork and other wood products
H. Municipal Use, subject to Section 1700.
I. Printing and publishing establishments
J. Research, engineering, or testing laboratories
K. Sawmill/Planing mill
L. Scientific/Electronic/Medical instruments
M. Self Storage Facility, subject to Section 1677.
N. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing
structures, subject to Section 1678.C.
O. Textile/Garment manufacturing.
P. Business, Vocational, or Trade school
Q. Warehousing, subject to Section 1689.
R. Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted use.
S. No-impact Home-based Business, subject to Section 1601.
T. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
Section 903. Special Exception Uses. The following uses are permitted in the L-I Zoning District when
special exceptions are granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in determining whether a special
exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated below as well as Section 2002 of
this Ordinance.
A. Storage of fireworks and explosives in accordance with Pennsylvania Code, Title 34. Labor and Industry.
Chapter 5 Blasting, Demolition, Fireworks and Explosives, Subchapter “C”. Fireworks. and Subchapter
“D”. Explosives or any current superceding codes or regulations.
B. Telecommunication Towers with or without Telecommunication Antennas, subject to Section 1678.D.
Section 904. Conditional Use. (Reserved)
Section 905. Area, Yard and Height Regulations for the L-I Zoning District
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Building Height 50 Feet
Impervious Coverage 80 Percent
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size 2 Acres
Lot Width 150 Feet
89
Distance between Highway
Access Points 75 Feet
Improvements Setback Line 10 Feet
Building Setback Line 50 Feet
Rear Yard 50 Feet
Side Yard
One Side 25 Feet
Total 50 Feet
Section 906. General Regulations
Section 907 through 949. (Reserved)
Section 950. G-I General Industrial Zoning District
Section 951. Specific Intent. The purpose of the G-I Zoning District is to provide an area for heavy
industry such as the manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging or testing of goods or
equipment within an enclosed structure or an open yard that is capable of being screened from neighboring
properties; and serviced by a modest volume of trucks or other vehicles, and to provide areas which are suitable for
extractive industry.
Section 952. Uses Permitted by Right. The following, as a principal use, their accessory uses and no
other, are permitted in the G-I Zoning District, provided that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
A. Assembly and Packaging Establishment
B. Automobile Service Station – Minor and Major repairs, subject to Section 1645.
C. Bakeries
D. Bottling
E. Pottery and ceramics (using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by gas or electricity)
F. Bulk photo processing
G. Commercial/Industrial machinery sales/service
E. Construction or building trades company
F. Fuel oil company, subject to applicable federal, state and local fire protection standards.
G. Furniture manufacturing
H. Metal fabrication/processing
I. Millwork or other wood product manufacturing
J. Self-Storage Facility, subject to Section 1677.
K. Municipal use, subject to Section 1700.
90
L. Truck Terminal, subject to Section 1689.
M. Plastics/Rubber products industry
N. Printing, publishing, binding establishments
O. Research, engineering, or testing laboratories
P. Scientific/electronic instruments manufacturing
Q. Storage of fireworks and explosives in accordance with Pennsylvania Code, Title 34. Labor and Industry.
Chapter 5 Blasting, Demolition, Fireworks and Explosives, Subchapter “C”. Fireworks. and Subchapter
“D”. Explosives.
R. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings attached to existing structures,
subject to Section 1678.C.
S. Textile/garment manufacturing
T. Textile bleaching
U. Car and Vehicle Washing Facility, subject to Section 1664.
V. Warehousing, subject to Section 1689.
W. Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on the same lot as the permitted use.
X. No-impact Home-based Business subject to Section 1601.
Y. Forestry, subject to Section 1685.
Section 953. Special Exception Uses. The following uses are permitted in the G-I Zoning District when
special exceptions are granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Standards to be used in determining whether a special
exception should be granted are found in the sections of the Ordinance indicated below as well as Section 2002 of
this Ordinance.
A. Asphalt manufacturers
B. Automobile Dismantling Facilities, subject to Section 1690.
C. Breweries
D. Cement plants
E. Chemical products industry
F. Fertilizer manufacturing
G. Flour mills
H. Food processing
I. Airport/Heliport, subject to Section 1676.
91
J. Paint manufacturing
K. Paper/Pulp mill
L. Slaughter house (commercial), subject to Section 1691.
M. Soap manufacturing
N. Mineral extraction, subject to Section 1687.
O. Solid Waste Disposal Facility, subject to Section 1686.
P. Tank farm.
Q. Tanning, curing or storage of leather and skins
R. Junkyards, subject to 1690.
S. New Telecommunications Towers with or without Telecommunication Antennas, subject to Section
1678.D.
Section 954. Conditional Use. (Reserved)
Section 955. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations for the G-I Zoning District
MAXIMUM PERMITTED
Building Height 50 Feet
Impervious Coverage 80 Percent
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Lot Size 2 Acre
Lot Width 200 Feet
Building Setback Line 50 Feet
Rear Yard 50 Feet
Side Yard
One Side 50 Feet
Total 100 Feet
Improvements Setback Line 25 Feet
Distance between Highway
Access Points 75 Feet
Section 956. General Regulations
Section 957 through 1499. (Reserved)
92
CHAPTER XV. GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 1500. Prohibited Uses. No building or structure may be erected, altered or used, and no lot or
premises may be used for any activity which is, in the opinion of the Municipal Governing Body, continuously
noxious, injurious, or offensive by reason of dust, smoke, odor, fumes, noise, vibration gas, effluent discharge,
illumination, or similar substances or conditions.
Section 1501. Access to Structures. Every building and structure hereafter erected or moved shall be on
a lot adjacent to either a public street or to a private street that has been approved by the Municipal Governing Body.
All structures shall be located on lots so as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and
required off-street parking.
Section 1502. Establishment of More Than One (1) Principal Use and/or the Erection of More Than
One (1) Principal Structure on a Lot. In any district more than one (1) principal use may be established and/or
more than one a structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot provided
that the area, yard, and other requirements of this Ordinance pertinent to the District in which the lot is located shall
be met for each use and/or structure as though it were on an individual lot unless otherwise specifically provided in
this Ordinance. The erection of either more than one (1) principal structure on a lot or the establishment of more
than one (1) principal use upon a lot, shall be considered land development and plans must be prepared and
approved in accordance with the ESP Region Joint Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance ESP (SALDO).
Section 1503. Storage of Explosives. No explosives may be stored in the EAP, A-P, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4,
R-5 or W-P Zoning Districts. Explosives may be stored in the G-I Zoning District By Right, and in the H-C, G-C,
and L-I Districts by Special Exception. In storing any such explosives, all applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP), the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms (ATF), and any other local, state, and federal regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such matters
shall be complied with.
Section 1504. Accessory Building Setback Exceptions. On any lot on which a principal building existed
at the effective date of this Ordinance an accessory building to such existing principal building which is constructed
after the effective date of this Ordinance does not have to be set back further from any street right-of-way than the
principal building which existed at the effective date of this Ordinance.
Section 1505. Landscaping Where District Regulations require buffer yards, screening, planting strips
and the like, these shall be subject to the regulations and standards of the ESP Region Joint Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (ESP SALDO).
Section 1506. Lighting. When any property on which any type of use is conducted is illuminated at night,
such illumination shall be so designed and located that the light sources are shielded from adjoining properties and
streets. No beams of light shall be directed toward adjacent properties or streets. No lighting shall be utilized
produce a light at the boundaries of the illuminated property greater than the values listed below:
A. W-P, EAP, A-P, R-1 Zoning Districts 0.5 (one-half) foot candle
B. R-2, R-3 Zoning Districts 0.75 (three-quarters) foot candle
C. R-4, R-5 Zoning Districts 1.0 (one) foot candle
D. G-C, H-C Zoning Districts 1.0 (one) foot candle
E. L-I, G-I Zoning Districts 1.0 (one) foot candle
Section 1507. Signs.
A. The purpose of this section is to promote and maintain overall community beautification; promote traffic
safety by avoiding distractions and sight distance obstructions; protect property values and ensure
compatibility with the character of neighboring existing and planned land uses; and assist in carrying out
the goals of the Pennsylvania Outdoor Advertising Act, as amended.
93
B. Signs shall only be erected and maintained when compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and all
other applicable ordinances and regulations relating to the erection, alteration, and maintenance of signs has
been clearly demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer.
C. Unless otherwise stated, all signs shall require a Municipal Zoning Permit and a Certificate of Use and
Occupancy as regulated by Section 1901, 1902, and 1903 of this Ordinance. Only signs that are
specifically permitted by this Ordinance, within the applicable Zoning District, shall be allowed. Lawfully
existing signs may be painted, repaired, or changed in message without a new permit under this Ordinance
provided that any such changes or repairs, do not increase the area of the sign or otherwise result in noncompliance
or an increased non-conformity with this Ordinance. A lawfully existing, non-conforming,
sign may be replaced with a new non-conforming sign provided that the new sign is not more nonconforming
in any way than the old sign. The replacement of an existing non-conforming sign must occur
within one-hundred and eighty (180) days of its removal.
D. General.
1. Signs (other than school warning signs, traffic control signs, time and temperature signs, and
similar signs as may be), shall not contain any moving parts nor shall they use flashing or
intermittent illumination. Any source of light used to illuminate a sign shall be steady and
stationary.
2. No portion of any sign shall project over any lot line.
3. Signs that are of such character, form, shape, or color that they imitate or resemble any official
traffic sign, signal, or device, or that have any characteristics which are likely to confuse or
distract the operator of a motor vehicle on a public street (such as prominent use of the words
“Danger” or “Stop”), are prohibited. Red, green, or amber lights, (except those contained within a
school warning sign, traffic control sign, or similar sign), shall not be located in such a manner
that they could create a danger by being misconstrued as traffic lights by an operator of a motor
vehicle.
4. Spinners or any other type of moving object used to attract attention are strictly prohibited.
5. No sign shall be located or arranged in a manner that it interferes with safe sight distance for
vehicles exiting or entering any property.
6. No sign shall be placed in such a position or have such a source of illumination that it will cause,
in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, any danger to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
7. No sign shall be utilized in a manner which produces a light intensity greater than 1.0 (one point
zero) foot-candles beyond the boundaries of the property containing the signage. No beams of
light shall be directed towards adjacent properties, public roads, or private roads and all light
sources shall be shielded in a manner which shall ensure that light pollution does not affect any
adjoining properties.
8. No sign shall be erected or located in such a manner as to prevent free ingress or egress to any
window, door, or fire escape.
9. No sign which emits smoke, visible vapors or particulates, sounds, or odors shall be permitted.
10. Except as permitted within this Ordinance (i.e., Off-Premises Advertising Signs/Billboards), no
signs shall be erected on a property to which it does not relate.
94
11. Any vehicle or structure to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the carrying of such sign
or signs no longer is incidental to the primary purpose of the vehicle or structure, but becomes, in
effect, the primary purpose in itself shall be considered a Freestanding Sign and, as such, shall be
subject to requirements for Freestanding Signs in the zoning district in which said vehicle or
structure is located.
12. Signs which contain information that states, infers, or implies that a lot or property, may be used
for any purpose not permitted under the applicable provisions of this Ordinance, are prohibited.
13. Signs or displays that include words or images that are obscene, pornographic, or that an average
reasonable person would find highly offensive to public decency are strictly prohibited.
14. No sign shall be posted on any property or upon any sign post or affixed to any public utility pole
unless permission to place said signs has been granted by the owner of said property, sign post, or
public utility pole.
15. No sign shall be tacked, stapled, or nailed to a utility pole except by an authorized utility or by a
person who has obtained permission from the authorized utility.
16. The area immediately surrounding each sign shall be kept in a clean, sanitary, and healthful
condition. No accumulations of loose paper, bottles, cans, garbage or similar items, shall be
permitted.
17. Every sign shall be constructed of durable material and shall be kept in good condition. Peeling
paint shall be removed and replaced. Broken lights shall be replaced; and similar maintenance
tasks shall be performed when deemed necessary by the sign’s owner, the property owner, and/or
the Zoning Officer.
18. Any sign which becomes dilapidated or which creates a hazard to the public health, safety and
welfare shall be removed at the expense of the owner or lessee. The Municipal Zoning Officer
shall make such determinations as to state of any signs condition.
19. Any and all signs lawfully permitted in the ESP Region are further subject to any requirements of
any other local, state, or federal agencies having jurisdiction over such matters.
20. Any and all signs placed on smokestacks, water towers, silos and other similar structures, shall be
governed by the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
E. Prohibited Signs
1. The following signs are expressly prohibited unless otherwise stated in these regulations:
a. Animated and Moving Signs – A sign or other display with either kinetic or illusionary
motion powered by natural, manual, mechanical, electrical or other means; including, but
not limited to, flags having commercial messages and all pennants, banners, streamers,
propellers, and discs, as well as flashing signs, signs with illuminated elements that are
used to simulate the impression of motion, and searchlights.
b. Flashing Signs (as defined in this Ordinance) and Message Signs – Any signs that include
lights or messages which flash, blink or turn on and off intermittently; but specifically
excluding time and temperature signs which display no other text or images.
c. Glaring Signs – Signs with light sources or which reflect brightness in a manner which
constitutes a hazard or nuisance. This includes signs with fluorescent text, graphics or
background, as well as holographic signs.
95
d. Obstructive Signs – A sign or other advertising devise erected or placed at any street,
alley, driveway, or road intersection in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision
sight distance at the intersection.
e. Inflatable Signs and Other Objects – Signs and other objects which are inflated;
including, but not limited to, balloons. An outdoor display of not more than one bouquet
of balloons shall be allowed on a premise that sells balloons. Balloons shall also be
permitted to be displayed in temporary situations or on special occasions at a residence
provided that said balloons are removed immediately after said special occasion is over.
f. Posters and Handbills – Any signs affixed to any structures, trees or other natural
vegetation, rocks, or poles; other than temporary signs posted by the Zoning Officer for
the purpose of identifying a property which is the subject of an Appeal before the Zoning
Hearing Board.
g. Roof Signs – Roof Signs are prohibited in the W-P, EAP, A-P, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and
R-5 Zoning Districts and are limited to lawful conforming commercial uses in the G-C,
H-C, L-I and G-I Districts. Roof Signs are On-Premise Signs and shall conform to this
Section and all other sections of the Zoning Ordinance.
h. Simulated Traffic Signs and Obstructions – Any sign which may be confused with, or
obstruct the view of, any authorized traffic sign or signal, obstruct the sight-distance
triangle at any road intersection, or extend into the public right-of-way.
i. Strings of Light – Any devices including lights that outline property lines, sales areas, or
any portion of a structure and are intended to advertise or draw attention to a business or
commercial activity, except as follows.
i. Lights used temporarily as holiday decorations.
ii. Lights or other devices used on a temporary basis on parcels on which carnivals,
fairs, or other such similar temporary activities are held.
j. Vehicle Signs – Any sign displayed on a parked trailer or other vehicle where the primary
purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product, service business, or other activity. This
regulation shall permit the use of business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles
which are primarily, actively used for business purposes.
k. Portable, A-frame/Wheeled Signs – Except where allowed for lawful, conforming, uses
in the G-C and H-C Zoning Districts, any wheeled, “A” frame, or similar Portable Sign
is prohibited except on a temporary basis not to exceed seventy-two (72) consecutive
hours and for no more than two (2) times per calendar year. A Zoning Permit is required
for any such temporary use.
l. Multiple Signs – Multiple signs, logos, or insignia on a canopy or canopies attached to a
building or other structure are prohibited.
m. Signs Adversely Affecting Safety – Signs which prevent free ingress or egress from any
door, window, fire escape, or that prevent free access from one part of the roof to any
other part shall not be permitted. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a stand-pipe or
fire escape. Open flames used to attract public attention to a place of business or to an
advertising sign shall not be permitted.
96
n. Sign Emissions – No sign which emits smoke, visible vapors, or particles, or sound or
odors shall be permitted.
o. Mirrors – No mirror device shall be used as part of any sign.
F. Signs Permitted in All Zoning Districts
1. The following signs are allowed in all zoning districts. Unless otherwise stated, the placement of
these signs does not require a zoning permit and all such signs shall comply with all of the
pertinent regulations of this Ordinance:
a. Holiday Decorations – Holiday decorations displayed for recognized federal, state, or
religious holidays shall be exempted from the provisions of this Section; except where
these signs interfere with traffic safety or are in any other way found to be a public safety
hazard as determined by the Zoning Officer.
b. Street Sign – As defined in this Ordinance an official highway sign, streets name,
directional, or other traffic sign erected in accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code by Penn DOT or a Municipality.
c. Residential Identification Sign – A sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet, bearing only
the residential property number, street address, and/or names of the occupants of the
residence, or the name of the dwelling. Any such sign shall either be non-illuminated or
indirectly illuminated and there shall be a limit of two (2) such signs per property.
d. Legal Notice – As may be posted upon properties by the Municipality, or its Zoning
Officer, when they are required to do so under applicable local, state, or federal laws and
regulations.
e. Cornerstone – As maybe found on the cornerstone of significant public buildings (e.g.,
Municipal Offices, churches, schools, etc.).
f. Barber Pole – Revolving barbershop pole sign provided that it does not exceed thirty-six
(36) inches in height and that it is erected only in conjunction with an actual, operational
barbershop.
g. Contractor Sign (as defined in this Ordinance) – No one sign shall exceed six (6) square
feet. Only one (1) sign may be erected for each business or contractor who is actually
engaged in permitted work on the property where said sign has been placed. No
illumination is permitted. Any sign in place for more than sixty (60) days requires a
permit from the Municipality.
h. Public Use, Official, and Governmental Signs (as defined in this Ordinance)
i. Garage/Yard Sale Signs – These are regulated in Section 1526.
j. Real Estate Signs (as defined in this Ordinance) – “Open House” signs are further
regulated as follows:
i. Open House Signs may be posted for a period no longer than ten (10) days prior
to and on the day the open house is taking place and shall be removed at the end
of the day that the open house occurs.
ii. The maximum sign size shall be three (3) square feet.
97
iii. One (1) Off-Premise Sign shall be permitted for the duration of the open house,
but not longer than four (4) hours per property having an open house. Such sign
shall be placed at the intersection with an arterial or collector road nearest to the
property having the open house. Off-Premise Signs may be used only for open
houses on Fridays, Saturdays, or Sundays.
iv. Failure to adhere to this Section will result in the removal of the signs and the
expense of any such removal shall be charged to the person or company
responsible for the placement of said sign(s).
v. Any and all Open House Signs shall not be illuminated.
k. Political Signs (as defined in this Ordinance) – These are limited to four (4) square feet.
l. Security and Warning Signs (as defined in this Ordinance).
m. Private Drive Signs (as defined in this Ordinance).
n. Nonprofit Organization Sign (as defined in this Ordinance) – Provided that a zoning
permit is obtained and t hat such signs are limited to one (1) per property and six (6)
square feet in size.
o. Special Event Sign (as defined in this Ordinance).
p. Identification Signs and Bulletin Board Signs, provided that a zoning permit is obtained
and that a zoning permit is obtained and that:
a. No more than two (2) such signs shall be erected on any frontage of any one (1)
property.
b. No side of any such sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area.
c. Signs shall be erected only upon the property on which the use is conducted.
q. Signs advertising a lawful non-conforming use, provided that a zoning permit is obtained
and that:
a. No side of any such sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
b. The sign shall be erected only upon the premises on which such non-conforming
use is located.
c. No more than one (1) such sign shall be erected on any one (1) street frontage.
r. Signs necessary for the identification and protection of public utility facilities, provided
that no side of any such sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
G. Signs Permitted in the EAP, A-P, R-1, and R-2 Zoning Districts
1. In addition to those signs specifically listed in subsection 1507.F, above the following signs are
allowed in the EAP, A-P, R-1, and R-2 Zoning Districts:
a. Signs advertising the sale of farm products, nursery products, or livestock produced or
raised on the premise provided that a zoning permit obtained and that:
98
i. No side of any such sign shall exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area.
b. Signs indicating membership in agricultural associations or cooperatives or specialization
in a particular breed of animal or plants provided that zoning permit is obtained and that:
i. The area on one (1) side of any such sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) square
feet.
H. Signs in Commercial and Industrial Districts (G-C, H-C, L-I, and G-I).
1. Any and all the various types of Signs in Section 1507 (H) through 1507(K) shall require an
appropriate Municipal Zoning Permit and Certificate of Use and Occupancy as regulated by
Sections 1901, 1902, and 1903 of this Ordinance.
2. The total area of all sides of any and all signs placed on, or facing towards, any one (1) street
frontage of any one (1) premises shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet aggregate except
in the case of a commercial or industrial building housing more than one (1) commercial or
industrial use.
3. In the case of a commercial or industrial building housing more than one (1) commercial or
industrial use, no more than One (1) Plaza Sign (as defined) shall face any one (1) street frontage
of any one (1) property. The area of said sign shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
a. In the case of a commercial or industrial building housing more than one (1) commercial
or industrial use, in addition to the above stated one (1) Plaza Sign, the following
regulations also apply:
i. If Free-Standing On-Premise Business Signs are erected, one (1) business sign
of no more than two (2) sides may be erected for each business/industrial use but
each On-Premise Business Sign may not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet.
ii. A Wall-Mounted On-Premise Business Sign may be erected for each
commercial, business, or industrial use located within that particular building;
and each Wall-Mounted On-Premise Business Sign may be up to fifty (50)
square feet in area provided that no such signs’ area shall equal more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total area of the wall to which it is attached.
The Wall-Mounted On-Premise Business Sign shall also be subject to Section
1507.H.6 and 7.
iii. Roof Signs are prohibited for any building housing more than one (1)
commercial or industrial use.
4. A Free-Standing Sign for a commercial or industrial business shall not be located within twenty
(20) feet of any lot line adjoining a property with an existing residential dwelling.
5. No portion of Free-Standing Sign shall be closer than ten (10’) feet to any street right-of-way or
property line.
6. The maximum elevation of Wall-Mounted Signs shall be equal to the highest elevation of the wall
to which they are attached.
7. No Wall-Mounted Sign permitted to be attached to a building face shall project more than twelve
inches (12”) from the building face to which it is attached. These signs shall be at least eight (8)
feet above the ground, as measured from the highest grade elevation under the sign to the lowest
part of the sign. Wall-Mounted signs that have the sign face perpendicular to the building face
99
may project from the face of a building perpendicularly for a distance of not more than four feet
(4’) provided that such signs are entirely located underneath a roof overhang or similar
architectural feature, and that such signs are no more than twelve (12) square feet in area on any
one (1) side, and that all such signs are at least eight feet (8’) above the ground as measured from
the highest grade elevation under the sign to the lowest part of the sign.
8. Only one Roof Sign is permitted per building which houses only one (1) commercial or industrial
uses, regardless of the number of other uses which may be permitted as per Section 1502 on the
premises.
9. No Roof Sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in area.
10. The height of a Roof Sign may not exceed the height of the highest part of the roof on which the
sign is erected. Roof signs erected on flat roofs may not exceed five (5) feet in height measured
from the highest architectural feature of the building.
11. In no case may the highest point of a Roof Sign be more than seventy (70) feet above the average
elevation of the ground immediately adjacent to the building on which it is erected.
12. No portion of a Roof Sign may project further than any roof overhang on which it is erected.
13. Portable Signs are permitted in the G-C and H-C Zoning Districts as regulated by Section 1507.
(I).
I. Portable, A-Frame, and Wheeled Signs are permitted in the Commercial Districts (G-C, H-C).
1. These signs are as defined in this Ordinance.
2. Portable Signs are a particular type of sign that has the characteristics of a temporary sign, but that
has been or may have been inappropriately used as a permanent sign. This subsection, therefore,
will clearly require that if a permittee desires to regularly display a sign for regularly changing
messages then, that the permittee be directed by the Zoning Officer to obtain a zoning permit for a
permanent sign which shall comply all of the requirements of this Ordinance.
3. A Portable Sign, including any such sign that may have been displayed prior to the adoption of
this Ordinance and which does not have a lawful permit, shall only be permitted if it meets all of
the following requirements:
a. The portable Sign must be placed upon the lot of a permitted principal commercial use.
b. Any and all portable signs shall have a maximum total area of forty (40) square feet with
a maximum of two (2) sides.
c. Portable Signs shall only be permitted with a maximum of one (1) such sign per principal
use and/or per lot, whichever is more restrictive.
d. Any and all Portable Signs shall require a Zoning Permit which shall state the dates
during which the sign may be displayed.
e. Any and all Portable Signs shall only be displayed on a lot for four (4) periods per
calendar year which shall not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days per period during a
calendar year. Failure to remove the sign after each thirty (30) day period shall constitute
a zoning violation.
100
f. Any and all Portable Signs shall not obstruct safe sight distance for any vehicles entering
or exiting the property containing such a sign and shall not be placed with the existing
street right-of-way.
g. Any and all Portable Signs shall not include flashing or blinking lights.
J. Off-Premise Signs (Including “Billboards” and “Advertising Signs”).
1. Off-Premise Signs are further defined as:
A sign which directs attention to an object, product, service, place, activity, person, institution,
organization, or business that is offered or located at a location other than the lot upon which the
sign is located. This definition includes signs commonly called “billboards” and “advertising
signs”.
2. Off-Premise Signs are controlled by this Ordinance for the following purposes: to prevent visual
pollution in the ESP Region; to protect property values; to prevent glare from said signs adversely
affecting adjacent property and streets; to protect the open space and natural character of areas of
the ESP Region planned to remain agricultural, woodland, or rural preservation areas; to avoid the
creation of additional visual distractions to motorists, especially along the busy arterial streets that
involve complex turning movements, congestion and numerous traffic hazards; recognize that this
ordinance allows every landowner a reasonable use for their land; and to avoid to the extent
possible the placement of off-premise signs that would have an unfair advantage over on-premise
signs in the competition for attention, as off-premise signs are typically placed higher and are
typically larger than on-premise signs.
a. An Off-Premise Sign is only permitted in the G-C, H-C, L-I, and G-I Zoning Districts
and any and all such signs shall require a Zoning Permit.
b. An Off-Premise Sign is only permitted within a maximum of two hundred (200’) feet of
an existing right-of-way of an arterial road and shall be placed a minimum of ten (10’)
feet from any lot line. Any off-premises sign shall be setback a minimum of twenty (20’)
feet from all existing and ultimate road rights-of-way. No off-premise sign shall be
located within two hundred (200’) feet of any existing residential dwelling unit.
c. No Off-Premise Sign shall be attached in any way to any other off-premise sign. Off-
Premise Signs shall have a maximum of two (2) sign faces.
d. The maximum area of each sign face of any and all types of Off-Premise Signs shall be
three hundred (300) square feet.
e. Any and all Off-Premise Signs erected after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be
separated by a minimum of one thousand (1,000’) linear feet from any other off-premise
sign, including signs on either side of a street and including any existing signs located in
other municipalities.
f. The maximum height of any Off-Premise Sign shall be fifty (50’) feet.
3. This Ordinance shall not require the removal of an existing, lawfully-placed, Off-Premise Sign
unless the Zoning Officer determines that any such sign is not in structurally sound condition.
4. This section applies to all types of Off-Premise Signs except as may be specifically provided for
elsewhere in this Ordinance.
101
5. Signs that are erected and maintained by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (Penn
DOT) are permitted by right in all Districts. Such signs that identify business services available at
an interchange are specifically encouraged as an appropriate and orderly means of providing
information without causing visual pollution or traffic hazards.
K. Abandoned or Outdated Signs.
1. Signs advertising a business or use no longer in existence (other than a sign relating to a building
that is clearly temporarily vacant and being offered for lease by new tenants or for purchase by new
owners) shall be removed within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the cessation of such
business operation or use.
Section 1508. Loading Areas. An All-Weather Surface (as defined in this Ordinance) for off-street
loading and unloading spaces, with proper access from a street, driveway or alley, shall be provided on any lot on
which a commercial or industrial use and/or business is hereafter erected or established. All such areas for the
loading and unloading of vehicles, and for the servicing of establishments by refuse collection, fuel delivery and
other such service vehicles, shall be of such size, design and arrangement that said areas may be used without
blocking or otherwise interfering with the use of automobile access ways, customer or employee parking facilities,
and pedestrian walk ways. Loading areas shall not be located within required front yards or within five (5) feet of
any side or rear lot line.
The number and size of loading spaces provided shall be appropriate for the use to be conducted on the premises.
At least one (1) loading space having a minimum area of seven hundred twenty (720) square feet and minimum
dimensions of twelve (12) feet by sixty (60) feet shall be provided for each use. When a zoning permit is applied
for, the application for the permit shall show all provisions for off-street loading and shall include supporting data
(data on number, frequency and size of vehicles which will use the loading facilities) which would assist the
Municipal Zoning Officer in determining any reduction in the number of loading spaces to be provided.
Section 1509. Off-Street Parking Requirements, Access Drives, Drive-Through Facilities
A. All regulations in this section must meet current Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
B. Off-Street parking facilities shall be provided and shall be increased in number whenever:
1. Any type of building is constructed or any type new land use is established upon any property
within the ESP Region.
2. The use of an existing building is changed to a use requiring more parking facilities.
3. An existing building or land use is altered so as to increase the amount of parking spaces required.
C. No areas included in the off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance shall be used for any purpose
other than parking of motor vehicles.
D. Parking spaces for residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use served and shall be located
behind the street right-of-way line. Parking spaces for other uses (e.g., permitted Home Occupation Uses)
associated with the same residential use shall be provided for on the same lot as the use being served or in
parking facilities within two hundred feet (200’) of the use, except in the case of a shopping center or
similar grouping of buildings on a lot, in which case all parking areas shall be provided within the lot
boundaries.
E. Parking in the W-P, EAP, A-P, R-1 and R-2 Districts is limited to those vehicles customarily used for noncommercial,
residential purposes except:
102
1. One (1) commercial motor vehicle may be parked upon a residential lot within the named districts,
provided that said vehicle is parked in a visually screened area and that said vehicle shall not be
left unattended if the vehicle itself and/or the equipment associated with the vehicle (e.g.,
refrigeration equipment) is running.
2. No boats, utility trailers, campers, travel trailers, tractors, or trailers from a tractor trailer truck
shall be stored or parked on a public or private street for more than twenty-four (24) hours within
the named districts unless said trailer or vehicle is stored off-street within a completely enclosed
building and that the vehicle and/or trailer is not allowed to be left unattended if the vehicle and/or
equipment associated with the vehicle is running.
F. All parking areas and access drives serving residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial uses shall be
(1) adequately drained, (2) permanently surfaced with an All-Weather surface (as defined in this
Ordinance) such as but not limited to, concrete, macadam, brick or other paving material, and (3)
maintained adequately. Gravel, stone and similar loose materials shall not be permitted to be used upon
any commercial, industrial, or institutional uses parking areas or access drivers but may be permitted for
residential uses at the discretion of the Zoning Officer.
G. Each parking space for residential, institutional, commercial, retail or industrial use shall have a minimum
area of two hundred (200) square feet and minimum dimensions of ten feet (10’) by twenty feet (20’). All
parallel parking spaces shall be at least ten feet (10) feet wide and twenty-two feet (22’) long. In addition,
appropriate driveways, aisles and maneuvering space shall be provided as necessary to permit safe and
convenient access to any and all of the areas provided for parking purposes. Proper access (including, but
not limited to, the required safe sight distance, gradient, surface, etc.) from a street, alley or driveway shall
be provided.
H. Joint parking facilities for two (2) or more uses may be established, provided that the number of spaces
provided is not less than the sum of the spaces required for each individual use.
I. All parking spaces and means of access, other than those relating to a dwelling, shall be adequately
illuminated during night hours of use. The illumination shall be designed and located so that the light
sources are shielded from adjoining properties and public and private streets. The illumination shall meet
the requirements of Section 1506 of this Ordinance.
J. All common parking areas and access drives serving commercial, retail, and industrial uses shall be graded
and located to provide convenient vehicular access and proper drainage. The maximum grade of any
parking area shall not exceed six percent (6%) and the maximum grade of any access drives shall not
exceed ten percent (10%). Surface water shall not discharge directly onto public streets, private streets, or
adjoining properties.
K. Any Off-street parking facilities which were in existence as of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance
shall not be subsequently reduced to a number of parking spaces less than that required under this
Ordinance for any new building or use.
L. The width of aisles in parking areas shall be no less than listed in the following table:
Aisle Width
Angle of Parking One-Way Two-Way
90° 20’ 24’
60° 18’ 20’
45° 15’ 20’
30° 12’ 20’
103
M. When the required number of parking spaces is computed and a fraction of a parking space results, any
fraction below one-fourth (1/4) may be disregarded and any fraction over one half (1/2) of a space shall
necessitate the provision of a full parking space.
N. Where parking requirements are determined by the number of permanent seats and only temporary seats
provided (e.g., a fire company’s social hall), the number of parking spaces to be provided for such a use
shall be based upon the capacity for the maximum number of temporary seats that could be used.
O. Parking areas shall be arranged so that no portion of any vehicle parked within a designated parking space
can extend over any property line of the lot on which it is parked.
P. Parking areas for non-residential uses which are designed to contain more than twenty (20) vehicles shall be
screened from the view of persons on any land zoned W-P, EAP, A-P, R-1, R-2, or R-3 which is adjacent to
the land on which the non-residential parking area is located. Any such screening shall meet the
requirements of the ESP Region Joint Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (ESP SALDO).
Q. Minimum Parking requirements:
Use Number of Off-Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus one (1) Off-Street Parking
Space for each
Residential Uses:
Single Family Detached 2 per dwelling unit
Single Family Semi-detached 2 per dwelling unit
Single Family Attached 2 per dwelling unit X Refer to Section 1602
Townhouse See Section 1602
Duplex See Section 1602
Apartment Building See Section 1603
Adaptive Re-Use See Section 1607
Residential Conversion See Section 1607
Boarding House See Section 1607
Group Care Facility See Section 1625
Home Occupation See Section 1601
Agricultural Uses:
Nursery/Greenhouse 4 minimum Employee
Family Farm Support Business 4 minimum Employee
Farm Stands 4 minimum Employee
Farm-related Business 4 minimum Employee
Vacation Farms See Section 1618
Institutional Uses
Places of Worship See Section 1630
Hospital, Healthcare Facility See Section 1628
Assisted Living Facility and/or
Life Care Facility; Retirement
Facility
1 per 4 beds plus 1.5 for each
independent dwelling unit
Employee
Child Day-care Facility See Section 1627 Employee
School, primary or secondary 1 per 4 students aged 16 or older Employee
104
Healthcare Services 5 per physician/dentist/health
professional
Employee
Utility Facility 1 per vehicle routinely needed to
service facility
Junior College, Community
College, College, University,
Technical School
1 per every 4 students of
building design (plus required
spaces for on-campus housing)
Employee
Library, Community Center or
Cultural Center
1 per 5 seats (or one per 250 sq.
ft. of floor area accessible to
patrons and/or users if seats are
not typically provided)
Employee
Treatment Center See Section 1629
Methadone Treatment Center See Section 1679
Commercial School 1 per every 4 students Employee
Day School 1 per every 4 students Employee
Boarding School 1 per every 4 students Employee
Hobby School 1 per student
Auditorium 1 per every 4 fixed seats
1 per ea. 100 sq. ft. of Employee
Assembly area or area
w/o fixed seats
Commercial Uses
Retail Uses
Auto Service Station or Repair
Garage
5 per repair/service bay and 1 per
fuel nozzle with such spaces
separated from access ways to
pumps
Employee; plus any parking
needed for a convenience store
under “retail sales”
Auto, Boat, Recreational Vehicle
or Mobile/Manufactured Home
Sales
1 per 15 vehicles, boats, RV’s or
Homes Displayed
Employee
Bed-and-Breakfast use See Section 1648
Car Wash Adequate waiting and drying
areas
Employee
Financial Institution (includes
bank)
1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
accessible to customers, plus
“office” parking for any
administrative offices
Employee
Funeral Home 1 per 5 seats in rooms intended to
be in use for visitors, counting
both permanent and temporary
seating
Employee
Barbershop/Beauty shop 1 per customer seat used for
haircutting/hair styling, hair
washing, manicuring or similar
work
Employee
Laundromats 1 per 3 washing machines
Hotel or Motel 1 per rental unit plus 1 per 4 seats
in any meeting room (plus any
required by any restaurant)
Employee
Antique store 1 per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area Employee
105
Tavern 1 per 30 sq. ft. gross floor area Employee
Convenience store 1 per 50 sq. ft. gross floor area Employee
Retail sales of furniture, lumber,
carpeting, bedding, floor covering
1 per 400 sq. ft. of customer floor
space
Employee
Retail sales uses other than above 1 per 200 sq. ft. of customer floor
space
Employee
Fitness/Health Center 1 per 100 sq. ft. net floor area Employee
Recreational Uses
Golf Course See Section 1665
Bowling Alley 4 per lane Employee
Swimming pool (non-household) 1 per 50 sq. ft. water surface Employee
Miniature golf 4 per hole Employee
Driving range 1 per tee Employee
Amusement Arcade 1 per 200 sq ft gross floor area 1 per each amusement device
Industrial Uses
All parking requirements based
on 1.5 per each employee on the
largest shift
Shift having the largest number
of employees
R. Drive-through facilities
1. Drive through facilities include lanes and canopies.
2. The proposed traffic flow and ingress-egress pathways shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent
streets.
3. On-lot traffic circulation and parking areas shall be clearly marked.
4. A drive-through use shall be designed with space for an adequate number of waiting vehicles
while avoiding conflicts with traffic onto, around and off the site. All drive-through facilities shall
be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrian traffic.
5. A drive-through lane or canopy situated adjacent to a residential property shall be no less than ten
(10) feet from the lot line with a buffer strip ten (10) feet in width and screening of at least six (6)
feet in height established between said canopy and the lot line.
6. No canopy shall be less than nine (9) feet above grade.
7. All signage, except for clearance, directional, and lane availability signs, is prohibited from
canopies.
S. Conditional Reduction of Parking Requirements
1. Under the Conditional Use Procedures Established in Section 2005 of this Ordinance, the
Governing Body may permit a conditional reduction of the number of parking spaces required by
this Ordinance; in individual cases, if in their sole discretion, the Governing Body believes that the
strict application of the parking requirements of this Ordinance could result in a land development
106
which would provide many more spaces than what maybe actually needed subject to the
following:
a. The design for the parcel of land in question shall show parking areas which provide the
total number of parking spaces required by this Ordinance and meet all the requirements
of this Ordinance. Those portions of parking spaces proposed for initial construction
shall be designated and their location is subject to the approval of the Governing Body.
b. Those portions of the parking areas which will not be initially constructed shall be
reserved for possible future construction of parking spaces and no other improvements
may be erected in the area designed for said “future parking”.
c. The landowner shall enter into a written agreement, satisfactory to the Governing Body,
that within eighteen (18) months after the issuance of the last Certificate of Use and
Occupancy on the tract the parking spaces not initially constructed shall be constructed at
the landowner’s expense should the Governing Body determine that the total number of
parking spaces required by this Ordinance are necessary to adequately serve the uses on
the lot. The landowner shall further enter into a written agreement to pay any costs
incurred by the Municipality in the undertaking of any studies to determine the adequacy
of parking facilities. If required by the Municipality, the landowner shall post a financial
guarantee, satisfactory to the Municipality, to cover the cost of additional parking
facilities which could be required by the Municipality and the cost of any studies
undertaken by the Municipality.
Section 1510. Front Yard Exceptions. When an unimproved lot is situated between two (2) improved
lots with front yard dimensions less than those required for the zoning district in which the unimproved lot is
located, the front yard required for the unimproved lot may be reduced to a depth equal to the average of the two (2)
adjoining lots; provided, however, that this provision shall only apply in such cases where the improved lots in
question were legally improved as of the effective date of this Ordinance. For the purpose of this section, an
unimproved lot shall be the same as a vacant lot and an improved lot shall be one on which a principal building has
been legally erected prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
Section 1511. Fences.
A. In all Districts, no fence, wall, or hedge may be erected or planted within the right-of-way lines of any
street nor may they encroach upon any street right-of-way at any time.
B. The maximum height of a fence placed along any boundary line of any residential property is six (6’) feet
and the maximum height of a fence placed along boundary line of any commercial, industrial, or
institutional (except for prisons or hospitals housing the criminally insane) is ten (10) feet.
C. A fence may be increased one (1’) foot in height for every five (5’) feet the fence is situated from a
property line, up to a maximum of fifteen (15) feet in height except for fences placed as backstops on
baseball and/or softball fields.
D. On a corner lot, no fence may be erected or altered which may cause danger to the drivers of the vehicles
on a public road by obscuring the drivers view at t he intersection.
Section 1512. Corner Lot Restrictions.
A. A “corner lot” is defined by this Ordinance as a lot abutting two or more intersecting public or private
streets, or at the point of abrupt change of direction of a single street (an interior angle of less than one
hundred thirty-five (135) degrees).
107
B. Any yard adjoining a street shall be designated the front yard and must meet the front yard requirements of
the applicable zoning district and the yard opposite that yard shall meet the side yard requirements of the
applicable zoning district. In the case of a building to be placed on a corner lot such that the front of the
building will not be parallel to a street line, yards shall be provided so that no portion of the building will
be placed closer to a street than the front yard requirement of the applicable zoning district and so that no
portion of the rear of the building will be placed closer to a lot line than the rear yard requirement of the
applicable zoning district, and so that no portion of a side of the building when placed closer to a lot line
than the side yard requirement of the applicable district..
C. On a corner lot, no wall, fence, or other structure may be erected or altered and no hedge, tree, shrub, or
other growth shall be planted or maintained in a manner which may cause danger to the drivers of motor
vehicles obscuring the driver’s view at the intersection.
D. Clear sight-triangles shall be provided at all street intersections. Within such triangle, no object shall be
permitted which obscures the vision of a motor vehicles’ operator above the height of two and one-half (2-
1/2’) feet and below ten (10’) feet, measured from the center line grade of intersecting streets. Clear sight
triangles shall be established from a distance of seventy-five (75’) feet from the point of intersection of the
center lines of the intersecting streets.
Section 1513. Slope Controls. The following controls shall apply in all zoning districts and in all areas of
a municipality where the slope of the land exceeds twenty-five percent (25%):
A. An Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control Plan shall be approved by the Schuylkill County
Conservation District prior to the establishment of any building, structure, or use.
B. The applicant shall provide the Municipality with report and/or plan prepared, signed, and sealed by a
Professional Engineer detailing the methods whereby any structural and foundation problems caused by
slope conditions will be overcome through the use of the Professional Engineers’ design including the
methods that will be used to adequately address stormwater runoff and erosion from this lot and its
improvements.
C. Prior to any alteration of the existing grades, Section 1513.A and 1513.B of this ordinance need to be
completed and approvals obtained. In addition, a grading plan shall be submitted by the Applicant’s
Engineer and shall be approved by the Municipal Engineer prior to commencement of any sort of
earthwork.
Section 1514. Conduct of Agricultural Activities in the ESP Region. Agricultural activities are
permitted by right to be conducted within the EAP, A-P, R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts within the ESP Region and
may be conducted even though those activities may create an annoyance or inconvenience to neighboring residential
uses due to sights, sounds, odors other conditions resulting from the conducting of said agricultural activities,
provided that, the agricultural activities are conducted in accordance with any and all the requirements of the local,
state and federal agencies having jurisdiction over such agricultural activities.
Section 1515 through 1525 (Reserved)
Section 1526. Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses – Residential.
A. General.
1. No residential accessory building or structure shall be permitted to be erected within any required
front or side yard, however, said structures maybe erected within ten feet (10’) of the rear lot line.
In instances where there are adjoining residential properties where accessory buildings or
structures were legally erected prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, that do not conform to
108
this requirement; then, the Zoning Officer shall allow the applicants proposed accessory building
to match the setback distances that said adjoining properties accessory buildings have.
2. No accessory uses shall be permitted which will, in the opinion of the Municipal Governing Body,
create a public nuisance or interfere with the use of adjacent lots.
3. The maximum height of any accessory building or structure shall be twenty five (25) feet.
4. The minimum distance between any accessory buildings or structures shall be five (5) feet and the
minimum distance between any accessory building or structure and a principal building shall be
ten (10) feet except where a deck is attached to both a house and a swimming pool.
5. Residential accessory buildings and residential accessory structures include, but are not limited to,
pet animal housing structures, detached garages, swimming pools, private greenhouses,
utility/storage sheds, tennis and basketball courts, outdoor skate park, handball court, outdoor
roller and ice skating rinks, and/or any other outdoor recreational buildings or structures erected
for the use of the resident and occasional guest.
6. The building area of any accessory buildings or structures shall be limited to a maximum of
sixteen hundred (1,600) square feet.
7. No permanent accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the
commencement of construction of the principal building to which said structure is accessory to.
B. Use Regulations.
1. Household or Private Swimming Pool. Permanent swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed
with a permanent barrier or fence not less than four (4) feet in height. Any such fences shall have
no opening with a dimension greater than four (4) inches on a side (or a diameter in the case of
round openings). Walls of buildings may serve in place of fence, however, if said wall contains
any doors or windows opening into the swimming pool area, they must be kept locked when the
pool is not in use and/or whenever the pool is in use without adult supervision. Where such pools
are of the type having above ground construction, that portion of the pool wall extending above
the ground may be included as part of the barrier or fence. Fences shall have a gate which can be
securely locked. Above ground pools shall have a ladder or stairway which can be removed or
rendered unusable and the entrance to the pool shall be capable of being securely closed to a
height of four (4) feet.
2. Detached Garages.
a. The maximum height shall be twenty five (25) feet.
b. No temporary structure shall be permitted.
c. Detached garages are subject to Section 1526.A of this Ordinance.
3. Apartment and Townhouse Accessory Uses shall be restricted to uses designed for residents of the
apartment and townhouse units and may include such uses as areas for washing machines and
dryers and vending machines; lockers and storage areas; recreational rooms, areas and lounges;
swimming pools and outdoor recreational areas. One (1) office per development for the purposes
of administering any renting dwelling units may be established. One (1) “sample” apartment or
townhouse for display purposes shall be permitted for each type of dwelling unit to be constructed.
109
4. Tennis Courts, basketball courts, skateboard apparatus and/or parks, outdoor roller and/or ice
hockey rinks, and/or similar courts used for recreational activities shall not extend into any yard.
Tennis courts shall have permanent fences at least ten feet (10’) in height behind each baseline,
extending at least the full width of the playing area.
5. Patios, Paved Terraces, as well as Decks and Open Porches (not more than fourteen (14) feet in
height) as regulated in Section 1527 of this Ordinance.
6. Animal Structures for pets (not livestock) shall be located no closer than ten feet (10’) to a rear lot
line or side lot line.
7. A porte-cochere or carport as regulated in Section 1527 of this Ordinance.
8. Satellite Dishes and Antennas
a. The unique shape, reception, and height requirements of standard antennas and satellite
antennas present an array of concerns relating to the health, safety, and aesthetic
integrity of a municipality; therefore it is the intent of this subsection to impose
reasonable regulations concerning such devices without infringing upon rights granted
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). If an applicant can demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that such rights would be violated due to unique
site constraints or other such conditions; then the applicant shall be exempt from only
those requirements which create such hardships. The following requirements shall
apply to all applicable antennas:
i. No more than one satellite dish antenna shall be permitted on a property.
Additionally, standard antennas shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height as
measured from the top of the antenna to the ground level.
ii. The diameter of the satellite dish shall not exceed twelve (12) feet.
iii. No portion of the satellite dish antenna shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
iv. Satellite dish antennas shall be set back from all adjacent properties a minimum
of ten (10) feet or a distance equal to the height of the satellite dish antenna,
whichever is greater. Standard antennas shall be set back the height of the
standard antenna.
v. Satellite dish antennas shall be surrounded by a complete visual barrier
composed of evergreen plantings which are at least four feet in height when
planted on site and which will achieve a mature height sufficient to screen the
entire antenna from the ground floor elevations of adjoining properties. If such
screening will impair the reception of the antenna, the applicant shall
demonstrate that such is the case and shall install evergreen plantings which,
when mature, will be maintained at a height which is within two feet of the
determined height of interference. Screening must be planted within six (6)
months of the antenna installation date.
vi. All satellite dish antennas shall be properly anchored and installed to resist a
minimum wind load of thirty (30) pounds per square foot of projected horizontal
area.
vii. A zoning permit shall be obtained prior to the installation of a satellite dish
antenna or standard antennas. The permit application shall demonstrate
compliance with this subsection and all other municipal regulations.
110
viii. Satellite dishes and Antennas shall not exceed the height provided by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
ix. This subsection does not include the term “Telecommunications Antenna” as
defined in this Ordinance.
9. Utility Buildings
a. No utility building shall be erected within any front yard.
b. The combined floor area of all utility buildings shall not exceed two hundred (200) square
feet of floor area and no utility building shall exceed ten (10) feet in height, excluding
ornamentation.
c. No utility building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any rear or side property
lines.
d. No outdoor storage of any materials shall be permitted between the utility building and
the property line.
e. No utility building shall be placed within any utility easements, street rights-of-way, or
other easement granting rights of ingress, egress, and regress across a property.
10. Yard and Garage Sales
a. Yard and garage sales are permitted as a residential accessory use, and must be
permitted.
b. Yard and garage sales in residential zones shall not exceed one (1) in any three (3) month
period nor exceed a total of four (4) sales annually per property.
c. Properties where sales are held more frequently than once per three (3) month period or
in excess of four (4) per year shall be deemed commercial uses thereby requiring Zoning
Hearing Board approval.
d. Each yard and garage sale may not extend beyond a three (3) consecutive day period.
e. Hours of operation shall be between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
f. At no time shall any part of the sale activity obstruct the public right of way.
g. A yard and garage sale shall not include wholesale sales or sales of new merchandise of
a type typically found in retail stores.
h. No outdoor storage shall be permitted when the sale is not in operation.
i. Signs are limited to one (1) On-Premise Sign of four (4) square feet. Any signs erected
may be erected one (1) day prior to the event, and shall be removed at the end of the day
the event occurs.
11. Keeping of Pets
a. This is a permitted accessory use in all zoning districts.
111
b. The keeping of five (5) or more dogs; or five (5) or more cats; or having the production
of more than two (2) litters per year of either dogs or cats shall be considered “breeding”
which is considered an operation of a “Kennel”, and shall be regulated as such, at a
minimum, through this Zoning Ordinance.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person occupying any residential lot to keep any “exotic
wildlife” as defined by the Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife Code, regardless of whether
or not an exotic wildlife possession permit has been issued.
d. It shall be unlawful or any person occupying any residential lot to keep a venomous or
poisonous animal.
Section 1527. Projections Into Yards – Residential Uses.
A. The following projections shall be permitted in required yards as follows:
1. Lamp posts, mailboxes, walkways, driveways, (to the extent regulated within any municipal
ordinance), retaining walls, fences, and steps may be allowed in all yards.
2. Patios, Paved Terraces, as well as Decks and Open Porches (not more than fourteen (14) feet in
height) shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any rear or side property line, except a
property line which is an extension of a party wall provided that it shall not extend that a side yard
more than one-half (1/2) the required side yards; and shall not project further than ten feet (10)
into any required front yard, provided that it shall not extend into such yard more than one-half
(1/2) the required front yard.
3. A platform or landing place, not covered by a roof, canopy or trellis, which does not extend above
the level of the first floor of the building may be erected to extend into a required yard a distance
of not more than ten (10) feet, provided that it shall not extend into such yard more than one-half
(1/2) the required depth or width of the yard.
4. A porte-cochere or carport may be erected over a driveway in a required side yard, provided that
such structure is:
a. Not more than fourteen (14) feet in height and twenty (20) feet in length.
b. Entirely open on at least three sides, exclusive of the necessary supporting columns and
customary architectural features.
c. At least ten (10) feet from the side lot line.
5. A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster of a building may project not more than eighteen (18)
inches into a required yard.
6. Open, unenclosed fire escapes, steps, bay windows and balconies may project no more than three
(3) feet into a required yard.
7. Swimming pools may be placed within ten (10) feet of any side or rear property line.
8. Fences and Walls which are part of landscaping shall be exempt from building setback line and
yard requirements but, shall not placed within any public or private street right-of-way.
Section 1528 through 1550 (Reserved)
112
Section 1551. Commercial, Retail and Industrial Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses.
A. General. Unless stated elsewhere in this Section or elsewhere in this Ordinance, no accessory building or
structure shall be located within any required front or side yard or within ten feet (10’) of the rear lot line.
B. Use Regulations
1. Industrial Storage Areas.
a. All such facilities shall be located in an area which has direct access to a street, driveway,
or alley.
b. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, flammable or explosive materials, and raw
materials shall be enclosed by a fence at least ten (10) feet high to prevent the
unauthorized access of the general public into said facility.
c. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they
may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
d. All material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard
or which may be edible or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be permitted
to be stored outdoors if said materials are kept in closed, sealed containers.
e. No materials or wastes of any form may be stored in any floodway, wetland, or
floodplain area.
2. Commercial and Retail Storage Areas
a. All facilities shall be located in an area which has direct access to a street, driveway, or
alley.
b. No vehicles, equipment, or merchandise shall be permitted to be parked, stored or
displayed within either the legal or the ultimate right-of-way of any public or private
street or within any areas intended for pedestrian use.
c. All storage areas shall be permitted only at the rear of buildings and shall be set back at
least twenty (20) feet from property boundaries.
d. All storage areas shall be screened from public view by an opaque fence or wall at least
six (6) feet and no more than twelve (12) feet high in height. Stored materials may not
exceed the height of the fence.
e. A screen buffer at least fifteen (15) feet wide, designed according to the requirements of
the ESP Region Joint Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (ESP SALDO),
shall be provided along all property lines of any adjacent residential properties.
3. Outdoor Display
a. Unless specifically allowed in the G-I District, there is to be no outdoor display of goods,
merchandise or vehicles in the G-I District.
b. The following commercial and retail uses may display vehicles, goods, or merchandise in
front yards in the H-C Zoning District:
i. Garden supply center, nursery, or florist.
113
ii. Produce shop.
iii. Auto dealership.
iv. Building materials and home equipment supplies.
c. Displayed items may not be permanently affixed in front yards.
d. Outdoor display areas may not encroach upon any required parking areas.
e. Outdoor display areas may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the required front yard area.
f. Outdoor display areas shall be considered to be sales floor area for the purpose of
computing parking requirements.
g. Outdoor parking areas shall be separated from the legal and, if established by the
Municipality, the ultimate right-of-way of any street by a twenty-foot (20’) wide
landscaped buffer, which shall be planted in grass, ground cover or low height (less than
12 inches) shrubs.
4. Refuse Areas and Collection Facilities
a. No refuse areas or collection facilities shall be permitted within any required front, side,
or rear yard.
b. All commercial and retail uses shall provide for storage of refuse either inside the
building(s) or within an outdoor area enclosed by walls or opaque fencing at least six (6)
feet and no more than twelve (12) feet high. Refuse shall be kept within one or more
container(s) having rodent proof lids said container(s) shall not exceed six (6) feet in
height.
c. Facilities associated with commercial or retail use shall be architecturally compatible
with the building(s).
d. Walls or fencing in the industrial districts shall be designed to shield the refuse facilities
from direct view from adjacent properties or to a height of a least six (6) feet whichever
is greater.
e. Facilities shall be designed in a manner which can accommodate large collection trucks
and shall be large enough to accommodate containers for recyclable materials as well.
f. Landscaping is required around these facilities in compliance with the requirements of
the ESP Region Joint Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (ESP SALDO).
g. Refuse facilities, attached to or within buildings, shall be subject to the same building
setbacks as the buildings themselves.
5. Living Accommodations for Caretakers. Living quarters, having a maximum of 1,000 square feet
of gross floor space, shall be permitted for proprietors and for no more than two (2) persons at
least one (1) of whom shall be employed by the business located upon the lot as a watchman or
caretaker.
6. Restaurants, Cafeterias, and Recreational Facilities shall be permitted for the use of employees
only, unless they are permitted as principal uses in the district in which they are constructed; then,
said facilities could be used by other persons as well.
114
7. Awnings and canopies are subject to the following:
a. The awnings or canopies shall be constructed primarily of fabric (such as canvas) or
similar material.
b. The awnings or canopies shall be maintained in good condition.
c. The awnings or canopies shall not be enclosed on the front or sides.
d. The awnings or canopies shall not extend into a street right-or-way; except that canopies
covering a walkway to a main entrance of a principal apartment, institutional or
commercial building may have a maximum canopy width of ten (10) feet and may extend
to within one foot of the curb.
e. The canopies or awnings shall meet the requirements of any municipal building code as
applicable.
f. The awnings or canopies shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle movement.
Section 1552. Highway Frontage Development in Commercial and Industrial Districts.
A. All areas used for off-street parking, off-street unloading and loading, and the storage or movement of
motor vehicles shall be physically separated from public or private streets or highways by a raised curb,
planting strip, or other suitable barrier against un-channeled motor vehicle entrance or exit; except for
necessary access ways or access roads which supply entrance to and egress from such parking, loading or
storage area.
Along Arterial Highways and Major Collectors, as classified in the ESP Region’s Joint Comprehensive
Plan, each use with less than one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a public or an approved private street
shall not have more than one (1) access way to each such street.
B. In no case shall a use with less then one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a public or an approved private
street have more than two (2) access ways to any such street. No use with one hundred (100) feet or more
frontages shall have more then two (2) access ways to any one (1) street for each three hundred (300) feet
of frontage.
C. The width, excluding radii, of entrances to and exits from parking areas, measured at the street line shall
conform to the following:
1. Width of entrances/exits of parking areas:
Width in Feet
Minimum Maximum
One Way 18 36
Two Way 36 50
2. Each travel lane provided shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width.
3. Each parking space provided shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length.
4. The radius of the edge of the driveway apron shall be at least twenty feet (20) feet and no more than
forty-five feet (45) feet.
115
D. The location and width of exit and entrance driveways shall be planned to interfere as little as possible with
the use of adjacent property and with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on adjacent sidewalks and streets.
Access driveways shall not be located in such a manner that they will cause any undue traffic congestion on
any adjoining streets. The center line of an access driveway to any public or an approved private street
shall be located at least eighty (80) feet from the intersection of any street cart way lines, except in the case
of a street intersecting the road which the driveway intersects directly opposite from said driveway.
Section 1553. Environmental Performance Standards for Industrial Districts.
All permitted uses within the ESA Region shall comply with these standards wherever applicable:
A. Air pollution controls. All uses shall comply with the standards of the Air Pollution Control Act, 35 P.S.
§4001 through 4015, as amended, and the following standards:
1. Visible emissions. Visible air contaminants shall not by emitted in such a manner that the opacity
of the emissions is equal to or greater than 20% for a period or periods aggregating more than
three minutes in any one hour, or equal to or greater than 60% at any time, and shall comply with
Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Chapter 127A (7), or its most recent update.
2. Particulate, vaporous and gaseous emissions. No person shall cause, suffer, or permit the emission
of fugitive particulate, vaporous, or gaseous matter from any source in such a manner that the
emission is visible or detectable outside the property of the person where the source is being
generated.
3. Hazardous air emission. All emissions shall comply with National Emissions Standards for
Hazardous Air Pollutants promulgated by the United States Environmental protection Agency
under the Federal Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7412) as promulgated in 40 CFR 61, or its most
recent update.
4. Odor
a. No person shall cause, suffer, or permit the emission into the outdoor atmosphere of any
malodorous air contaminants from any source in such a manner that the malodors are
detectable outside the property of the person where the source is being generated.
b. The prohibition on odors shall not apply to odor emissions arising from a property being
legally used for agricultural activities.
c. Any person who causes an odor emission shall be required to alter their operations in
such a manner that the escaping odors are eliminated. Backup odor reduction equipment
shall be maintained to support any primary odor reduction equipment used to control
odors.
B. Noise control.
1. No use shall generate a sound level exceeding the maximum limits established in the following
table as measured at the specified locations:
Location Receiving
The Noise
Hours of the Day Maximum Sound Level in (A)
Weighted Decibels
At a lot line of a residential use in
a residential district or an
institutional use
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
67 dB(A)
57 dB(A)
At a lot line of an industrial use in
an industrial district
All hours 72 dB(A)
116
At any other lot line of a lot All hours 69 dB(A)
2. To measure the above noise levels, a sound level meter shall be used that is capable of measuring
A-weighted decibels and that shall have been designed in a manner consistent with applicable
standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or other similar standards
organization.
C. Vibration control. No vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling or otherwise is
perceptible without instruments shall be permitted at any point beyond the lot line.
D. Glare or heat control Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosed
building or behind a solid fence in such manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point beyond
the lot lines.
E. Control of radioactivity or electrical disturbance.
1. There shall be no activities which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity. There shall be no
electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the
operation of any equipment located beyond the boundary line of the property which is producing
said disturbance.
2. No electromagnetic radiation shall be radiated that does not comply with the regulation of the FCC
(Federal Communication Commission) or which interferes in any perceptible way with radio or
television reception or with the operation of any other electronic equipment.
F. Flammable and explosive hazards. Flammable and explosive materials shall be stored, used, and
transported in accordance with the applicable state and federal regulations regarding such materials.
G. Outdoor storage.
1. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, flammable or explosive materials, and similarly dangerous
materials shall be enclosed by a fence at least ten (10) feet in height and of sturdy enough
construction to adequately prevent the access of the general public to said facility.
2. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be
transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
3. All material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which
may be edible or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insect shall only be permitted to be stored
outdoors in closed, sealed containers.
4. No materials or wastes of any form may be stored in any flooding, wetland or floodplain area.
H. Waste disposal. No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any treated or untreated sewage
except as shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the
Municipality’s Sewage Enforcement Officer, as appropriate; nor shall industrial wastes be stored,
discharged, incinerated, or otherwise disposed of except in strict conformance with the applicable local,
state and federal regulations regarding solid and hazardous wastes.
I. Electrical power. Every use shall be designed and operated so that the service lines, and related
paraphernalia., shall conform to the most acceptable safety requirements recognized by the Pennsylvania
Bureau of Labor and Industry, and shall be so constructed, installed, etc., as to be an integral part of the
architectural features of the plant or, if visible from abutting residential properties, shall be concealed in
accordance with the landscaping requirements contained within this Ordinance and the ESP SALDO.
117
J. Public water or sewer service. Industrial uses shall be served by public water and/or sewer, where
available.
Section 1554 through 1599 (Reserved)
118
CHAPTER XVI. SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS
Section 1600 (Reserved)
Section 1601. Home Occupations; No-impact Home-based Business
A. Home Occupations
1. Home Occupations shall only be permitted by Special Exception and shall only be practiced in a
dwelling unit. Only a resident(s) of the dwelling unit may practice a home occupation carried on in
a dwelling unit. This resident(s) shall be the sole practitioner of the home occupation. Home
occupations shall include, but not be limited to, the office of a doctor of medicine, surgeon, dentist,
architect, lawyer, accountant, insurance agent, real estate broker, tax collector, engineer, music or
voice instructor (if limited to a single pupil at a time), artisan, craftsman, computer programmer,
web-site designer, computer consultant, barber, beautician, dressmaker, milliner, tailor or seamstress
shall be deemed to be a “home occupation”, provided that the principal person(s) so employed is a
resident(s) of the dwelling.
2. No accessory buildings or structures shall be constructed for the sole purpose of housing a home
occupation.
3. All home occupations shall require a Zoning Permit and a Certificate of Use and Occupancy as
regulated by Sections 1902, 1903, and 1904 of this Ordinance.
4. Not more than one (1) person, whether paid or unpaid, may be employed besides the sole
practitioner(s) of the home occupation to provide secretarial, clerical or other similar assistance.
5. Such occupations shall be incidental or secondary to the use of the property as a residence and are
limited to those occupations customarily conducted within a dwelling unit. The home occupation
use shall not change the character of the property as a residence.
6. No display of products shall be visible from adjoining properties or streets.
7. There shall be no outside advertising other than a single (1) one-sided or two-sided sign having no
more than two (2) square feet of area on each side.
8. None of the goods available for retail sale shall be fireworks, explosives, or other hazardous
materials or substances.
9. No noise, odor, dust, vibration, electromagnetic interference, smoke, heat, or glare shall be
perceptible at or beyond the lot boundaries.
10. The use shall be conducted indoors. No storage of materials or products shall be permitted outside
of the home.
11. Not more than the equivalent of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total gross floor area of the
existing dwelling unit shall be used for the purpose of a home occupation.
12. A home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner that is perceptible to other residents between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
13. Any need for parking generated by the residence and by the home occupation shall be met off-street
on the lot on which the home occupation is carried out and shall be provided behind the building
119
setback line. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be required in addition to two (2)
off-street parking spaces for the residence.
14. The use shall not require delivery by tractor-trailer trucks.
15. No more than one (1) home occupation may be practiced on any one (1) premise.
16. The Zoning Hearing Board may deny a home occupation application, or limit its intensity through
conditions, if the Board determines the use would be too intense for the proposed location. In
making such determination, the Board shall review the anticipated traffic volume, the types of
operations involved and related nuisances, the amount of off-street and on-street parking that is
available, the density of the neighborhood, whether the use would be adjacent to another dwelling,
and setbacks from other dwellings.
B. No-impact Home-based Business
1. A “No-impact Home-based Business” is a business or commercial activity administered or
conducted as an accessory use in a residence, and primary which is clearly secondary to the use as a
residential dwelling and which involves neither, customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular
or pedestrian nor, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those
normally associated with residential use. The business or commercial activity shall satisfy the
following requirements:
a. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and
surrounding residential uses.
b. The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the
dwelling.
c. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a
substantial nature.
d. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use including, but not limited to, offstreet
parking (beyond what is required by Ordinance for a residential use) signs or lights.
e. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference, including any interference with
radio, television, or telephone reception in the residential neighborhood.
f. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge in volume or
type beyond that which is normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
g. The business activity shall be conducted only within the existing residential dwelling unit
and shall not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
h. The business shall not involve any illegal activity.
2. The permitting of any No-impact Home-based Business by any municipality shall not supersede any
deed restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the use of land, nor any master deed, by law or
other document applicable to a common interest ownership community.
Section 1602. Townhouses; Duplexes; Single Family Attached Dwellings
A. Townhouses regulations (see definition in Section 201):
1. Maximum number of townhouses permitted in one row is Eight (8) townhouses.
2. Minimum distance between townhouse buildings and another residential building is Fifty (50)
feet.
3. Minimum distance between townhouses and dwellings not within the same row of townhouses is
Fifty (50) feet.
120
4. Minimum open space area for townhouse developments is Ten percent (10%) of the Lot Area.
5. Maximum height of any townhouse, duplex of other SFAD is Forty (40) feet.
6. Whenever a side or rear yard of a townhouse and/or condominium
development adjoins an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, AP, EAP, and W-P
district, vegetation which shall serve as an appropriate screen shall be
placed within the side and/or rear yard as specified in the ESP SALDO.
7. No townhouse, duplex, or similar single family attached dwelling shall be located closer than
Fifteen (15) feet to any driveway or parking area.
8. All dead-end parking lots shall provide adequate areas for which cars parked in the end stalls of
the lots to back into.
9. No parking area or driveway may be located within Twenty-five (25) feet of the exterior boundary
lines of the development.
10. Parking areas shall not be designed or located as to require or encourage cars to back into a public
or private street in order to leave the lot.
11. Entrance and exit ways to parking areas shall have a minimum width of Twelve (12) feet for each
lane of traffic entering or leaving the area.
12. The connection of a townhouse development to a public or private sewerage system and a public
or private water system is required.
13. Minimum Lot Size is Five (5) acres.
14. Maximum Density without the purchase of TDR’s is ten (10) units per acre.
15. Maximum Density with the purchase of TDR’s is twelve (12) units to the acre.
B. Townhouse Accessory Uses – shall be restricted to uses designed for residents of the townhouse units and
may include such uses as areas for washing machines and dryers and vending machines; lockers and
storage areas; recreational rooms, areas and lounges; swimming pools and outdoor recreational areas. One
(1) office per project for the purposes of administering the townhouses may be established. One (1)
“sample” townhouse for display purposes shall be permitted for each type of dwelling unit to be
constructed.
C. Duplex regulations (see definition in Section 201):
1. A “Duplex” is a two-family detached building having two (2) dwelling units one above the other,
being fully separated by a horizontal floor and where each dwelling unit has its own separate
access.
2. For purposes of this Ordinance, a “duplex” is a structure erected after the effective date of this
Ordinance which is expressly built as a duplex as defined in Section 201. The conversion of a
single family detached dwelling into a duplex- like structure is a “Residential Conversion” as
defined in Section 201 and is further regulated within this Ordinance.
3. The connection of a duplex development to a public or private sewerage system and public or
private water system is required.
121
4. Duplex shall mimic single family detached dwellings in appearance to the extent possible when
viewed from the street.
5. Entrance for the first floor shall be through the front wall and entrance for the second floor shall be
from the side or rear wall.
6. The lot area per dwelling unit is that which is required for the zoning district in which the duplex
is located.
7. Parking: Four (4) off-street parking spaces per each Duplex.
8. Minimum Lot Size is Five (5) acres.
9. Maximum Density without the purchase of TDR’s is Ten (10) units per acre.
10. Maximum Density with purchase of TDR is Twelve (12) units per acre.
Section 1603. Apartment Buildings
A. Medium Density Apartment Buildings (see definition in Section 201):
1. Minimum Lot Size is one (1) acre.
2. Minimum Lot Width is one hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Front Yard is seventy-five (75) feet (50 feet of which may be used for parking with a
required 10 feet, starting at the right of way line, to be used for a planting strip).
4. Minimum Side Yard is twenty (20) feet (with a 10 foot planted strip at the property line).
5. Minimum Rear Yard is fifty (50) feet (with a 10 foot planting strip at the property line).
6. Minimum Apartment Size: is five hundred (500) square feet for each (1) bedroom apartment (with
an additional 120 square feet per each additional bedroom).
7. Minimum Spacing between apartment Buildings is twenty five (25) feet.
8. Maximum Building Height is forty-eight (48) feet.
9. Maximum Impervious Surface is eighty percent (80%) of Lot Area.
10. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces:
a. 2 per unit for 1 to 2 bedroom apartments.
b. 3 per unit for 3 bedrooms or more apartments.
11. A minimum of one (1) off-street loading space for each apartment building shall be provided.
12. Maximum Density without purchase of TDR’s is twelve (12) apt. units per acre.
13. Maximum Density with purchase of TDR’s is eighteen (18) apt. units per acre.
14. The connection of any apartment development to both a public, or private, sewerage system and a
public, or private, water supply system is required.
122
B. High Density Apartment Buildings (see definition in Section 201):
1. Minimum Lot Size is two (2) acres.
2. Minimum Lot Width is one hundred fifty (150) feet.
3. Minimum Front Yard is seventy-five (75) feet (50 feet of which may be used for parking with a
required 10 feet starting at the right of way line, to be used for a planting strip).
4. Minimum Side Yard is twenty (20) feet (with a 10 foot planting strip).
5. Minimum Rear Yard is fifty (50) feet (with a 10 foot planting strip).
6. Maximum Building Height is sixty five (65) feet.
7. Maximum Impervious Surface is eighty percent (80%) of Lot Size.
8. Minimum Apartment Size: is five hundred (500) square feet for one (1) bedroom apartment (with
an additional 120 square feet for each additional bedroom)
9. Minimum Spacing between Buildings is twenty five (25) feet.
10. Minimum number of off-street spaces:
a. 2 per unit for 1 to 2 bedroom apartments.
b. 3 per unit for 3 bedrooms or more apartments.
11. A minimum of one (1) off-street loading space for each apartment building shall be provided.
12. Maximum Density without purchase of TDR’s is eighteen (18) apt. units per acre.
13. Maximum Density with purchase of TDR’s is twenty four (24) apt. units per acre.
14. The connection of any apartment development to both a public, or private, sewerage system and a
public, or private, water supply system is required.
C. Apartment Building Accessory Uses – Shall be restricted to uses designed for residents of the apartment
units and may include such uses as areas for washing machines and dryers and vending machines; lockers
and storage areas; recreational rooms, areas and lounges and swimming pools and outdoor recreational
areas. One (1) office for the purposes of administering and renting dwelling units may be established. One
(1) “sample” apartment for display purposes shall be permitted for each type of dwelling unit to be
constructed.
Section 1604. Planned Residential Development
A. The minimum amount of land in the development shall be at least twenty-five (25) acres.
B. The development shall be served by public or private sewage disposal and water supply facilities.
C. The overall density of the development shall not exceed twelve (12) dwelling units per acre.
D. Permitted uses include single family detached dwellings, single family semi-detached dwellings,
townhouses, and accessory uses thereto.
E. Not less than twenty percent (20%) of the gross area to be developed shall be permanently set aside for
123
non-commercial common open space purposes such as recreation or conservation of natural features.
These non-commercial open space areas shall be suitable by size, surface conditions, shape, and location
for the designated purpose and contain no structure or parking facility except as related to and incidental to
open space uses. Common open spaces shall not include land included within street right-of-ways nor shall
they include required open areas between buildings or between buildings and street right-of-ways,
driveways, parking areas, and property boundary lines. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the minimum
required common open space shall be land with slope of over fifteen percent and/or land with a developed
and equipped shall be submitted to the municipality for approval prior to the approval of any plan.
1. Common open space areas shall be readily accessible to residents of the development, but shall be
so located that they can be reached and used safely without undue traffic or other hazards.
2. Written agreements satisfactory to and approved by the municipality shall be made for the
perpetual preservation and maintenance of the common open space areas.
3. Common open space shall not be used for stormwater detention or retention unless approval is
given by the Municipality.
F. A system for pedestrian circulation within the tract shall be provided. This system shall consist of a series
of walkways four feet in width and shall provide access to community facilities and recreation areas,
though they shall also be designed to provide privacy for dwelling units.
G. The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
H. The maximum permitted total impervious coverage shall be seventy percent (70%) of the tract area.
I. No more than fifteen percent (15%) of those portions of the tract with a slope of between fifteen (15) and
twenty-five percent (25%) shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
J. No one dwelling type, as listed in Section 702, shall comprise more than sixty-five percent (65%) of the
total number of dwelling units within the development.
1. Areas designated for single family detached and single family semi-detached with two bedroom
dwelling units shall not be developed to exceed a density of ten (10) dwelling units per acre.
Areas designated for single family detached and single family semi-detached with three or more
bedroom shall not be developed to exceed a density of eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
2. When townhouses with varying numbers of bedrooms are mixed within areas, there must be at
least 1800 square feet of land provided for each dwelling unit with two bedrooms; and at least
2400 square feet of land provided for each dwelling unit with three or more bedrooms.
K. The maximum length of a townhouse grouping, or row, shall be 195 feet.
L. The number of townhouses within a continuous grouping shall not exceed eight (8). No more than two (2)
contiguous townhouses shall have the same front setback and the variations in front setback shall be at least
four (4) feet.
M. No townhouse shall be located within fifty (50) feet of a property line of the development.
N. No townhouse shall be located within fifty (50) feet of another dwelling.
O. A townhouse shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any dwelling which is not in the same continuous
grouping of townhouses.
P. The minimum building setback line for a townhouse shall be twenty (20) feet.
124
Q. In the case of townhouses for sale where the sale of land with the townhouse will not be limited to the land
actually covered by the townhouse, the following regulations shall apply to the townhouse lot:
1-2 BR 2-4 BR
1. Minimum Lot Width 18 feet 24 feet
2. Minimum Lot Size 1800 sq. ft. 2400 sq. ft.
3. Minimum Rear Yard 25 feet 25 feet
4. Minimum Side Yard
(end of row) 20 feet 20 feet
5. Minimum Building Setback 20 feet 20 feet
6. Maximum Impervious Coverage 70 % 70 %
R. Requirements for single family detached and single family semi-detached dwellings shall be as follows:
Single Family Single Family
Detached Semi-Detached
1. Minimum Lot Size 7,500 sq. ft. 2,500 sq. ft.
2. Minimum Lot Width
At Street Line 50 feet 50 feet
At Building Setback Line 70 feet 70 feet
3. Minimum Building Setback 25 feet 25 feet
4. Minimum Rear yard 25 feet 25 feet
5. Minimum Side yard
Total 16 feet 12 feet
One Side 8 feet 6 feet
6. Maximum Impervious Coverage 70 % 70 %
S. Any “Community Refuse Stations” shall be suitably screened and placed in locations which are convenient
for collection removal and not offensive to the occupants of dwelling units.
T. Adequate storage capacity shall be provided within containers at each “community refuse station” to
accommodate the projected solid waste volumes to be stored at that station.
U. Adequate lighting shall be provided to outdoor areas used by occupants after dark, including parking areas
and open space and recreation areas. Appropriate lighting fixtures must be provided for walkways.
Lighting should be located to avoid shining directly into habitable room windows and into private outdoor
open spaces associated with dwelling units. Number, type, and illumination standards shall conform to the
specifications published by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America and shall meet the
standards of the ESP SALDO.
V. Existing trees shall be preserved whenever possible and desirable. The location of trees must be considered
when planning the development. The developer shall indicate the means whereby trees and other natural
features shall be protected during construction. The proposed development shall be accomplished without
excessive earth moving, tree clearance and destruction of natural amenities.
W. The developer shall attempt to minimize the interruptions to traffic along roads within the development by
limiting the number of points at which access is provided said internal roads from any common parking
areas.
X. In the design of the street system the developer shall make a good faith attempt to eliminate or minimize
through-traffic within the development which originates outside the development and limit any throughtraffic
to streets with minimal or no residential frontage. The developer shall make a good faith attempt to
provide a system of collector and local streets such that traffic entering and leaving the development is
125
directed to a limited number of collector streets with limited residential frontage and traffic entering and
leaving the development is discouraged from local residential streets.
Y. Safe and efficient means of ingress and egress from the development shall be provided. Points of ingress
and egress shall be located so as to not create congestion or traffic hazards. Any and all PRD’s shall have a
minimum of two (2) points of safe ingress and egress from said PRD to an existing public roadway.
Z. The design of all common parking areas is subject to the approval of the municipality. All common
parking areas shall be paved with an All-Weather Surface.
1. Common parking areas shall be designed such that aisles within said parking areas will not be
used for through-traffic.
2. No more than ten (10) parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being
interrupted by landscaping per the ESP SALDO.
3. No more than sixty (60) parking spaces shall be accommodated in any single parking area.
4. All common parking areas shall be landscaped per the ESP SALDO.
5. Common parking areas shall not be designed or located in such a manner as to require cars to back
into streets in order to leave the parking areas. All dead end parking lots shall provide adequate
areas into which cars parked in the end stalls of the lots may back out. Common parking areas and
access drives shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all structures and from the
exterior lot lines of the development.
6. Entrance and exit ways to common parking areas shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet
for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the areas.
7. The minimum distance between common parking areas shall be twenty (20) feet.
8. The design of common parking areas shall recognize the possible need for emergency service and
access by emergency vehicles. The municipality shall have the right to require that secondary
means of access and egress be provided for parking areas.
9. Common parking areas shall be screened from adjacent land and roads not included within the
development by means of plantings, changes in grade, or other means approved by the
municipality.
AA. Entrances to driveways serving multiple-family dwellings shall be located at least seventy-five (75) feet
from the point of intersection of the nearest street curb lines.
BB. Retail and Personal Service uses within developments of fifty (50) or more dwelling units in a PRD.
1. If a PRD includes a minimum of fifty (50) dwelling units, then, as a Special Exception Use, a
maximum of four (4) acres within the PRD may be used for retail and personal service uses. The
applicant shall provide sufficient evidence to adequately demonstrate to the Zoning Hearing Board
that, the proposed retail land personal service uses are those which will primarily serve the PRD
and have been designed and located with safely designed traffic access that shall be fully
coordinated with the PRD’s internal traffic design. To the maximum extent feasible, traffic access
shall be fully coordinated with any adjacent developments, as well.
2. No retail or personal service shall be open for business until a minimum of twenty-five (25)
dwelling units within the PRD have been constructed and lawfully occupied.
126
3. No retail or personal services uses approved under this subsection shall be open to the public nor
receive truck deliveries between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
CC. Requirements for the Purchase of Transferable Development Rights (TDR’s) in order to propose a PRD in
the (R-3), (R-4) and (R-5) Zoning Districts by Special Exception
1. No person may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a Special Exception for a PRD until they
first acquire, or enter into a legally binding agreement to acquire TDR’s from a willing seller, or
sellers, in the (A-P) and/or (EAP) Zoning Districts based upon the following requirements:
a. 100 TDR’s must be acquired for a PRD in an (R-3) District.
b. 75 TDR’s must be acquired for a PRD in an (R-4) District.
c. 50 TDR’s must be acquired for a PRD in an (R-5) District.
Section 1605. Mobile Home Park Regulations.
A. Mobile Home Park subject to:
1. The minimum area required for any mobile home park shall be ten (10) acres.
2. Any mobile home park shall be served by either a public or private sewerage system and by
either a public or private water supply system, however, all mobile home parks shall be served by
a public sewerage system and a public water system if available. “Available” means within five
hundred (500) yards to the boundary line of the mobile home park. If either a public sewerage
system or a public water supply system is not available then private systems shall serve the
mobile home park.
3. The maximum density of a mobile home park shall be eight (8) units per acre.
4. Lot Requirements: With the exception of corner lots, mobile home lots shall contain a front yard,
two (2) side yards and a rear yard which shall comply with the following requirements. The
minimum lot area and required front yard shall be measured from the edge of pavement of the
interior roads within the mobile home park.
a. The minimum lot area shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet; minimum lot width
shall be sixty (60) feet.
b. The minimum front yard shall be twenty five (25) feet.
c. The minimum side yard shall be fifteen (15) feet.
d. The minimum rear yard shall be twenty five (25) feet.
e. Mobile homes and any roofed structures of which are erected thereto shall be separated
from each other, and from other buildings and structures, other than accessory structures,
at their closest points by a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
f. Setback from tract boundary. No mobile home shall be located closer than seventy-five
(75) feet to any boundary of a mobile home development regardless of whether that
boundary abuts a lot, a water body, a road, or another type of right-of-way.
127
g. All accessory buildings shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to any adjacent
manufactured home lot. Likewise, all patios, porches, and decks shall not be located
within any required front, side, or rear yard.
h. Accessory structures. A detached accessory structure shall be separated a minimum of
ten (10) feet from any dwelling units which the accessory structure is accessory to.
i. Setbacks for common parking facilities, common refuse collection points, and other
common improvements (including buildings) shall be observed as follows: No such
common use structure shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet of any common
mobile home, mobile home accessory, and boundary line of the mobile home
development.
j. Skirting and anchoring. Any open spaces between a mobile home floor and a mobile
home foundation shall be permanently enclosed to unauthorized entry and to conceal
supports and utility connections. Every mobile home shall be anchored to the foundation
to prevent overturning or uplift as specified in the current ICC Regulations. The
application for placement of the mobile home shall be accompanied by a specification for
the foundation and anchoring and calculations indicating that the foundation and
anchoring are adequate to meet the standards of this section.
5. Access, roadways, parking
a. Any tract intended for a mobile home development must have direct access to a collector
type road (or a road of a higher classification).
b. Access to individual mobile/manufactured home spaces shall be from interior parking
courts, access drives or private streets and shall not be from public streets exterior to the
development. Such roads shall be paved with an all-weather surface at least twenty (20)
feet wide for two-way roads, and twelve (12) feet wide for one-way roads. If on-street
parking is provided, such minimum widths shall be increased by ten (10) feet for each
lane of parking.
c. Streets, curbs, and sidewalks if required by the Municipality shall be constructed to
Municipal standards.
d. Each mobile home shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) paved parking spaces
which shall be located upon the mobile home lot. If on-street parking is not provided,
one (1) additional off-street parking space per unit shall be provided in a common visitor
parking facility. Such visitor parking facilities shall be sized, arranged, and located so
that the spaces are within three hundred (300) feet walking distance to those units being
served.
e. A paved on-site walkway of a minimum width of four (4) feet shall be provided to each
mobile home unit from an adjacent street.
6. Service and accessory buildings.
a. Construction. All service and accessory buildings, including management offices, storage
areas, laundry buildings, and indoor recreation areas shall conform to the requirements of
any applicable building code, and such shall be maintained so as to prevent deterioration
caused by decay, corrosion, termites, or other destructive elements. Any structural
attachments to mobile homes in the form of decks, porches, sheds, lean-tos, or similar
structure shall be prohibited.
128
b. Mobile home park office. Every mobile home park shall have an office on-site for the
mobile home park manager. Every mobile home park containing fifteen (15) or more
mobile home spaces shall have a structure designed and clearly identified for such office.
c. Storage space. Occupants of each mobile home unit shall be provided with a utility shed
with a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet of storage space placed to the rear
of each mobile home.
d. Service and accessory buildings located in a mobile home park shall be used only by the
occupants of the same and their guests.
7. Open space, recreation area:
a. Not less than twenty (20) percent of the total area of the mobile home park shall be
devoted to active use recreation areas for the use of all residents of the park. Provision
shall be made by the owner of the mobile home park for the development, installation and
perpetual maintenance of such active use recreation areas.
8. Any and all lighting shall comply with Section 1506 of this Ordinance.
9. Any and all signs shall comply with Section 1507 of this Ordinance.
10. All manufactured home parks shall be screened from view of all adjacent properties from ground
level to a minimum height of six (6) feet. Such screening may consist of an earthen berm and/or
evergreen plantings with trees having a minimum size of six (6) feet in height at the time of
planting. Such screening shall be provided within a perimeter landscape buffer which shall have
a minimum width of fifty (50) feet.
11. Maximum Impervious Coverage shall not exceed 60% of the total tract area.
12. A Traffic Impact Report shall be prepared per the ESP SALDO
13. Additional Requirements:
a. The limits of each mobile home lot shall be clearly marked on the grounds by permanent
stakes, survey markers or other suitable means.
b. Each mobile home lot shall have attachments for sanitary sewage disposal, water supply
facilities and electrical service.
c. No structure built in a Mobile Home Development shall exceed a height of two stories or
a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet.
d. No recreation vehicle, travel or vacation trailer, or other form of temporary living unit
shall be placed upon any mobile home lot or shall be allowed to be used as a dwelling
within the mobile home park itself.
e. Each mobile home lot shall contain no more than one (1) mobile home to be occupied by
no more than one (1) family.
f. The owner of the manufactured home park shall make certain that zoning and building
permits are obtained prior to the construction or installation of any and all structures on
the premises.
129
14. All applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(PADER) shall be complied with as well.
Section 1606. Retirement Community and Life Care Retirement Facility
A. A Retirement Community as defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance is a planned residential community
for persons fifty-five (55) years or older, their spouses or companions.
B. A Retirement Community is composed of specific dwellings as defined in this Ordinance.
C. It is a specific intent of this section to:
1. Ensure that these communities are suitably designed and sited so as to protect the character of
adjacent neighborhoods.
2. Ensure that any institutional development will be adequately served by public facilities and
services.
3. Promote the development of safe and affordable housing for elderly persons and to ensure that
such housing provides accessibility to essential community facilities and services.
4. Provide the elderly individual with a variety of structural housing options within a single
development, including the option of the Retirement Community to include a “Healthcare
Facility” to allow the residents the opportunity to transfer from an independent living situation to a
semi dependent or dependent care environment, should the need arise.
D. Any tract proposed for such a Retirement Community shall be at least ten (10) acres in size and shall have
direct access to an arterial or collector street.
E. The proposed use shall be serviced by a public or private sewerage system and a public or private water
system.
F. A traffic study shall be performed in compliance with the ESP Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (SALDO).
G. The applicant shall guarantee occupancy only by persons fifty-five (55) years or older, their spouses or
companions to the extent possible under state and federal law.
1. The guaranty shall be in a form acceptable to the Governing Body upon recommendation by the
municipality’s Solicitor.
2. The guaranty shall be a covenant running with the land, applicable to the applicant and his heirs,
successors, and assigns.
3. If, at any time, elderly residents cannot be guaranteed, the property may be converted to another
permitted institutional use such as:
a. Medical and surgical hospitals or clinics, convalescent homes, and other health care
facilities of a similar nature.
b. Nursing homes, personal or intermediate care facilities and similar uses providing elderly
care.
130
H. Any such development shall be designed with unified standards for building design, landscaping, lighting
and access to interior roads. These standards shall be submitted in the form of protective covenants which
shall be binding upon developers of individual lots.
I. Any commonly owned elements shall be owned and maintained in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act or other ownership arrangement reviewed by the Governing Body’s Solicitor.
J. Only dwelling types permitted in the applicable zoning district shall be permitted under this section.
K. The following standards shall apply:
1. Minimum lot area: 10 acres
2. Minimum lot width: 300 feet
3. Minimum front yard: 100 feet
4. Building setback from side or rear lot lines: 100 feet
5. Maximum impervious coverage: 60% of total tract area
6. Maximum building height: 35 feet
L. The maximum number of units developed under this article shall be equal to the density that would
otherwise be permitted for such dwellings in the applicable zoning district, plus a bonus of twenty percent
(20%). This bonus is intended to recognize the fact that senior citizen household typically generate less
community impacts than other types of households.
1. For any Healthcare Facility housing persons overnight each two (2) beds shall be considered one
(1) dwelling unit.
M. Retirement Communities shall meet the property line buffer requirements as found in Section 1605 (A)(10)
of this Ordinance.
N. Parking for Retirement Communities shall be as per Section 1509 of this Ordinance.
O. Retirement Communities may at its options, have Healthcare Facilities (such as, but not limited to, “skilledcare”
or “nursing-care” facilities) as part of its proposed facility seeking and obtaining municipal approval,
or made part of the facility at a later date as long as the Healthcare Facility is designed and built meeting
the unified standards of the Retirement Community in subject 1606 H.
P. A Life Care Retirement Facility is as defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance.
Q. All accessory uses within the Life Care Retirement Facility shall be limited to facilities serving employees,
residents and guests of residents. Accessory uses may include offices, health care services, maintenance
facilities, recreational facilities, libraries, chapels, health-care facilities, gift shops, banks, snack bars,
pharmacies, barber/beauty shops and other personal services.
R. The types of housing units allowed in a Life Care Retirement Facility are single family detached; single
family semi-detached; townhouses and Low-Density Apartments, but only if said dwelling unit types are
allowed in the underlying zoning district.
S. The density of a Life Care Retirement Facility shall not exceed the densities set forth in the underlying
zoning district in which the facility is located. For the purpose of this section, the density allowed for beds
in a Healthcare Facility are forty (40) beds per acre.
131
T. The maximum lot coverage shall be 60% of the total tract area.
U. Life Care Retirement Facilities shall comply with the following dimensional requirements:
1. Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
2. Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
3. Minimum front yard: 100 feet.
4. Minimum side yard: 100 feet.
5. Minimum rear yard: 100 feet.
6. Separation of buildings.
a. Side to side: 20 feet.
b. Side to rear: 30 feet.
c. Side to front: 50 feet.
d. Front to front: 50 feet.
e. Front to rear: 50 feet.
f. Rear to rear: 50 feet.
g. Corner to corner: 20 feet.
7. The maximum height of buildings shall be thirty-five (35) feet except for Medium-
Density Apartment Buildings which shall not exceed forty-eight (48) feet in height.
8. Building setback from parking and street: twenty (20) feet from a parking area with more than
four (4) spaces, alleys or streets.
V. A buffer yard complying with Section 1605(A)(10) of this Ordinance, shall be provided along all adjacent
property lines (excluding property lines along public roads). In addition, storage areas for trash and
recyclable materials shall be screened from view of adjacent properties. All other screening and planting
requirements shall be as per the ESP SALDO.
W. Lighting facilities shall not produce direct glare on adjacent properties and shall meet Section 1508 of the
Ordinance.
X. Identification signs, not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet, shall be permitted, provided that no more
than one (1) such sign is located at each public street access to the retirement community. Such signs shall
be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the cartway or outside the right-of-way and fifty (50) feet from
all side yard property lines. Signs may be illuminated with indirect focused lighting only. All other sign
requirements shall meet Section 1507 of this Ordinance.
Y. The following minimum parking standards, and those of Section 1509, shall apply to a Life Care
Retirement Facility:
1. Single-family detached; semi-detached; and townhouses: two (2) spaces per unit.
2. Apartment housing unit: one (1) space for each unit plus one visitor space for every five units.
3. Healthcare Facilities: one (1) space for every four beds.
4. Staff parking: one (1) space per staff member working the largest shift.
Z. The applicant proposing a Life Care Retirement Facility shall obtain documentation from appropriate
providers of ambulance and fire services indicating the ability to provide service to the site.
AA. Interior drives, alleys or streets shall be designed to prevent the blockage of vehicles entering or leaving the
site. The minimum cartway width shall be twelve (12) feet for one-way streets and twenty (20) feet for
132
two-way streets. In addition, all any Life Care Retirement Facility shall have at least two (2) means of
ingress and egress from a public street into said facility.
BB. Pedestrian walkways shall be accessible from the entrance of each residential structure.
CC. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed use will be provided with a public or private sewerage
system and a public or private water system.
DD. A traffic impact study, subject to the requirements of the ESP SALDO, shall be submitted.
Section 1607. Adaptive Reuse; Residential Conversions; Boarding Houses; Commercial Conversion
A. Adaptive Reuse. Industrial or manufacturing buildings may be converted to residential use and/or office
uses where allowed by Special Exception provided that, the following requirements are met as well as any
other requirements identified by the Zoning Hearing Board.
1. A site plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale, shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing
Board. These plans shall show the location and dimensions of off-street parking, private
entrances, walkways, landscaping, the dimensions and square footage of each room and any
storage space and shall also indicate the intended use of each room.
2. The conversion to residential use shall have minimum floor areas committed to residential use as
per the following schedule:
Apartment Square Feet (net floor area)
Efficiency or Studio 400
One Bedroom 550
Two Bedroom 700
Three Bedroom 850
3. For each dwelling unit, there shall be a minimum of two (2) parking spaces on-site. Parking
requirements for office uses shall conform to the requirements of Section 1509 of this Ordinance.
4. Documentation must be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board, indicating to the Zoning Hearing
Board’s satisfaction that all plumbing, heating and electrical equipment, parking and related
facilities are adequate and appropriate for the proposed use.
5. A Land Development Plan, meeting the requirements of the ESP SALDO, shall be submitted to
the Municipality as well.
B. Residential Conversions- Single Family Dwellings may be converted to Residential Conversions as defined
in this Ordinance by Special Exception where allowed:
1. The definition of a Residential Conversion shall include the conversion of any single family
dwelling to a two-family dwelling with the dwelling unit’s to be located one above the other, fully
separated by a horizontal fire rated floor, and with each dwelling unit having its own separate
access.
2. The Residential Conversion shall retain its single-family dwelling appearance from the street.
3. Each dwelling unit shall not have less than eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area.
133
4. The lot area for a Residential Conversion shall not be reduced to any amount less than that
required by this Ordinance for the zoning district in which the original single family home is
located.
5. The yard and building area requirements for the zoning district in which the original single family
dwelling unit is located shall not be reduced.
6. There shall be no external alteration of the original single family dwelling except as for the
alterations which are necessary to provide each new dwelling unit with its own separate access.
Fire escapes and outside stairways shall, where practicable, be located to the rear of the building.
7. For each dwelling unit, there shall be a minimum of two (2) parking spaces onsite, or any other
arrangements as may be deemed appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board.
8. The Residential Conversion shall be served by both a public sewerage system and a public water
supply.
9. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the right to specify any further conditions and restrictions as
the Board may consider appropriate.
C. Boarding House:
1. A Boarding House is as defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance.
2. The boarding house shall retain its single family dwelling appearance from the street. No signs
other than those relating to the identification of the owner of the dwelling are allowed.
3. Each boarding house shall contain complete bath facilities and a central kitchen with complete
cooking and washing facilities. The facilities shall be available to the occupants of the boarding
house at all hours. No cooking facilities of any kind shall be located in any room except the
central kitchen.
4. No basement or cellar shall be used as a habitable room.
5. The applicant shall provide documentation to the Zoning Officer stating that the boarding house
meets all of the plumbing, electrical, heating, building, fire, and similar standards set by the
Municipality and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
6. One (1) off-street parking space for every one (1) renter and two (2) off-street parking spaces for
the owners of the dwelling shall be provided.
7. All Boarding Houses shall be served by both a public sewerage system and a public water system.
D. Commercial Conversions
1. Only single-family detached dwellings that existed on the effective date of this chapter may be
converted to “personal services” or retail business by Special Exception as defined in this
Ordinance. All such uses shall be limited to that area of the first floor of the building as it existed
on the effective date of this Ordinance.
2. The applicant shall furnish evidence to the Zoning Hearing Board that any alterations,
improvements or other modifications proposed to the building will be accomplished in a manner
that complements its residential character.
134
3. The applicant shall furnish to the Zoning Hearing Board evidence of an approved connection to
both a public sewerage system and a public water supply system.
4. The conversion will allow a single family dwelling unit to remain in the upper floors. The
applicant for a Commercial Conversion must provide proof to the Zoning Hearing Board that the
single-family dwelling unit will have adequate sanitation and cooking (stove and refrigerator)
facilities after said conversion, and can meet the following criteria:
a. One (1) Bedroom – 550 square feet (net floor area)
b. Two (2) Bedroom – 700 square feet (net floor area)
c. Three (3) Bedroom – 850 square feet (net floor area)
5. The applicant shall also obtain land development plan approvals from the Municipality, as well.
6. All commercial and residential off-street parking and/or loading areas shall be screened from
adjoining residences and shall meet the requirements of Sections 1510 and 1511 of this Ordinance.
Each will have its own parking requirements.
7. One (1) sign shall be permitted which shall be no larger than six (6) square feet in area and shall
be affixed to the building.
Section 1608. Cluster Development
A. Intent of Cluster Development in the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts of the ESP Region
1. Cluster development allows for the reduction of lot area and other bulk requirements so that dwellings
may be grouped in certain areas of the parent tract, while the remainder of the site is set aside as
common open space.
2. As one of the goals of the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts is to “…maintain large contiguous
agricultural parcels…” cluster development is consistent with this goal.
3. Within the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts, development is restricted in its intensity and limited in the
type of non-agricultural land uses allowed, therefore, the only allowable residential uses permitted in
these districts are single-family detached dwellings.
4. The intensity of development (e.g. how many “lots” or “Development Units” are allowed to be
created from a farm) is more restricted in the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts than in other zoning
districts in the ESP Region. The intent of cluster development in the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts is
to allow for more “lots” on less acres of land in a “clustered” arrangement while still making a good
faith effort to maintain the existence of large contiguous agricultural parcels through open space
requirements.
B. Site Requirements for Cluster Development Use.
1. Cluster Development shall be permitted as a Special Exception Use in the EAP and A-P Zoning
Districts.
2. Only tracts of land which are at least twenty-five (25) gross acres in size may propose a cluster
development.
3. The cluster development shall be served by both a public or private sewerage system and by a public
or private water system.
135
4. The tract of land to be developed shall be in single ownership.
5. At least 60% of the A-P tract of land and 70% of the EAP tract of land shall be permanently
preserved by deed restriction as open space and/or agricultural land.
6. All cluster developments shall be served by an internal private road network which shall be designed
and constructed to meet the standards set forth in the ESP SALDO.
7. All cluster developments which propose more than twenty-five (25) single family dwellings shall
provide two (2) points of access from said development to an existing public road.
C. Density and Dimensional Standards for Cluster Development
EAP A-P
1. Minimum Tract Size 25 Acres 25 Acres
2. Area, Yard, and Height Regulations for Cluster Development in the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts
a. Use - Single Family Detached Dwelling
i. Min. Lot Area - 15,000 sq. ft.
ii. Min. Lot Width - 100 feet
@ Lot Line
iii. Min. Lot Width - 100 feet
@ Setback Line
iv. Min. Front Yard 30 feet
v. Min. Side Yard 20 feet each side
vi. Min. Rear Yard 30 feet
3. Maximum Density of Cluster Development
a. The maximum density shall be determined by a Yield Plan. The Yield Plan will show the
maximum number of lots that could be developed on the parent tract using the cluster
development criteria contained in this Ordinance.
b. The Yield Plan shall, at minimum, contain the following:
i. A boundary survey signed and sealed by a Professional Land Surveyor (PLS)
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania indicating the gross area of the
Parent Tract.
ii. Any and all road rights of way.
iii. Utility rights of way, whether they were established by easement or fee simple
transactions.
iv. Areas of wetlands as determined via a Jurisdiction wetland delineation
performed by a qualified individual.
136
v. Areas containing slopes in excess of 25% as determined by a topographic survey
performed by a Professional Land Surveyor.
vi. Areas subject to floodplains determined either by using current FEMA maps; or,
in the case of an unmapped Stream via an actual calculated floodplain limit
derived from a field survey.
c. The Yield Plan shall indicate the gross acreage of each topographic feature listed in
C.3.b.ii through vi above. Where two (2) or more of these categories overlap, the
overlapping acreage shall be counted only once, using the most restrictive classification.
The acreages of these various topographic features shall be added together and this total
acreage figure shall be referred to as the “Deducted Acreage”.
d. The gross acreage of the Parent Tract minus the “Deducted Acreage” is then multiplied
by the open space coefficient (the percentage of the Parent Tract required to be preserved
as open space and/or agricultural land as stated in subsection B.5). The resultant figure is
the amount of area available for the cluster development of single family detached
dwellings.
(As an example an EAP Parent Tract is 100 gross acres. The “Deducted Acreage” for the
features indicated in subsection C.3.b.ii through v is 20 acres which results in 80 acres (100-20)
to be multiplied by 0.70 (70% open space). The result is 56 acres (80 x 0.70) which must be
preserved and 24 acres (80-56) which is available for cluster development).
D. Neighborhood Standards for Cluster Developments
1. All residential lots are required to be grouped into “Neighborhoods” according to the open space
residential provisions of the ESP SALDO.
2. Neighborhoods shall contain at least five (5) but no more than ten (10) lots surrounded by open land.
Neighborhoods are defined by the outer perimeter of houses in contiguous lots.
3. Neighborhoods shall be defined and separated by open land in order to provide direct access to open
space. Roads may not be used to separate adjacent neighborhoods unless one or more of the following
are provided:
a. The road is designed as a parkway with a minimum 10-foot wide planted median.
b. A fifty (50) foot setback is provided along one side of the road measured from the right of way line
to the closest residential lot line.
c. A landscape buffer, that forms an effective visual screen, shall be planted within said fifty (50) foot
setback.
4. Neighborhood residential lots shall not be directly accessed from existing state or township roads. All
lots in a neighborhood shall take access from interior private roads.
5. Views of neighborhoods from exterior roads shall be minimized by existing vegetation and/or
additional landscaping, but in all cases, said landscaping, shall be designed in a way to preserve scenic
views.
E. Neighborhood Setbacks for Cluster Developments
1. Twenty-five (25) feet from wetlands or floodplain.
137
2. One hundred (100) feet from public roads adjoining the Parent Tract.
3. Fifty (50) feet from the Parent Tract’s external boundaries.
4. Seventy-five (75) feet (unless subsection D.3 is utilized) from other neighborhoods within the same
cluster development.
5. All setbacks along public roads shall be planted with a vegetative landscaped buffer in order to screen
the view of the cluster development from the traveling public.
Section 1609. Transfer of Development Rights (TDR)
A. Primary Purpose
The primary purpose of the Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) Section of this Ordinance is to
permanently preserve open land, agricultural land, sensitive natural areas, and rural community character
that would be lost if the land were developed. In addition, this Section is intended to establish the
procedures for the transfer of developments rights (TDR’s) from EAP or AP zoned tracts to eligibly zoned
areas within the ESP Region.
B. Specific Intent
Within the ESP Region, there are certain areas that, because of their unique natural resources, make them
worthy of special protection. In accordance with Sections 603(c) (2), 605(4), and 619.1. of the
Municipalities Planning Code, a transferable development rights (TDR) program is hereby established
within the ESP Region, and the ESP Region designates the EAP (Enhanced Agricultural Preservation), and
the A-P (Agricultural Preservation) as the Sending Areas (as defined in this Zoning Ordinance), and the R-
3, R-4, and R-5 residential districts as the Receiving Areas (as defined in this Zoning Ordinance). The
purpose of the transfer of development rights program is to preserve the agricultural soils and agricultural
character of the lands in the EAP and A-P agricultural districts by shifting development from those areas to
the areas for designated residential development within the ESP Region.
C. Concept
The transfer of development rights (TDR) is a voluntary agreement under the terms of this section of this
Ordinance between a willing buyer and a willing seller. The TDR’s shall be transferred to a person,
corporation, partnership or other legal entity, or a municipality within the ESP Region. The TDR’s may be
held by the purchaser for future use or sale or may be immediately attached to a specific parcel of land
within the Receiving Areas of the ESP Region. The TDR’s shall be considered a separate estate in land
and may be transferred subject to the limitations of this Section. Once the TDR’s are attached to a specific
parcel of land, those rights shall run with that specific parcel in perpetuity.
A purchaser of TDR’s who attaches those rights to a tract of land located in a Receiving Area in accordance
with the procedures set forth in this Section is permitted an increase, with the use of the development
rights, in the density of his development within the Receiving Area. The seller of the said TDR’s in the
Sending Area receives compensation from the sale plus the right to retain the land for agricultural use. A
deed restriction against future development is placed upon the agricultural land in the designated Sending
Area from which the TDR’s have been obtained by the willing buyer.
The deed restriction will not affect the landowner’s ability to sell the land after the development rights have
been severed, although such land cannot be sold for development purposes. The deed restriction on the
land from which the development rights have been severed shall run in favor of the municipality in which
the sending property is located.
138
The owner of the tract in the Sending Area from which the development rights are severed or any
subsequent purchaser or purchasers of the development rights may hold the development rights or may
resell the development rights. The only use which may be made of the development rights is the ultimate
transfer to a developer with a tract in the Receiving Area. The municipality shall have no obligation to
purchase the development rights which have been severed from a tract in the Sending Area.
1. A developer who has not purchased TDR’s shall only have the right to:
develop a tract in the Receiving Area as a subdivision or land development using the minimum lot
sizes found in the applicable ESP Zoning District regulations; and the maximum density for such
developments will be those of the R-3, R-4, or R-5 Zoning District.
2. A developer who has purchased TDR’s shall have the right to increase the allowable densities by:
a. providing public or privately owned potable water and sewerage services.
b. acquiring the number of TDR’s necessary to increase the allowable density of dwelling
unit types which are permitted in the R-3, R-4, and R-5 zoning districts.
D. Recognition of Transferable Development Rights
The ESP Region hereby recognizes the severability and transferability of development rights from certain
lands within a municipality of the ESP Region to be transferred and used in accordance with the provisions
hereof.
Each municipality in the ESP Region, in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection G.,
Apportionment of Development Rights of the section, shall determine the eligibility of each tract of land
within the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts for allocation of Transferable Development Rights. The
municipality has no obligation, however, to determine the specific number of such rights apportioned to
each tract, nor to give any formal notice to the landowner other than by the passage of this Ordinance, until
such time as an application to utilize Transferable Development Rights is made in accordance with
subsection G., Apportionment of Development Rights and subsection H., Transfer and Use of Transferable
Development Rights, of this Ordinance.
The ESP Region’s municipalities reserve the right to amend this Section in the future, and the ESP
Region’s municipalities expressly reserve the right to change the manner in which the number of
development rights shall be apportioned to a tract in the Sending Area, the manner in which development
rights may be attached to land within the Receiving Area, the locations of the Sending Area and the
Receiving Areas and the procedure by which development rights can be conveyed. The ESP Region’s
municipalities further expressly reserve the right to terminate the transferable development rights program
at any time. No owner of land or owner of development rights shall have any claim against the
municipalities of the ESP Region for damages resulting from a change in this section of the Ordinance
relating to the regulations governing the apportionment, transfer and use of development rights or the
abolition of the Transferable Development Rights program. If the Transferable Development Rights
program is abolished by the ESP Region’s municipalities, no developer may attach development rights to
any tract in the Receiving Area after the effective date of any ordinance abolishing the Transferable
Development Rights program unless an application in conformity with the provisions of Section G herein
was filed prior to the effective date of any such amending or abolishing ordinance.
E. Sending Area Qualifications and Calculations
1. Applicants who own properties located within the following Zoning Districts are eligible to transfer
development rights (known as Transfer Development Rights, or TDR) and will be known as Sending
Tracts:
139
a. EAP (Enhanced Agricultural Preservation) Zoning District.
b. A-P (Agricultural Preservation) Zoning District.
2. Land restricted against development by covenant, easement, or deed shall not be eligible for TDR.
3. The tracts of land shall not be less than twenty-five (25) acres in size.
4. The number of TDR’s which are eligible to be transferable shall be computed by Subsection G.
F. Receiving Area Qualifications and Calculations
1. Applicants for development of tracts which meet the following requirements may use TDR’s and will
be known as Receiving Tracts:
a. The Receiving Tract shall be located in the R-3, R-4, or R-5 Zoning Districts.
b. The Receiving Tract shall be at least three (3) acres in size.
2. The Receiving Tract may only be developed for the homogenous developments of the different types
of residential dwelling units Permitted By Right in the R-3, R-4, and R-5 Zoning Districts and for mix
of land uses allowed in a PRD, as defined by Section 1549 of this Ordinance.
3. The Receiving Tract may be developed in the following densities:
a. A Receiving Tract in the R-3 may develop to R-4 densities by utilizing TDR’s.
b. A Receiving Tract in the R-4 district may develop to R-5 densities by utilizing TDR’s.
c. A Receiving Tract in the R-5 district may develop to no more than double the R-5 densities
Permitted By Right.
G. Apportionment of Development Rights
1. Development rights shall be apportioned to tracts of land within the designated Sending
Area of a municipality based on the following criteria:
a. The tract of land shall be located within either the EAP or the A-P Zoning Districts.
b. The tract of land shall not be less then twenty-five (25) acres in size.
c. Tracts of land or portions thereof owned by or subject to easements (including, but not
limited to, easements of roads, railroads, electrical transmission lines, and water, gas or
petroleum pipelines) in favor of governmental agencies, utilities, and nonprofit
corporations shall not be eligible for Transferable Development Rights.
d. Land restricted against development by covenant, easement, or deed restriction shall not
be eligible for Transferable Development Rights unless and until such time as said
covenant, restriction, or easement is dissolved or rescinded. In the event said covenant,
restriction, or easement is dissolved or rescinded, such land shall be eligible for issuance
of Transferable Development Rights.
e. Land utilized for uses other than agriculture shall not be eligible for Transferable
Development Rights.
140
2. The number of Transferable Development Rights apportioned to an eligible tract shall be
established by subsection G.4.c of this Ordinance.
3. The owner of any EAP or A-P Parent Tract eligible for development rights shall be restricted from
developing said tract in accordance with other Sections of this Ordinance.
4. The determination of the precise number of development rights which shall be apportioned to a
tract in the Sending Area shall be computed as such:
a. The tract of land in the Sending Area to be apportioned shall be known as the Sending Tract.
b. The owner of the Sending Tract shall prepare an Apportionment Plan to determine the number
of TDR’s which can be apportioned to the Sending Tract.
c. The Apportionment Plan shall be prepared to meet the following criteria:
i. Apportionment Plan shall be a 1” = 50’ scale drawing:
ii. Apportionment Plan may show a deed plot of Sending Tract or a boundary
survey signed and sealed by a Professional Land Surveyor.
iii. The Apportionment Plan shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a PLS, PE, or
RLA.
iv. The Apportionment Plan shall state the “Gross Acreage” of the Sending Tract
(as determined by deed plot or survey). The “Gross Acreage” will be used in the
calculation of TDR’s.
v. The Apportionment Plan shall state the acreage of wetlands, determined either by
available NWI Maps; Soil Lines per the Schuylkill County Soils Survey, USDA,
SCD, July 1982 or soils containing major hydric components, or inclusions of
hydric components; or a wetland delineation by a qualified individual.
vi. The Apportionment Plan shall state the acreage of areas subject to floodplains
determined either by current FEMA maps; the soil lines of the At, Ba, Ln, Ph
and Po soils; or a survey to determine soils.
vii. The Apportionment Plan shall state the acreage of areas subject to slopes in
excess of 25% as determined either by USGS mapping or a topographic survey
performed by a Professional Land Surveyor.
viii. The Apportionment Plan shall state the acreage of each feature above as well as
the aggregate. Where two (2) or more categories overlap, the overlapping
acreage shall be counted only once, using the most restrictive classification. The
aggregate acreage will be known as the “Deducted Acreage” and will be used in
the calculation of TDR’s.
ix. The Apportionment Plan shall show the following formula and the subsequent
calculation to determine the “Sending Tract’s Acreage Eligible for TDR
Calculation (of TDR’s)” or “(S.T.A.E.C)”:
(Gross Acreage) – (Deducted Acreage) = (S.T.A.E.C. of TDR)
141
x. The S. T. A. E. C. multiplied by the EAP coefficient (.30) or the A-P coefficient
(.40) will determine the number of TDR’s apportioned to the Sending Tract:
[I] S. T. A. E. C. x .30 = the number of TDR’s apportioned to the Sending Tract in
the EAP Zoning District.
[II] S. T. A. E. C. x .40 = the number of TDR’s apportioned to the Sending Tract in
the A-P Zoning District.
d. The Apportionment Plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Municipality’s Engineer
and Governing Body.
5. Once an Apportionment Plan has been approved, the Transferable Development Rights which
have been apportioned shall be conveyed by a Deed of Transferable Rights duly recorded in the
Office of the Schuylkill County Recorder of Deeds.
a. The Deed of Transferable Development Rights shall specify: the tract of land within the
receiving district to which the rights shall be permanently attached or that the rights shall
be transferred to a 1) municipality, 2) the owner of the Sending Tract, or 3) another
person in gross.
b. The Deed of Transferable Development Rights which severs the development rights from
the Sending Tract shall be accompanied by a Declaration of Restriction of Development
which shall permanently restrict development of the Sending Tract and which shall be
recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds at the same time as, or prior to, the Deed
of Transferable Development Rights.
c. All Deeds of Transferable Development Rights shall be endorsed by a municipality prior
to recording.
d. The owner of the Sending Tract from which the development rights are to be severed
shall, by a Declaration of Restriction of Development, totally and permanently restrict the
future development of the tract. The Declaration of Restriction of Development shall be
in a form approved by a Municipal Solicitor. All owners of the tract from which
development rights are severed shall execute the Declaration of Restriction of
Development. All lien holders of the tract from which development rights are severed
shall execute a joiner and/or consent to the Declaration of Restriction of Development.
i. The said Declaration of Restriction of Development shall designate a municipality as a
third party beneficiary of the restrictions imposed on the land from which the
development rights are severed, and said restrictions shall be enforceable by the
municipality as such third party beneficiary. The municipality shall hold the rights
granted by the Declaration of Restriction of Development as trustee for all of the
residents of the municipality, in recognition of the right of the people to the
preservation of the natural, scenic, historic and aesthetic values of the municipality
and in further recognition of the fact that these resources are the common property of
all the residents of the municipality, including generations yet to come.
ii. Land from which development rights have been severed shall be permanently
restricted against development; shall continue to be owned subject to said restrictions
by the landowner, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns; and
may be continues to be used for agriculture and other lawful uses as are specified in
this Ordinance.
142
H. Transfer and Use of Transferable Development Rights (TDR’s)
1. A formal request to utilize transferable development rights on a property shall be in the form of a
preliminary subdivision plan prepared in accordance with the ESP Region Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. The preliminary plan submitted must indicate the proposed density of
the development utilizing public or private water and sewer, and the number of TDR’s transferred
or to be transferred to the property to achieve the desired increase in density.
2. In addition to the preliminary subdivision plan, an application shall include the following:
a. An “Application for Transfer of Development Rights” on a form provided by the
municipality for such application. Such application shall be signed by both the willing
seller and the willing buyer. The application shall be accompanied by a copy of the Deed
of Transferable Development Rights which was recorded in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds (after the Apportionment Plan was approved by the Municipality), as well as a title
search demonstrating that such development rights are still held by the willing seller and
setting forth all liens placed against them shall be included If the development rights
have previously been severed from the tract in the Sending Area, a title search of the
rights set forth in the Deed of Transferable Development Rights sufficient to determine
all of the owners of the development rights and all lien holders shall be furnished to the
Municipality.
b. An agreement of sale for the development rights between either 1) the owner of the tract
to which development rights have been apportioned or 2) the owner of development
rights which have been previously severed from a tract in the Sending Area as evidenced
by a recorded Deed of Transferable Development Rights (e.g. the “sellers” of TDR’s);
and the owner of the tract proposed to be developed as a residential development (e.g. the
“buyer” of TDR’s). The agreement shall be made contingent upon approval of a final
subdivision or land development plan for residential development of the tract to which
the development rights are to be transferred.
i. If the agreement of sale of development rights would entail less than the total of
all the TDR’s apportioned to the Sending Tract, this information shall be clearly
stated on the above plan to the subject municipality. Such plan shall also
include a notation of (i) the number of development rights applicable to the
entire parcel, (ii) the number of development rights which remain available to
the remaining portion of the parcel.
ii. If the agreement of sale of development rights would entail less than the entire
number of development rights represented by a recorded Deed of Transferable
Development Rights, the applicant shall indicate the disposition of the
remaining development rights.
iii. There shall be no final action any such agreements of sale unless, and until, the
subject Municipality’s Solicitor and Engineer have reviewed said agreement and
the corresponding Governing Body has approved said document.
Section 1610 through 1614 (Reserved)
Section 1615. Intensive Agricultural Standards
A. Intensive Agriculture activities are regulated by this Section of this Ordinance.
143
B. Agricultural activities that exceed the standards and provision specified under Section 456 of this
Ordinance (General Agricultural Standards for the EAP and AP Districts) shall be construed as Intensive
Agriculture.
C. For purposes of this Zoning Ordinance the raising and ownership of horses, cattle, sheep, goats, poultry,
rabbits or similar animals in any number or amount which exceeds three point zero (3.0) animal units per
acre shall be considered Intensive Agriculture. Any swine operation in excess of one thousand (1,000)
pounds per acre (1.0 animal unit per acre), the production processing or cultivation of mushrooms, and
mink farms shall be also considered an Intensive Agricultural activity. Any and all Intensive Agricultural
activities shall be conducted on lands, that exceed twenty-five (25) acres in size, and are located in the EAP
or AP Zoning Districts. Standard animal weights, which must be used to calculate animals units, are found
within Section 1617 of this Ordinance.
D. The raising and ownership of horses, cattle, pigs, hogs, sheep, goats, poultry, rabbits or similar animals
shall be limited to four point zero (4.0) animal units per acre on lands which are greater than twenty-five
(25) but less than forty (40) contiguous acres. Lands which exceed forty (40) acres are limited to six point
zero (6.0) animal units per acre. Any Intensive Agricultural Use that intends to exceed the animal units per
acre specified above shall require prior approval of a Special Exception by the Zoning Hearing Board
before commencing operations. Standard animal weights, which must be used to calculate animal units, are
found within Section 1617 of this Ordinance.
E. No agricultural building or other accessory outbuilding utilized for any type of Intensive Agricultural Use
shall be constructed within two hundred (200) feet of any residence, or within one hundred (100) feet of
any property line, whichever distance is greater.
F. The display and sale of farm products shall be permitted provided that at least fifty (50%) percent of the
quantity of products for sale have been produced on the property on which they are offered for sale. The
sale of farm products shall be conducted in a farm stand which shall not exceed one thousand (1,000)
square feet or twenty (20) feet in building height and which shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from the
applicable street right-of-way. In addition, all off-street parking and access driveways shall be designed in
accordance with Sections 1508.D and 1509 of this Ordinance. The farm stand parking area, and driveway
will require a Municipal Zoning Permit and/or Driveway Permit (and/or Penn DOT Permits if adjacent to a
State Road) and any other permits required by County, State, or Federal Authorities.
G. Signs displaying information for the sale of farm products in farm stands are limited to one (1) free
standing sign which shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in total area and which shall be regulated as
per Section 1507 of the Zoning Ordinance.
H. All areas utilized for grazing purposes shall be completely and entirely enclosed within a fence of sufficient
type, height (and if necessary electrically activated) to ensure that grazing animals can not escape from said
grazing area.
I. The production, processing or cultivation of mushrooms shall be construed as an Intensive Agricultural
activity and will be considered a Use Permitted by Right subject to the following:
1. Mushroom houses and complexes will be allowed as a Use by Right up to one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet total gross building space for growing. Any use including more than one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of mushroom growing space will be permitted only by
Special Exception.
2. Mushroom houses shall be operated under the guidelines as set forth in “Best Practices for
Environmental Protection in the Mushroom Farm Community”, draft of December, 1996, as
may be amended, revised or adopted, which is incorporated herein by reference thereto.
3. Mushroom industry housing for workers will not be allowed except as it relates to single-family
144
residences as regulated by this Zoning Ordinance.
J. Piggeries and mink farms shall also be construed as an Intensive Agricultural activity.
K. A Nutrient Management Plan shall be prepared and approved under the guidelines of Title 25, Chapter 83,
Subchapter D, Pennsylvania Code (as may be amended) for all proposed Intensive Agricultural uses. A
copy of approved Nutrient Management Plan shall be submitted to the respective Municipality.
L. A stormwater management plan shall be prepared pursuant to the ESP Region Joint Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (ESP SALDO) and any other stormwater management ordinances adopted by the
ESP Region’s Municipalities. All such stormwater management plans shall be approved by the Municipal
Engineer for all proposed Intensive Agricultural uses.
M. No construction of any improvements required to support Intensive Agricultural activities shall be permitted
except pursuant to an approved Land Development Plan.
N. An Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control Plan shall be prepared for and approved by the Schuylkill
County Conservation District for all proposed Intensive Agricultural uses. A copy of the approved Erosion
and Sedimentation Pollution Control Plan shall be submitted to the Municipality.
O. A Conservation Plan shall be prepared and approved by the Conservation District for all proposed Intensive
Agricultural uses. The approved Conservation Plan shall be submitted to the Municipality.
P. A Landscaping Plan shall be submitted to the Municipality pursuant to Section 1507 of this Ordinance, for
all proposed Intensive Agricultural uses.
Q. Solid and liquid wastes shall be disposed of in a manner that will avoid creating insect or rodent problems
and in a manner which shall be consistent with the Nutrient Management Plan.
R. No discharges of liquid wastes and/or sewage shall be permitted into any water bodies, water reservoir,
sanitary sewage or storm sewer disposal system, holding pond, stream or open body of water, or into the
ground unless any such discharges are in compliance with any permits approved by the applicable local,
state and/or federal regulatory agencies.
S. Any and all Intensive Agricultural uses and activities shall be reviewed and/or permitted by the
Municipality, the Schuylkill County Conservation District, the Schuylkill County Cooperative Extension,
and any and all applicable Federal and State Regulatory Agencies having jurisdiction over such matters
prior to the commencement of any activities associated with said use.
T. A Fly and Odor Abatement Plan shall be developed and submitted to the Municipality for review and
approval. The municipality will forward a copy of said plan to the Penn State Cooperative Extension or an
equivalent agency for its review and comments. Recognition is hereby be given that, certain agricultural
activities will produce odors, but the applicant shall show that, odors can be reduced to a minimum or
abated. The plan of the applicant shall show such steps as may be necessary to abate odors or to limit the
times certain activities are performed so that there would be a minimal interference with neighbors will be
taken.
U. Animal manure storage facilities planning, design, construction, and operation shall be in accordance with
PA DEP approved manure management practices as described in the publication entitled “Manure
Management for Environmental Protection” and addenda or amendments thereto prepared by PADEP;
“The Pennsylvania Technical Guide” and addenda or amendments thereto; Pennsylvania Code, Title 25,
Chapter 83, Section 83.351, Minimum Standards for the Design, Construction, Location, Operation,
Maintenance and Removal From Service of Manure Storage Facilities when applicable; and Pennsylvania
Code, Title 25, Chapter 91, Section 91.36 Pollution Control and Prevention at Agricultural Operations.
145
Section 1616. General Agriculture Standards for the EAP Zoning District; and General Agriculture
Standards for the A-P, R-1, and R-2 Zoning Districts.
A. General Agriculture Standards for the EAP Zoning District
1. It is the intent of these requirements that agricultural activities in the EAP Zoning District be
regulated for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
2. Unless otherwise stipulated within this Zoning Ordinance, General Agricultural activities/uses as
described in this section are permitted by right in the EAP Zoning District. Those Intensive
Agricultural Activities allowed within the EAP Zoning District on lands of twenty-five (25) acres
or more are further regulated within Section 1615.
3. Processing of farm products, where such use is accessory to the raising or growing of such
products and is located on the property on which the products are grown or raised is permitted by
right, provided such use does not include Intensive Agricultural Activities.
4. The display and sale of farm products shall be permitted provided that throughout a calendar year,
at least fifty percent (50%) of the quantity of products for sale have been produced on the property
on which they are offered for sale. The sale of farm products shall be conducted in a farm stand
which shall not exceed one-thousand (1,000) square feet or twenty (20’) feet in building height
and which shall not be located at least thirty (30’) feet from the applicable street right-of-way. In
addition, all off-street parking and access driveways shall be designed in accordance with Section
1509 of this Ordinance. The farm stand, parking area, and driveway will require a Municipal
Zoning Permit and/or Driveway Permit (and/or Penn Dot Permits if adjacent to a State Road) and
any other permits required by County, State, or Federal authorities.
5. Signs displaying information for the sale of farm products in farm stands are limited to one (1)
free standing sign which shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in total area and shall be
regulated as per Section 1507 of this Zoning Ordinance.
6. Certain small domestic animal operations (excluding mink which is an Intensive Agricultural
Activity) are permitted by right provided the following conditions are met (for purposes of this
Subsection, small domestic animals shall include animals such as rabbits, guinea pigs, and
chinchilla; and fowl such as chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, and pigeons):
a. The area within which small domestic animals are kept shall be enclosed by a suitable
fence designed for the containment of such animals.
b. The area where such small domestic animals are maintained shall be kept in a suitable
grass cover and shall not be allowed to degrade to an erodible condition.
c. The owner of the small domestic animals shall exercise suitable control over the animals
and shall not allow a nuisance condition to be created in terms of excessive noise, dirt, or
odor.
d. Buildings housing small domestic animals shall be subject to the yard requirements of
Section 455, but in no case shall any such buildings be located within fifty (50’) feet of
the nearest residential dwelling, other than that of the owner.
7. Certain large domestic animal operations (except swine over one thousand (1,000) pounds/acre
which is an Intensive Agricultural Activity) are permitted by right provided that the following
conditions are met. For purposes of this subsection, large domestic animals shall include animals
of the bovine, swine, equine and sheep families:
146
a. The area within which large domestic animals are kept shall be enclosed by a suitable
fence designed for containment of such animals.
b. All buildings erected to house such animals shall meet the setback requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance. In addition, no building shall be erected within one hundred (100’)
feet of the nearest residential dwelling, other than that of the owner.
c. The area within which large domestic animals are maintained shall be kept in a suitable
grass cover of at least two (2) acres in area and shall not be allowed to degrade to an
erodible condition.
d. The owner of the large domestic animals shall exercise suitable control over the animals
and shall not allow a nuisance condition to be created in terms of excessive noise, dirt, or
odor.
8. Large and small domestic animal operations as described herein are permitted in accordance with
the following table. Standard animal weights used to calculate Animal Units are found within
Section 1617 of this Ordinance.
No. of Acres Maximum Animal Units Per Acre
(1 Animal Unit = 1,000 lbs.) *
More than 1 and up to and including 5 0.5 (500 lbs/acre)
More than 5 2.0 (2,000 lbs/acre)
* Any concentration of animal units of three point zero (3.0) or greater/acre shall be considered an
Intensive Agricultural activity and shall be limited to those lands of more than twenty-five (25)
acres in the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts, and are subject to Section 1615 of this Ordinance.
9. Any combination of large and small domestic operations is permitted, but in no instance shall any
such combination exceed the animal units/acre in the chart above (ex. A tract of 5 acres may have
any combination of large and/or small animals which does not exceed 2,500 lbs [5 (acres) x 500
(lbs) = 2,500 lbs]. A tract of 10 acres may have a combination which does not exceed 20,000 lbs.
[10 acres x 2,000 (lbs.) = 20,000 lbs]. The animal units per acre as stated above are permitted only
if all other criteria of this Section are met.
10. Any concentration of swine equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) lbs/acre and any, and all,
mink farms shall be considered an Intensive Agricultural activity and shall be limited to the EAP
or AP Zoning Districts where allowed and are subject to Section 1615 of this Ordinance.
11. Large and small domestic animal operations are subject to all other sections of this Ordinance as
applicable; the requirements set forth in the ESP Region SALDO; any and all ordinances adopted
by a municipality within the ESP Region; and all county, state, and federal regulations as may be
applicable to these operations.
12. Any building erected for agricultural uses in the EAP and AP Zoning Districts are regulated as
follows:
a. Except for Farm-related Businesses, any building erected for agriculture use on the same
lot as a single family dwelling use (an no other), does not need to meet the requirements
of Section 1502 of this Ordinance.
b. In addition to buildings regulated by subsections A.4, A.6.a and A.7.b above any building
erected for agricultural uses in the EAP and AP Zoning Districts must also meet all the
147
Area, Yard and Height requirements of the EAP or AP Zoning District, whichever is
applicable, in addition to any other Area, Yard, and Height requirements within Section
455.
13. No slaughter area, spent mushroom compost storage area, manure storage area, or structure
designed or designated for the raising of pigs shall be established within one hundred (100’) feet
of any lot line.
14. A Fly and Odor Abatement Plan shall be developed and submitted to the Municipality for review
and approval. The Municipality will forward a copy to the Penn State Cooperative Extension or
an equivalent agency for its review and comments. Recognition is hereby given that certain
agricultural activities will produce odors, but the applicant shall show that odors can be reduced to
a minimum or abated. The plan of the applicant shall show such steps as may be necessary to
abate odors or to stipulate times when there can be odors generated which will have minimal
interference with neighbors.
15. The planning, design, construction, and operation of any Animal Manure Storage Facilities shall
be in accordance with PA DEP approved manure management practices as described in the
publication entitled “Manure Management for Environmental Protection” and addenda or
amendments thereto prepared by PA DEP; “The Pennsylvania Technical Guide” and addenda or
amendments thereto; Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Chapter 83, Section 83.351, Minimum
Standards for the design, construction, location, operation, maintenance and removal from service
of manure storage facilities when applicable; and Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Chapter 91,
Section 91.36 Pollution control and prevention at agricultural operations.
B. General Agriculture Standards for the A-P, R-1, and R-2 Zoning Districts
1. It is the intent of these requirements that agricultural activities in the A-P, R-1 and R-2 Zoning
Districts be regulated for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
2. Unless otherwise stipulated within this Zoning Ordinance, General Agricultural activities/uses as
described in this section are permitted by right in the A-P, R-1 and R-2 Zoning District. Intensive
Agricultural Activities are allowed only within the EAP and AP Zoning Districts as specified in
this Ordinance.
3. Processing of farm products, where such use is accessory to the raising or growing of such
products and is located on the property on which the products are grown or raised is a Use
Permitted By Right, provided that any such use does not include Intensive Agricultural Activities.
4. The display and sale of farm products shall be permitted provided that at least fifty percent (50%)
of the quantity of products for sale have been produced on the property on which they are offered
for sale. The sale of farm products shall be conducted in a farm stand which shall not exceed one
thousand (1,000) square feet in area or twenty feet (20’) in building height and which shall not be
located within thirty (30’) feet of the applicable street right-of-way. In addition, all off-street
parking and access driveways shall be designed in accordance with Section 1509 of this
Ordinance. The farm stand, parking area, and driveway will require a Municipal Zoning Permit
and/or Driveway Permit (and/or PennDot Permits if adjacent to a State Road) and any other
permits required by County, State, or Federal authorities.
5. Signs displaying information for the sale of farm products in farm stands are limited to one (1)
free-standing sign which shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in total area and shall be
regulated as per Section 1507 of this Zoning Ordinance.
6. Certain small domestic animal operations (excluding mink farms which are an Intensive
Agricultural Activity) are Uses Permitted By Right provided the following conditions are met (for
148
purposes of this Subsection, small domestic animals shall include animals such as rabbits, guinea
pigs, and chinchilla; and fowl such as chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks and pigeons):
a. The area which small domestic animals are kept shall be enclosed by a fence designed for
containment.
b. All such fences shall be at least ten (10’) feet away from any lot line and at least fifty
(50’) feet from the nearest dwelling other than that of the owner.
c. The area within which small domestic animals are maintained shall be kept in suitable
grass cover and shall not be allowed to degrade to an erodible condition.
d. The owner of the small domestic animals shall exercise suitable control over the animals
and shall not allow a nuisance condition to be created in terms of excessive noise, dirt, or
odor.
e. Buildings housing small domestic animals shall be subject to the yard requirements of
Sections 505, 555, and 605 but in no case shall any such building be erected within fifty
(50’) feet of the nearest dwelling other than that of the owner.
7. Certain large domestic animal operations (except swine over one thousand (1,000) pounds/acre
which is an Intensive Agricultural Activity) is a Use Permitted By Right provided that, the
following conditions are met. For purposes of this subsection, large domestic animals shall
include animals of the bovine, equine, swine, and sheep families:
a. The area within which large domestic animals are kept shall be enclosed by a fence
designed for the containment of such animals.
b. All buildings must meet the setback requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. In addition
no building shall be erected within one hundred (100’) feet of the nearest dwelling other
than that of the owner.
c. The area within which large domestic animals are maintained shall be kept in a suitable
grass cover of at least two (2) acres in area and shall not be allowed to degrade to an
erodible condition.
d. The owner of the large domestic animals shall exercise suitable control over the animals
and shall not allow a nuisance condition to be created in terms of excessive noise, dirt, or
odor.
8. Large and small domestic animal operations are permitted in accordance with the following table.
Standard animal weights to calculate Animal Units are within Section 1617 of this Ordinance:
No. of Acres Animal Units Per Acre (1 Animal Unit = 1,000 lbs.)
More than 1 but less than 4 0.125 (125lbs/acre)
4 but less than 10 0.5 (500 lbs/acre)
10 but less than 25 1.0 (1,000 lbs/acre)
More than 25 2.0 (2,000 lbs/acre)
9. Any combination of large and/or small domestic operations except as noted below are permitted,
but in no instance shall any such combination exceed the animal units/acre in the chart above (ex.
A tract of 5 acres may have a combination of large and/or small animals which does not exceed
2,500 lbs. [5 (acres) X 500 (lbs) = 2,500 lbs.], A tract of ten (10) acres can have a combination
149
which does not exceed 10,000 lbs. [10 acres x 1,000 (lbs.) = 10,000 lbs]. The animal units/acre
are permitted if all other criteria of this Section are met.
10. Any concentration of swine equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) lbs/acre and any and all
mink farms shall be considered an Intensive Agricultural Activity and shall be limited to the EAP
and AP Zoning Districts where allowed and are subject to Section 1615 of this Ordinance.
11. All large and small domestic animal operations are subject to all other sections of this Ordinance
as applicable; the requirements set forth in the ESP SALDO; any and all ordinances adopted by a
municipality within the ESP Region; and all county, state, and federal regulations as they may be
applicable to these operations.
12. All areas utilized for grazing purposes shall be completely fenced in.
13. No slaughter area, spent mushroom compost storage area, manure storage area, or structure
designed or designated for the raising of pigs shall be established within one hundred (100) feet to
any lot line.
14. Any building erected for agricultural uses in the A-P, R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts are regulated
as follows:
a. Except for Farm-Related Businesses, any building erected for agricultural use on the same
lot as a single family dwelling use (and no other), does not need to meet the requirements
of Section 1502 of this Ordinance.
b. All buildings must meet subsections B.6.e and B.7.b above if applicable.
c. In addition to subsections B.4 and B.14.b above any building erected for agricultural uses
in the A-P, R-1, and R-2 Zoning Districts must meet all the Area, Yard and Height
requirements of the respective Zoning Districts in which the building is located in
addition to any other Area, Yard, and Height requirements within Sections 505,555, and
605 of this Ordinance.
O. A Fly and Odor Abatement Plan shall be developed and submitted to the Municipality for review and
approval. The Municipality will forward a copy to the Penn State Cooperative Extension or an equivalent
agency for its review and comments. Recognition is hereby given that, certain agricultural activities will
produce odors, but the applicant shall show that odors can be reduced or abated. The plan of the applicant
shall show that such steps as may be necessary to abate odors or to identify times when the release of such
odors would be a minimal interference with neighbors.
P. The planning, design, construction, and operation of Animal Manure Storage Facilities shall be in
accordance with PA DEP approved manure management practices as described in the publication entitled
“Manure Management for Environmental Protection” and addenda or amendments thereto prepared by PA
DEP; “The Pennsylvania Technical Guide” and addenda or amendments thereto; Pennsylvania Code, Title
25, Chapter 83, Section 83.351, Minimum Standards for the design, construction, location, operation,
maintenance and removal from service of manure storage facilities when applicable; and Pennsylvania
Code, Title 25, Chapter 91, Section 91.36 Pollution control and prevention at agricultural operations.
150
Section 1617 - Standard Animal Weights to Calculate Animal Units.
Type of animal Standard weight (lb) during production (range)
Swine
Nursery pig 30 (15-45)
Finishing pig 145 (45-245)
Gestating sow 400
Sow and litter 470
Boar 450
Beef
Calf: 0-8 mo. 300 (100-500)
Finishing: 8-24 mo. 850 (500-1,200)
Cow 1,150
Veal
Calf: 0-16 wk. 250 (100-400)
Poultry
Layer: 18-65 wk. 3.25 (2.75 – 3.76)
Layer: 18-105 wk. 3.48 weighted average
Layer, brown egg: 20-65 wk. 4.3 (3.6 – 5.0)
Layer, brown egg: 20-105 wk. 4.63 weighted average
Pullet: 0-18 wk. 1.42 (0.08 – 2.75)
Broiler, large 0-57 days 3.0 (0.09 – 5.9)
Broiler, med. 0-43 days 2.3 (0.090 – 4.5)
Roaster
Male 0-8 wk.
Female 0-10 wk.
3.54 (0.09-7)
Turkey, tom 0-18 wk. 14.1 (0.12 – 28)
Turkey, hen 0-14 wk. 7.1 (0.12 – 14)
Duck: 0-43 days 3.56 (0.11 – 7)
Guinea: 0-14 to 24 wk. 1.9 (0.6 – 3.75)
Pheasant: 0-13 to 43 wk. 1.53 (0.05 – 3)
Chukar: 0-13 to 43 wk. 0.52 (0.04 – 1)
Quail: 0-13 to 43 wk. 0.26 (0.02 – 0.5)
Dairy
Holstein/Brown Swiss
Cow 1,300
Heifer: 1-2 yr. 900 (650 – 1,150)
Calf: 0-1 yr. 375 (100 – 650)
Bull 1,500
Ayrshire/Guernsey
Cow 1,100
Heifer: 1-2 yr. 800 (575 – 1,025)
Calf: 0-1 yr. 338 (100-575)
Bull 1,000
Sheep
Lamb: 0-26 wk. 50 (10-90)
Ewe 150
Ram 170
Goat
Kid: 0-10 mo. 45 (5-85)
Doe 125
Buck 170
Horse
151
Foal: 0-6 mo. 325 (125-625)
Yearling 750 (625-875)
Non-draft breeds: mature 1,000
Draft breeds: mature 1,700
Section 1618. Vacation Farms
A. Bed and Breakfast Establishments
1. A maximum of six (6) rental units shall be provided, no more than three (3) adults may occupy one
rental unit and no more than twelve (12) guests total may occupy the facility at one (1) point in
time.
2. One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each rental unit. The off-street parking
spaces for the bed and breakfast shall be located either to the rear of the principal building or
screened from the street and abutting dwellings by landscaping.
3. There shall not be any signs, show windows or any type of display or advertising visible from
outside the premises, except for a single non-illuminated sign with a maximum sign area of four
(4) square feet on each of the two (2) sides and with a maximum height of eight (8) feet. The sign
shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet to any side lot line. The sign shall require a zoning permit.
4. The bed and breakfast shall have a residential appearance and character.
5. The bed and breakfast shall be operated by a permanent resident of the lot.
6. There shall not be separate cooking facilities in any guest room.
7. Food shall only be served to guests who are staying overnight.
8. No guest shall stay for more than fourteen (14) days in any month.
9. No retail sales are permitted.
10. No sales of alcohol are permitted.
11. The Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer must confirm if the sewage facilities are adequate for
the number of rental units utilized. This confirmation must accompany the application to the
Municipal Zoning Hearing Board.
12. The Municipal Road Master and the Municipal Engineer must confirm if the access drive(s) are
adequate for safe ingress and egress for the anticipated volume of traffic for the proposed use. A
Municipal driveway permit (or PA DOT HOP permit if applicable) needs to accompany the
application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
13. The Municipal Road Master and Municipal Engineer must confirm if the applicant will be required
to address stormwater issues prior to the issuance of any driveway, zoning, and/or building
permits.
B. Vacation Farms
1. Vacation Farms are engaged primarily in agricultural production as defined, and are regulated by
General agricultural standards within Section 456 of this Ordinance.
2. No intensive agricultural activities shall be permitted.
152
3. All grazing and pasture areas shall be completely enclosed by a fence, when in use.
4. No spent mushroom compost areas, manure storage areas, and/or slaughter areas shall be
established.
5. The minimum size of a vacation farm shall be ten (10) acres and still engaged in agricultural
production.
6. No farm building housing livestock shall be erected within one hundred (100) feet of a lot line.
7. A maximum of six (6) rental units shall be provided; no more than three (3) adults may occupy
one (1) rental unit; and no more than twelve (12) guests total may occupy the facility at one point
in time.
8. One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each rental unit. The off-street parking
spaces for the vacation farm shall be located either to the rear of the principal building or screened
from the street and abutting dwellings by landscaping.
9. There shall not be any signs, show windows, or any type of display or advertising visible from
outside the premises, except for a single non-illuminated sign with a maximum sign area of four
(4) square feet on each of the two (2) sides and with a maximum height of eight (8) feet. The sign
shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet from any side lot line. The sign shall require a zoning
permit.
10. The vacation farm shall have an agricultural appearance and character.
11. The vacation farm shall be operated by permanent residents of the property.
12. There shall not be separate cooking facilities in any guest room.
13. Food shall only be served to guests who are staying overnight, unless a restaurant has also been
permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
14. Retail sales are permitted, but limited to items commonly found at a farm stand regulated by
Section 456 and/or all items containing information and/or logos on clothing, apparel, and
household goods.
15. No sales of alcohol are permitted.
16. The Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer must confirm if the Sewage Facilities are adequate
for the number of rental units utilized. This confirmation must accompany the application to the
Zoning Hearing Board.
17. The Municipal Road Master and the Municipal Engineer must confirm if the access drive(s) are
adequate for safe ingress and egress for the anticipated volume of traffic for the proposed use. A
Municipal Driveway Permit (or Penn DOT HOP Permits if applicable) needs to accompany the
application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
18. The Municipal Road Master and Municipal Engineer must confirm if the applicant will be
required to address stormwater issues prior to the issuance of any driveway, zoning, and/or
building permits.
153
Section 1619. Farm Labor Housing
A. Farm Labor Housing is permitted in the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts by right and the R-1 and R-2
Zoning District by special exception.
B. Farm Labor Housing is that type of housing as defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance.
C. Farm Labor Housing shall be either a single-wide or double-wide manufactured home and shall be located
within three hundred (300) feet of the dwelling unit of the farm operator or the owner of the farm. It is the
intent of this subsection to not allow the placement of Farm Labor Housing on any vacant parcel and to
require said placement to be on a parcel containing the residence of the operator or owner of the farm
operation.
D. A Farm Labor House shall house no more than the number of occupants allowed by the definition of
“Family” in Section 201 of this Ordinance.
E. One (1) Farm Labor House may be erected for every contiguous twenty-five (25) acres under the
ownership on which the farm activities take place.
F. Farm Labor Houses shall not be placed on their own lots, but must meet any side and rear set backs of the
underlying zoning district. The Farm Labor Houses shall be set back a distance that is at least equal to the
front yard set back of any existing farm dwelling.
G. If more than one (1) Farm Labor House is allowed they may be clustered to within twenty-five (25) feet of
each other.
H. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed method of sewage disposal and water supply meets
all local and state requirements.
I. Two (2) on-site off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each Farm Labor House.
J. The dwelling shall be occupied at least thirty (30) days a year by at least one person who is employed on
the farm where the dwelling is located. If this condition is not satisfied, then the manufactured home shall
be removed within ninety (90) days.
K. Upon the proper installation of the dwelling, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning and use permit. This
permit shall be reviewed during the month of January of each year until such time that the dwelling is to be
removed. A fee, in an amount established by the Governing Body shall be paid by the landowner each
renewal of the temporary zoning and use permit.
Section 1620 through 1624 (Reserved)
Section 1625. Group Home
A. Group Homes, as defined in this Ordinance, and where permitted as a Special Exception shall meet certain
standards as described within this and other sections of this Ordinance.
B. A Group Home shall not include “treatment centers” or “methadone treatment centers” as defined in this
Ordinance.
C. If a Group Home is in a residential district, an appearance shall be maintained that is closely similar to
nearby dwellings, and no sign shall identify the use. The only physical changes to the dwelling shall be
those required by law. When the use is abandoned, any subsequent use shall conform to permitted uses in
the zoning district.
154
D. A Group Home shall function as a common household unit. A Group Home shall meet the restrictions in
this ordinance’s definition of family for the maximum number of unrelated persons, except that up to two
(2) paid professional staff may reside in the Group Home, but they shall not count towards such maximum
number.
E. Any medical or counseling services shall be limited to a maximum of three (3) nonresidents per day.
F. The Group Home shall have adequate staff supervision for the number and type of residents.
G. Although live-in supervision is not required, the sponsoring social service agency shall document to the
Zoning Hearing Board that the agency shall provide the residents of the Group Home with the physical
safety and the emotional support they require. Because residents of a Group Home are likely to be
suffering from personal crises, some form of immediate contact with a counselor should be available at all
hours. Likewise, immediate contact with sponsoring social service agency should be available to members
of the public who may be in need of the services of the Group Home.
H. A licensed physician, psychologist, counselor or social worker in the employ of or under contract to the
social service agency shall be responsible for the assignment of residents to the Group Home.
I. At least one (1) supervisor shall be on call during all hours during which any resident of the Group Home is
on the premises.
J. The Group Home shall provide, in writing, its location, general type of treatment/care, maximum number
of residents and sponsoring agency to the Zoning Hearing Board.
K. The applicant shall provide evidence of any applicable federal, state, or county licensing or certification to
the Zoning Hearing Board.
L. A site plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale, shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board. These
plans shall show the location and dimensions of off-street parking, private entrances, walkways,
landscaping, the dimensions and the square footage of each room and storage space, and shall indicate the
intended use of each room.
M. No Group Home shall be located within eight hundred (800) feet of another Group Home, institution,
school, Adult Day Care Home, or Adult Day Care Center.
N. The premises at which the Group Home is located shall be owned or leased by the social service agency
sponsoring the Group Home.
O. The sponsoring social service agency shall document to the Zoning Administrator that all building, fire,
plumbing, heating, electrical, and similar systems meet the standards set by the Municipality and by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
P. A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided per on-site employee, plus one (1) space
for every two (2) residents of a type reasonably expected to be able to drive a vehicle.
Section 1626. Adult Day-Care Facilities
A. Adult Day-Care Facility - Any premises operated for profit, or not for profit, in which older adult daily
living services, as defined herein, are simultaneously provided for four (4) or more adults who are not
relatives of the operator. The following types of adult day-care facilities are regulated by this section.
1. Adult Day-Care Home - Any adult day-care facility in which services are provided to between
four (4) and eight (8) adults and where the day-care areas are being used as a family residence.
155
2. Adult Day-Care Center- Any adult day-care facility in which services are provided to eight or
more adults and where the day-care areas are not being used as a family residence.
B. The following apply to Adult Day-Care Homes and Adult Day-Care Centers:
1. Adult day-care centers and homes must be registered with the Pennsylvania Department of Aging
and must demonstrate compliance with all applicable regulations for such facilities.
2. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee and one safe passenger
unloading space measuring ten by twenty (10 x 20) feet for each five (5) clients the center or home
is licensed to accommodate.
3. Any sign shall comply with the regulations applicable to the district in which the center or home is
located.
4. All other applicable requirements of this section and any Building Code, Fire Code, or other
applicable municipal and state ordinances shall be met.
Section 1627. Child Day-Care Facilities
A. The following types of child day-care facilities are regulated by this section.
1. Day-Care Center A facility in which care is provided for part of a 24-hour day for seven (7) or
more children at any one time, where the child-care areas are not being used as a family residence.
2. Family Day-Care Home – Any premise other than the child’s own home in which child day care
is provided for part of a 24-hour day at any one time to four (4), five (5) or six (6) children, and
where the child-care areas are being used as a family residence.
3. Group Day-Care Home – A facility in which care is provided for part of a 24-hour day for more
than seven (7) but fewer than twelve (12) children at any one time where the child-care areas are
being used as a family residence.
B. Child Day Care Facilities shall have all licenses and approval from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. When allowed by Special Exception the Zoning Hearing Board shall determine whether the use will be
detrimental to the surrounding area and the design of any structures erected in connection with such use
shall be in keeping with the general character of the area, and such lot shall meet the requirements of the
Zoning District in which it is located.
D. A minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of habitable floor area exclusive of halls, bathrooms, offices,
kitchens, locker rooms, and related areas must be maintained on the premises.
E. In the Townships, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee and one safe passenger
unloading space measuring ten by twenty (10 x 20) feet for each ten (10) children that the center is licensed
to accommodate.
F. When an off-premises play area is utilized, it must be located within five hundred (500) feet and be safely
accessible without crossing (at grade) any arterial street or other hazardous area.
G. The requisite outdoor play area shall be surrounded by a four (4) foot high safety fence or natural barrier
impenetrable by children or small animals.
H. Outdoor play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
156
I. No portion of the outdoor play area shall be located less than one hundred (100) feet from an existing
occupied dwelling without the owner’s written consent.
J. Any sign shall comply with the regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the center is located.
K. In any residential district, no day-care center in a freestanding building shall be located within 500 feet of
any other freestanding day-care center, private nursery or kindergarten. Day-care centers in schools or
places of worship are exempt from this requirement.
L. All other applicable requirements of this section and any Building Code, Fire Code, or other applicable
municipal and state ordinances shall be met.
Section 1628. Hospitals and Healthcare Facilities; Healthcare Services
A. It is the specific intent of this section to:
1. Ensure that hospitals and healthcare facilities, and healthcare services as defined in this Ordinance
are suitably designed and sited so as to protect the character of adjacent neighborhoods
2. Ensure that hospitals and healthcare facilities, and healthcare services will be adequately served by
public facilities and services
B. Hospitals
1. Minimum Lot Area: five (5) acres.
2. The subject property shall have frontage along an arterial or collector road.
3. The applicant shall submit a traffic impact study per the ESP SALDO.
4. Adequate provision shall be made for a system of roads sufficient to accommodate predictable
vehicular traffic and to ensure safe and efficient vehicular access for emergency management
equipment.
5. Emergency entrances shall be located on a building wall which faces away from adjoining
residential zoned properties or separated by at least 300 feet from residentially zoned properties.
6. A public water supply and a public sewerage system are required.
7. Adequate provision shall be made for the collection, disposal and recycling of garbage, trash, and
medical and hazardous waste.
8. Where more than one (1) of the permitted uses enumerated below are proposed, either at one (1)
time or separately over time, integrated site function and design shall be required, consistent with
the creation of a campus-like environment:
a. Commercial day-care facilities for children of the hospital staff.
b. Commercial schools with exclusively health care-related curricula intended to prepare
enrolled students for careers in health care, nursing schools, and other allied health
technology training programs.
c. Health and fitness equipment for staff and patients.
d. Hospices.
157
e. Intermediate care and skilled nursing facilities.
f. Medical and dental offices.
g. Outpatient health services, including, but not limited to, laboratories, radiological and
diagnostic imaging services, blood banks, outpatient surgery centers, and outpatient
clinics and patient care facilities.
h. Accessory buildings, uses and services customarily incidental to the above uses,
including, but not limited to, the following:
i. Administrative offices.
ii. Automobile parking lots and parking garages.
iii. Housing for students, employees and their families in accordance with the
underlying Zoning District.
iv. Helistop, per subsection 1628.B.9.a below.
vi. Customary accessory uses such as cafeterias, gift shops, news stands, other
small retail operations, intended primarily for the occupants’ visitors and
employee’s hospital. If any of these accessory uses are housed in a separate
building, this must meet the dimensional regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located.
9. Additional accessory use regulations:
a. Helistops- The heistop shall only be used for the emergency transport by helicopter or
patients to or from other permitted health care-related uses. The helistop shall not
include auxiliary facilities, such as fueling and maintenance equipment. The helistop
shall be set back a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any adjoining property and
any street. The applicant must demonstrate compliance, through a written statement, and
continue to comply with applicable state and federal standards.
b. Hospital waste – Only the processing of waste generated on-site is permitted. All
processing and storage of waste shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building. All storage of waste shall be in a manner that is leak-and-vector-proof. No
storage of waste shall exceed seven (7) days in length. Incineration of hospital waste is
prohibited on-site. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with all applicable state
and federal standards and regulations.
10. Maximum permitted height: sixty (60) feet for hospitals, provided all structures are set back a
horizontal distances equal to their height from each property line and street right-of-way line and
thirty-five (35) feet for all other uses.
C. Healthcare Facilities
1. Healthcare Facilities are as defined within this Ordinance.
2. Healthcare facilities shall be served by a public water supply and public sewerage system.
3. A traffic study shall be performed in compliance with Section ESP SALDO.
4. The following shall apply to Healthcare facilities:
a. Minimum Lot Area: Ten (10) acres
b. Minimum Lot Width: Five hundred (500) feet
158
c. Minimum Front Yard setback: One hundred (100) feet
d. Minimum separation between buildings: Thirty (30) feet
e. Minimum setback from side or rear lot lines: Fifty (50) feet
5. Customary accessory uses such as cafeterias, gift shops, newsstands, other small retail operations,
intended primarily for the occupants, visitors, and employees of the Healthcare Facilities as well
as child day care centers for the children of staff personnel are allowed. The accessory uses shall
meet the dimensional regulations of Healthcare Facilities.
6. Buffer yards shall be established along boundaries with residential districts or uses and along
streets per the ESP SALDO.
7. Parking
a. One (1) off-street parking space for every three (3) patient beds.
b. One (1) off-street parking space for every one point two (1.2) employees and staff
members.
D. Healthcare Services
1. Healthcare Services shall be served by a public water supply and a public sewerage system.
2. A traffic study shall be performed in compliance with the ESP SALDO.
3. Dimensional requirements
a. Minimum Lot Area: Two (2) acres
b. Minimum Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet
c. Minimum Front Yard: Seventy-five (75) feet
d. Minimum separation between buildings: Thirty (30) feet
e. Minimum setback from side or rear lot lines: Fifty (50) feet
4. Buffer yards shall be established along boundaries with residential districts or uses and along
streets per the ESP SALDO.
5. Parking - One (1) off-street parking space for every one point two (1.2) employees and staff
members.
Section 1629. Treatment Center; Methadone Treatment Center
A. For purposes of this section a “Treatment Center” is as defined in this Ordinance.
1. The applicant shall provide a written description of all types of persons intended to occupy the use
during the life of the permit. Any future additions to this list shall require an additional special
exception approval.
2. The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the use will involve
adequate on-site supervisions and security measures to protect public safety.
3. The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions upon the use to protect public safety such as
conditions on the types of residents and security measures.
159
B. This section of the ordinance regulates the location of Methadone Treatment Centers in certain locations in
the ESP Region:
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary and except as provided in subsection
1629.B.2, a methadone treatment facility shall not be established or operated within five hundred
(500) feet of an existing school, public playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care
facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious worship established
prior to the proposed methadone treatment facility.
2. The provisions of this subsection shall apply whether or not an occupancy permit or certificate of use
has been issued to the owner or operator of a methadone treatment facility for a location that is within
five hundred (500) feet of an existing school, public playground, public park, residential housing area,
childcare facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious worship
established prior to the proposed methadone treatment facility.
C. Notwithstanding subsection 1629.B.1, a methadone treatment facility may be established and operated
closer than five hundred (500) feet to an existing school, public playground, public park, residential
housing area, child-care facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious
worship established prior to the proposed methadone treatment facility if, by majority vote, the governing
body for the municipality in which the proposed methadone treatment facility is to be located votes in favor
of the issuance of an occupancy permit or certificate of use for said facility at such a location. At least
fourteen (14) days prior to the governing body of a municipality voting on whether to approve the issuance
of an occupancy permit or certificate of use for a methadone treatment facility at a location that is closer
than five hundred (500) feet to a school, public playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care
facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious worship established prior to
the proposed methadone treatment facility, one (1) or more public hearings regarding the proposed
methadone treatment facility location shall be held within the municipality following public notice. All
owners of real property located within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed location shall be provided
written notice of said public hearings at least thirty (30) days prior to said public hearings occurring.
D. This section shall not apply to a methadone treatment facility that is licensed by the Department of Health
prior to May 15, 1999.
E. As used in this section, the term “methadone treatment facility” shall mean a facility licensed by the
Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment, maintenance, or detoxification of
persons.
Section 1630. Places of Worship, Cemeteries
A. Church/Places of Worship. Places of worship may be permitted in specific zoning districts by special
exception, provided that the following standards and those in Section 1802 are met as well as any other
requirements of this Ordinance or those as deemed necessary by the Zoning Hearing Board.
1. The proposed use is a bona fide nonprofit religious use.
2. The intended use in the proposed location will not adversely affect the comfortable enjoyment of
property rights and otherwise adversely affect the value of adjacent properties; that the design of
any structure to be erected in connection with such use is in keeping with the general character of
the area; and that sufficient landscaping, including trees, shrubs and lawn are provided to
appropriately buffer these from adjoining properties and to ensure an attractive appearance for the
use.
3. Church-related (Place of Worship) residences (rectories and convents).
160
a. All residents’ uses shall be accessory and located upon the same lot or directly adjacent
to a lot containing a Place of Worship.
b. All residents’ uses shall be governed by the location and bulk standards imposed upon
other residences within the underlying zoning districts.
4. Church-related educational or day-care facilities.
a. All educational or day-care users shall be accessory and located upon the same lot as a
Place of Worship.
b. If education or day-care is offered below the college level, an outdoor play area shall be
provided, at a rate of one hundred (100) square feet per individual enrolled. Off-street
parking lots shall not be used as outdoor play areas, unless the applicant can demonstrate
that such parking lots are not in use during play periods. Outdoor play areas shall not be
located within the front yard and must be set back ten (10) feet from all property lines.
Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a minimum four (4) foot high fence.
Any vegetative materials located within the outdoor play areas shall not be of a harmful
type (poisonous, thorny, allergenic, etc.). All outdoor play areas must provide a means of
shade, such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s).
c. “Enrollment” shall be defined as the largest number of persons under day-care
supervision at any one time during a seven (7) day period.
d. Passenger “drop-off” areas shall be provided and arranged so that passengers do not have
to cross traffic lanes on adjacent to the site.
e. All educational or day-care uses shall be governed by the location, height, and bulk
standards imposed upon principal uses within the underlying zone.
5. Parking requirements: Section 1509 of this Ordinance. Unless the applicant can demonstrate that
the off-street parking associated with the Place of Worship is sufficient for the proposed use of a
church-related education or day-care facility, one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for
each six (6) persons enrolled.
B. Cemeteries. Cemeteries shall be permitted as a special exception in specific zoning districts provided that
the following standards and those in Section 1802 are met as well as any other requirements of these
Ordinance or those as deemed necessary by the Zoning Hearing Board.
1. The minimum lot size for this use shall be two (2) acres which may be the same lot as an allowed
Place of Worship.
2. Cemeteries may include mausoleums, crypts, and tombs above and below ground level.
3. A fence of no less than six (6) feet in length shall be placed around the entire perimeter of any
cemetery.
4. An evergreen landscaped buffer no less than six (6) feet in height shall be placed inside of the
perimeter fence of the entire cemetery.
5. A crematorium, where allowed, shall be set back a minimum of two hundred and fifty (250) feet
from all lot lines of existing dwellings and all undeveloped residentially zoned lots.
6. All structures and graves shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the lot line of an
abutting dwelling or any undeveloped residentially zoned lot, twenty (20) feet from the future
161
right-of-way of any public street, and ten (10) feet from the cartway of an internal driveway or
any other lot line.
7. No grave sites shall be located within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
8. The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board, based upon review by
the Municipal Solicitor, that the use will include an appropriate financial system to guarantee
perpetual maintenance.
Section 1631. Schools
A. Schools and colleges, as defined in this Ordinance, are subject to the following:
1. Facilities which are subject to licensing by the commonwealth shall show evidence of the license
and the continued certification of the license.
2. All property boundaries shall be screened as required by the ESP SALDO.
3. No storage of equipment or material shall be permitted outside a structure.
4. All lights shall be shielded and reflected away from adjoining property.
5. Ingress, egress, and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to ensure safety and access by
emergency vehicles.
6. The applicant shall demonstrate that the granting of the proposed use shall not materially increase
traffic congestion on adjacent roads and highways.
7. Adequate off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Section 1511 of this Ordinance. In addition passenger “drop off” and “pickup”
areas shall be provided and arranged so that students do not have to cross traffic lanes on or
adjacent to the site.
8. Swimming pools shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
9. When dormitories are proposed the following shall apply:
a. This use shall be limited to full-time students, faculty or staff of an accredited college,
university, nursing school, medical training program, or teaching hospital.
b. The building shall be set back a minimum of eighty (80) feet from any existing singlefamily
detached dwelling or single-family semidetached (twin) dwelling that is not
owned by the institution providing such dormitory.
c. A dormitory shall include a maximum of one cooking area for every twenty (20)
students.
10. As defined in this ordinance, Public; Private; Parochial; Day; Boarding; and Business, Trade, or
Vocational Schools shall provide an outdoor area reserved for recreation at a rate of one hundred
(100) square feet per individual enrolled. Off-street parking lots shall not be used as outdoor
recreation areas. Outdoor recreation areas shall not be located within the front yard and must be
set back twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines. Outdoor recreation areas shall be
completely enclosed by a minimum (4) four-foot-high fence and screened from adjoining
residentially zoned properties. Any vegetative materials located within the outdoor recreation area
shall not be a harmful type (poisonous, thorny, allergenic, etc.). All outdoor recreation areas must
162
provide a means of shade, such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s); “enrollment” shall be defined as
the largest number of students on the site at any one time during a seven (7) day period.
Section 1632 through 1639 (Reserved)
Section 1640. Office/Commercial Center.
An office/commercial center is a planned development of office and related uses with some accessory commercial
uses intended primarily to serve employees of the offices. These developments shall include improvements for
internal streets, coordinated utilities, landscaping, and buffering.
A. Individual uses may be located in detached and attached structures.
B. Dimensional Requirements.
1. Minimum Site Regulations:
a. Minimum Site Area: 8 acres
b. Minimum Site Width: 300 feet
c. Minimum Setbacks: 100 feet (from site boundaries)
2. Minimum Lot Area Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Area: 1 acre
b. Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet
c. Minimum Front Yard: 50 feet
d. Minimum Side Yard: 20 feet, (50 feet for corner side yards)
e. Minimum Rear Yard: 30 feet
3. Maximum Regulations
a. Maximum Building Height: 40 feet
b. Maximum Impervious Surface: 80%
c. Minimum Building Spacing: 35 feet
C. Permitted Uses.
1. Healthcare Services, subject to Section 1628 subsection D.
2. Offices for Commercial Business/Serving or Professional Services.
3. Commercial School or Technical School, subject to Section 1631.
4. Child Daycare Center, subject to Section 1627.
5. Banks and Financial Establishments
6. Restaurants, General, Take-out and Fast-food, subject to Section 1649.
7. Fitness/Health Centers
8. Hotel, subject to Section 1648.
D. At least twenty percent (20%) of the total floor space of the center shall be utilized
163
for office uses.
E. Accessory outside storage or display of materials, goods, or refuse is not permitted within a center.
F. Lighting facilities shall be provided and arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and
neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
G. The buffer requirements of the ESP SALDO shall be met.
H. All parking and loading facilities shall be located to the rear or side of buildings.
I. Interior roadways shall have street trees as required in the ESP SALDO.
J. All commonly owned elements shall be owned and maintained in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act or other ownership arrangement reviewed by the Municipal Solicitor.
K. Parking:
1. Office: one (1) off-street parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor
area. Parking areas must be adequately screened when situated within fifty (50) feet of land zoned
for or in residential use.
2. Commercial and retail uses: four (4) off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained
for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area.
L. Conditional Reduction of Parking Improvements. Refer to Section 1509 of this Ordinance.
Section 1641. Shopping Centers
A. Shopping centers shall be in single ownership and under a guaranteed unified management control.
B. Permitted Principal uses:
1. The sales of goods at retail.
2. Personal services.
3. Services incidental to retail sales.
4. Restaurants.
5. Banks and financial institutions.
C. Area and Bulk Regulations:
1. Lot Size: The area for development shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres.
2. Impervious Coverage: Eighty percent (80%) maximum.
3. Building height: three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet maximum.
4. Building setback: 100 feet minimum.
5. Side Yard building setback: 50 feet minimum each side.
164
6. Rear Yard building setback: 50 feet minimum.
D. Parking Regulations:
1. Parking areas are for transient auto vehicles, but not for the storage of new or used motor vehicles
for sale. Temporary use is permitted for car dealers during special sales or shows no longer than
five (5) consecutive days in any six (6) month period and said use is subject to Section 1902.D.
2. Off-street parking shall be provided on the premises at a ratio of one (1) parking space per two
hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
3. Parking shall be permitted in the areas required for front, side, and rear yard setbacks up to a point
of twenty-five (25) feet from any front, side, or rear lot line of the shopping center.
4. All parking areas shall be suitably paved with all weather surface coverings.
E. Interior Circulation:
1. Interior access ways shall be designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving
the site.
2. Areas provided for loading or unloading of trucks and/or other vehicles or for servicing of shops
for rubbish collection or other services shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged that they
may be used without blocking or interfering with interior circulation and parking facilities.
F. Lighting:
1. Lighting for buildings, signs, access ways, and parking areas shall be so arranged as not to reflect
toward public streets or cause any annoyance to surrounding property owners or residents.
2. Lighting shall meet the standards of the ESP SALDO.
G. Shopping Cart Storage:
1. Establishments furnishing carts or mobile baskets shall provide definite areas on the site for the
storage of said carts. Storage area shall be clearly marked and designated for the storage of
shopping carts and/or mobile baskets.
H. Screening:
1. All side and rear lot lines abutting a residential district shall be appropriately screened by fences,
walls, or year-round planting and/or other suitable enclosures of a minimum height of four (4) feet
and a maximum height of six (6) feet.
2. If trees, evergreen hedges or other types of year-round plant are used, a landscaped area shall be
provided at least five (5) feet in width along the entire interior lot lines.
I. Storage of Trash or Rubbish:
1. Storage areas for trash and rubbish shall meet the requirements of Section 1505 of this Ordinance.
J. Outdoor displays shall meet the requirements of Section 1551 of this Ordinance.
K. Signs:
165
1. Signs shall conform to Section 1507 of this Ordinance.
L. Access and Traffic Controls:
1. All means of ingress and egress from the shopping center to a public street or State highway shall
be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any other intersecting street or streets and shall be
designed to conduct traffic in a safe manner.
2. The developer shall be responsible for the purchase and erection of any necessary traffic control
devices and the construction of additional acceleration or deceleration lanes which may be
required by PennDOT or the Governing Body.
M. Sewage and Drainage:
1. All shopping centers shall be required to connect to a public or community sewerage system and a
public or community water supply.
2. A storm runoff and drainage system shall be installed consistent with sound engineering practices
and shall meet the ESP SALDO.
N. Design Standards
1. Maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Maximum horizontal dimension of any building shall not exceed eight hundred (800) feet.
3. Any uninterrupted building façade that exceeds two hundred fifty (250) feet in length shall be
varied by methods such as building wall offsets and varying the pitch and height of the roofline.
O. Satellite use regulations
1. Satellite use buildings shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the building coverage of a
shopping center.
2. Each satellite use building shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from the primary
building(s).
3. Only one (1) permitted principal use is permitted in each satellite use building.
4. Gross floor area of each satellite use building shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
5. Vehicular access to satellite uses shall be from interior driveways only, with no independent
driveway access to exterior streets.
6. Parking capacity for satellite uses shall be included in the total capacity required in subsection
1641.D. above; however, sufficient parking for the satellite use shall be located convenient to the
satellite use.
7. Areas for satellite uses shall be integrated into the initial overall design of the development.
Section 1642. Supermarket; Grocery Store; Specialty Grocery Store; Convenience Store
A. Supermarket
166
B. Grocery Store
C. Specialty Grocery Store
D. Convenience Store
1. A Convenience Store is a business which specializes in the rental sales and/or retail of household
products and foods. Convenience Stores may also include any of the following provided that each use
has obtained the necessary approvals and that they operate as an accessory use to the Convenience
Store:
a. Retail sales or rental of books, magazines, videos, software, and video games provided that adultrelated
uses are expressly prohibited.
b. Take-out or Fast-food Restaurants provided that rest rooms are made available to the public.
c. Amusement devices to a maximum of two (2).
d. Automatic bank teller machines.
e. Photomats and film development drop-off sites.
f. Lottery sales counters and machines.
g. Propane fuel sales within no larger than twenty (20) pound tanks, which must be stored outside of
the building, but within a locked enclosure at all times.
h. Dispensing of automobile fuels, oils, compressed air, kerosene, washer fluid, and other auto-related
items.
i. Car washes, subject to the requirements of Section 1644 of this Zoning Ordinance.
2. Lot Area: one (1) acre.
3. Lot Width: One hundred and twenty five (125) feet.
4. Impervious Coverage: ninety percent (90%) maximum.
5. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street as defined by
this chapter.
6. The applicant must furnish evidence as to how the use will be controlled as to not constitute a nuisance
due to noise or loitering outside the store.
7. Ingress, egress and traffic circulation on the site shall be designed to minimize hazards and congestion.
8. The applicant shall demonstrate that the granting of the proposed use shall not materially increase traffic
congestion on adjacent roads and highways.
9. The subject property shall be set back at least three hundred (300) feet from any lot containing a school,
Day-Care Facility, playground, library, hospital, or Healthcare Facility.
10. Access driveways shall be a minimum of twenty-eight (28) feet wide and separated by one-hundred
(100) feet from one another, if located along the same frontage as measured from edge to edge.
167
11. All structures (including gasoline pump islands, but not permitted signs) and machinery shall be set
back at least twenty-five (25) feet from any street right-of-way line and not less than fifty (50) feet to a
side or rear lot line.
12. There shall be an ability for a minimum of three (3) vehicles to be serviced at each cluster of gasoline
pumps without obstruction of access driveways from public streets.
13. All ventilation equipment associated with fuel storage tanks shall be set back one-hundred (100) feet
and oriented away from any adjoining residential, commercial, or institutional properties.
14. Any drive-through facilities shall be located so that the on-site movement of vehicles will not be
hampered by those cars using said facilities. Drive-through facilities and canopies are subject to
Section 1509.
15. A minimum of one (1) parking space for each seventy five (75) square feet of gross floor area shall be
provided.
16. Loading areas are required and subject to Section 1508.
17. All property boundaries shall be screened as required by the ESP SALDO.
18. All lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from streets and adjoining properties.
19. All sales and/or storage or display of all merchandise, including seasonal items such as bagged wood
chips, peat moss, rock salt, flowers, etc., shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
20. Exterior trash/recycling receptacles shall be provided and routinely emptied to prevent the scattering of
litter and the applicant shall furnish and continuously implement a working plan for the cleanup of
litter and debris.
21. The applicant is required to demonstrate compliance with all applicable state requirements imposed
upon the proposed upon the proposed use.
Section 1643. Outdoor Flea and Antique Markets; Outdoor Farmer and Produce Markets
A. Outdoor flea and antique markets and outdoor farmer and produce markets shall comply with the
following:
1. It is the intent of this section to allow for areas of the ESP Region to have regulated outdoor sales
of items associated with flea markets, the antique trade, and farmers produce items in an indoor
and outdoor setting.
2. The duration of sales shall not exceed three (3) days within a seven (7) day time period.
3. Such uses may also take place within any enclosed buildings, however, sales within these
buildings must not exceed three (3) days per week. Any indoor or outdoor sales in any
consecutive seven (7) day period shall occur coincidentally.
4. All retail sales areas shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines.
5. The indoor sale of merchandise and products shall take place between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. Outdoor sales set up may begin no earlier than 4:00 a.m. and shall conclude by the
official sunset for that particular day.
6. There shall be no lighting of the property which produces glare on adjacent properties.
168
7. There shall be no more than two (2) signs, which shall not exceed three (3) square feet, and shall
only be located only on the premises and shall not be illuminated advertising the markets.
8. Off-street parking areas shall be provided based on one (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of retail sales area. The retail sales area shall be considered to be that of the smallest
rectangle or other regular geometric shape which encompasses all display stands, booths, tables or
stalls, plus any adjoining aisles and/or walkways from which consumers can inspect items for sale.
The retail sale shall include all indoor and/or outdoor areas as listed above;
9. The person responsible for the markets shall ensure proper parking and ingress and egress
circulation patterns so as to avoid impeding the flow of traffic on adjacent streets.
10. Adequate sewage disposal facilities shall be provided for all customers and vendors. Proof must
be provided that said facilities meet PA DEP requirements.
11. There shall be no overnight parking allowed.
12. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor retail sales area. Such
trash receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All
applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
13. When applying for a special exception, the applicant shall submit a plan showing compliance with
all applicable conditions of this section.
B. Application Procedure. The markets in this section shall be subject to the following application and
approval process:
1. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter and shall request
a special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board.
2. If a special exception is granted, the applicant shall apply for a zoning permit from the Zoning
Officer.
3. The Zoning Officer shall review the application for compliance with this section and any
conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board, visit the facility if deemed necessary, and
approve or deny the application for the Zoning Permit.
Section 1644. Car and Vehicle Washing Facility
A. The facility shall be connected to a public sewerage system and shall have all required approvals from PA
DEP.
B. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets. On-lot traffic circulation
channels and parking areas shall be clearly marked.
C. Driveway entrances shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from the right of way line of the intersection of
any public streets.
D. All automated washing facilities shall be in a completely enclosed building. All other car-washing
facilities shall be under a roofed structure which has at least two (2) walls.
E. Adequate provisions shall be made for the proper and convenient disposal of refuse. The applicant shall
provide evidence that adequate measures will be in place to prevent pollutants from being washed into the
169
groundwater or waterways. Any chemicals or polluted runoff that may be hazardous to aquatic life shall be
stored within an area that will completely contain any leaks or spills.
F. Water from the car wash operation shall not flow onto adjoining properties or onto sidewalks or streets in
such a manner as could cause ice hazards.
G. Any car wash that is located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of an existing dwelling shall not
operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7: 00 a.m.
H. No portion of a car wash shall be located within one hundred (100) feet from the center line of a perennial
waterway.
I. No structure shall be located less than twenty-five (25) feet from any lot line.
J. An approach drive or parking area to accommodate a minimum of five (5) cars in tandem, with a total
length of one hundred (100) feet per bay shall be constructed for the purpose of avoiding an accumulation
of cars backing upon a public thoroughfare, except in the case of a facility where only one bay is provided.
In such case, the approach drive or parking area shall be constructed to accommodate a minimum of eight
(8) cars in tandem, with a total length of one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
Section 1645. Automobile Service Station
A. Automobile Service Stations are those facilities performing “Minor Repair” and “Major Repairs” as
defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance and are regulated accordingly.
B. Minor Repair
1. All activities as allowed as a Minor Repair facility shall be performed within a building except
those customarily performed at air or fuel pumps. Spray painting or body or fender work is
prohibited as part of a Minor Repair facility.
2. Fuel pumps shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the existing street right-of-way.
3. An individual junk vehicle (as defined in this Ordinance) shall not be stored within view of a
public street or a dwelling for more than a total of twenty (20) days. No more than three junk
vehicles shall be stored on the lot outside of an enclosed building at any time.
4. Overnight outdoor storage of junk and vehicle parts, other than permitted whole junk vehicles,
shall be prohibited within view of a public street or dwelling.
5. There shall be an ability for a minimum of three (3) vehicles to be serviced at each cluster of
gasoline pumps or to be lined up behind cars being serviced without obstruction of access into or
out of the driveways from public streets.
6. A use that is primarily intended to serve trucks with three or more axles or tractor-trailer trucks
shall have a minimum lot area of one acre and all areas used for fueling and servicing shall be set
back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from all residential lot lines.
7. No building, structure, fuel pump, or fuel storage tank shall be less than fifty (50) feet to a lot line.
8. All refuse shall be stored within an enclosed building or an enclosed area.
9. The handling and disposal of motor oil, battery acid, and any other substance regulated by federal
statute and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental protection (DEP) shall be in
accordance with all permits and requirements of that agency or its successor agency. Any
170
suspension, revocation or violation of the DEP permits shall be a violation of this chapter and shall
be subject to the enforcement provisions of this Ordinance.
10. Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor
area, or two (2) off-street parking spaces for each service bay, whichever is larger, plus one (1)
space for each employee shall be provided. Off-street parking spaces are not to be a part of, nor
interfere with, the access ways to and from the pumps.
C. Major Repair
1. All major repair, welding, and paint work shall be performed within a building with a fume
collection and ventilation system that directs noxious fumes away from any adjacent dwellings.
2. All reasonable efforts shall be made to prevent or minimize noise, odor, vibration, glare, or
electrical interference nuisances to adjacent lots.
3. Outdoor storage of motor vehicles shall not be within a buffer yard or planting strip area nor closer
than ten (10) feet from a residential lot line.
4. Overnight outdoor storage of junk, other than permitted vehicles, shall be prohibited within view
of a public street or an adjacent dwelling.
5. An individual junk vehicle shall not be stored within view of a public street or a dwelling for a
total of more than twenty (20) days. A maximum of six (6) junk vehicles may be parked on a lot
outside of an enclosed building at any one time unless screened from view by evergreen plants.
6. Whenever practical in the determination of the Zoning Officer, service bay doors shall not face
directly towards an abutting dwelling (other than a dwelling separated from the repair garage by a
street).
7. A use that is primarily intended to serve trucks with three (3) or more axles or tractor-trailer trucks
shall have a minimum lot area of one (1) acre and all areas used for repairs, fueling, and serving of
such vehicles shall be set back a minimum of one-hundred (100) feet from a residential lot line.
8. The handling and disposal of motor oil, battery acid, and any other substance regulated by federal
statute and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental protection (DEP) shall be in
accordance with all permits and requirements of that agency or its successor agency. Any
suspension, revocation or violation of the DEP permits shall be a violation of this chapter and shall
be subject to the enforcement provisions of this Ordinance.
D. Car and Vehicle Washing Facilities as a Service by Minor Repair and Major Repair Automobile Service
Station
1. Car and Vehicle Washing Facilities is a service permitted by a Minor Repair and Major Repair
Automobile Service Station.
2. Where permitted by the zoning district in which the facility is to be located, the facility shall meet
the standards of Section 1552 of this Ordinance.
Section 1646. Vehicular and Mobile Home Sales, Rentals and Display; Heavy Equipment Sales,
Service and/or Repair Facilities
A. Vehicular and Mobile Home Sales, Rentals, and Display
171
1. Vehicles are those apparatuses as defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance which include, but are
not limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, recreation vehicles, motorcycles, and boats but does
not include “Trucks and Heavy Equipment Sales, Rental and Service Establishments” as defined
in Section 201.
2. Mobile homes are those structures as defined in Section 201 of this Ordinance.
3. New and used vehicle sales and service establishments shall be limited to those establishments
which are factory-authorized dealerships or which have obtained a license from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to operate a used car dealership.
4. The regulation of the renting of vehicles does not include those uses directly associated with
recreational areas such as canoe or boat rentals, golf carts, and bicycles.
5. The minimum lot area required shall be five (5) acres.
6. The property shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street.
7. The area used for display of vehicles, mobile homes, and related merchandise offered for sale and
the area used for parking of customer and employee vehicles shall be continuously paved and
maintained in either concrete or asphalt over a base of crushed stone compacted to not less than
six (6) inches in depth. Mobile home sales shall be required to install and maintain crushed stone
compacted to not less than six (6) inches in all areas with concrete or asphalt paving optional at the
owner’s discretion.
8. The handling and disposal of motor oil, battery acid, and any other substance regulated by federal
statute and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental protection (DEP) shall be in
accordance with all permits and requirements of that agency or its successor agency. Any
suspension, revocation or violation of the DEP permits shall be a violation of this Section and
shall be subject to enforcement provisions of this Ordinance.
9. All lots used for the outdoor display of vehicles shall have at least one (1) completely enclosed
building on the same lot which has not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor
area where all repair, servicing, sales and customer car-washing shall be performed.
10. No vehicle or other merchandise displayed outdoors shall be less than five (5) feet from any
property line. No vehicle shall be parked on adjacent property or in any public street right-of-way.
11. No vehicle shall be displayed or offered for sale which does not have all of the mechanical and
body components necessary for the safe and lawful operation thereof on the streets and highways
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
12. All lights and light poles shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any street right-of-way or
property line and all lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjacent streets and
properties.
13. No strings of lights or flags, flashers, or other display paraphernalia shall be permitted on the lot,
on any of the structures or poles, or on merchandise displayed outdoors except for such signs as
may be otherwise allowed by this Ordinance.
14. All required off-street parking spaces shall be reserved exclusively for the parking of customer and
employee vehicles and shall not be used for the display of merchandise.
15. Customer vehicles with external damage awaiting repairs shall be located either inside a building
or in an outdoor area which is screened by a six-foot (6) compact hedge or opaque fence.
172
16. All property boundaries shall be screened as required by the ESP SALDO.
B. Truck and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and/or Repair Facility
1. Truck and heavy equipment are defined in Section 201 of this ordinance.
2. New and used vehicle and equipment sales and service establishments related to truck and heavy
equipment shall be limited to those establishments which are factory-authorized dealerships or
which have obtained a license from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to operate a used car
dealership.
3. The minimum lot area required shall be: three (3) acres.
4. The property shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street.
5. The area used for display of trucks, heavy equipment and related merchandise offered for sale and
the area used for parking of customer and employee vehicles shall be continuously paved and
maintained in either concrete or asphalt over a base of crushed stone compacted to not less than
six (6) inches in depth.
6. The handling and disposal of motor oil, battery acid and any other substance regulated by federal
statute and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental protection (DEP) shall be in
accordance with all permits and requirements of that agency or its successor agency. Any
suspension, revocation or violation of the DEP permits shall be a violation of this Section and
shall be subject to enforcement provisions of this Ordinance.
7. If allowed in the G-I Zoning District the outdoor display of vehicles and merchandise must meet
Section 1505.B.3 of this Ordinance.
8. All lots used for the outdoor display of vehicles shall have at least one (1) completely enclosed
building on the same lot, which has not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor
area, where all repair, servicing, sales and vehicle washing shall be performed.
9. No vehicle or other merchandise displayed outdoors shall be less than ten (10) feet from any
property line. No vehicle shall be parked on adjacent property or in any public street right-of-way.
10. No vehicle shall be displayed or offered for sale which does not have all of the mechanical and
body components necessary for the safe and lawful operation thereof on the streets and highways
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
11. All lights and light poles shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any street right-of-way or
property line, and all lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjacent streets and
properties.
12. No strings of lights or flags, flashers or other display paraphernalia shall be permitted on the lot,
on any of the structures or poles or on merchandise displayed outdoors, except for such signs as
may be otherwise allowed by this Ordinance.
13. All required off-street parking spaces shall be reserved exclusively for the parking of customer and
employee vehicles and shall not be used for the display of merchandise.
14. Customer vehicles with external damage awaiting repairs shall be located either inside a building
or in an outdoor area which is screened by a six (6) foot compact hedge or opaque fence.
173
15. All property boundaries shall be screened as required by the ESP SALDO.
Section 1647. Auction Houses; Automobile and Vehicle Auctions
A. Auction House
1. Minimum Lot Area: Two (2) acres
2. Parking: one (1) space per 200 sq. ft of gross floor area
a. No part of any required parking areas or access drives shall be used for any display, sales or customer
seating/standing.
3. Lights shall meet the standards of Section 1506 and the ESP SALDO.
4. Any outdoor or indoor public address system must meet the requirements of Section 1553.B. of this
Ordinance.
5. No part of any outdoor auction sales shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
6. Access drives and parking are subject to Section 1509.
7. All required local, state, and federal licensing shall be made part of any municipal application for a Zoning
Permit.
B. Automobile and Vehicle Auction
1. Minimum Lot Area: 10 acres
2. Parking (customer): one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of sales area (indoor and outdoor)
devoted to the auctioning of automobiles and vehicles (see subsection 1647.B.8.a below)
3. Lighting shall meet the standards of Section 1506 of this Ordinance and any requirements of the ESP
SALDO.
4. Any site used for the sale, parking and/or storage of more than one hundred and fifty (150) vehicles for
auctions shall front solely upon collector or arterial roads.
5. All exterior areas used for the parking and/or storage of automobiles for auctions shall be subject to the
zoning districts setback requirements and enclosed a six (6) foot high fence.
6. Access drive and parking areas for customers shall be governed by Section 1509. Beyond this, all areas
used for vehicles sales; parking or storage shall include a non-paved, all-weather, dust-free surface.
7. Vehicles for auction may be parked and/or stored in a horizontally stacked configuration; however, no
vehicle shall be located more than one-hundred (100) feet from a minimum eighteen (18) foot-wide- on-site
access drive. Access drives, parking, and vehicle storage shall be part of the impervious coverage
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
8. In addition to the preceding requirements, automobile and vehicle auctions shall comply with the following:
174
a. The sales area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle, or other regular geometric
shape which encompasses all display stands, booths, tables or stalls, plus any adjoining aisles
and/or walkways from which consumers can inspect items for sale. The sales area shall include all
indoor and outdoor areas as listed above.
b. Except for subsection 1647.B.8.g below, the retail sales area shall be set back at least one hundred
(100) feet from all property lines.
c. Any exterior, amplified public address system shall be arranged and designed so as to comply with
Section 1553. B of this Ordinance.
d. Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor sales area. Such trash receptacles
shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All applications shall
include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
e. The servicing, reconditioning, demolition, or junking of vehicles is prohibited.
f. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of all materials will be accomplished in a
manner that complies with all applicable state and federal regulations.
g. No part of the auction shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of any land adjacent to a
residential use. A traffic impact report shall be prepared in accordance with the ESP SALDO.
Section 1648. Hotel; Motel; Bed and Breakfast
A. Hotels
1. The following accessory uses may be approved as part of:
a. Auditorium.
b. Barber and beauty shops.
c. Tavern or night club.
d. Gift shop.
e. Meeting facilities.
f. Recreational uses and swimming pools.
g. Restaurants, General. Health Club facilities for guests.
h. Other similar retail sales and personal services.
2. The above accessory uses (aside from outdoor recreational uses) shall be physically attached to the
main hotel building;
3. One freestanding restaurant, tavern or nightclub shall be permitted on the same lot as a principal
hotel, subject to the following:
175
a. The proposed restaurant, tavern, or nightclub shall offer the preparation and
serving food and drink to be consumed on the premises; no drive-through or
take out services shall be permitted.
b. No additional freestanding signs (other than those permitted for the principal
hotel use) shall be permitted.
c. If a nightclub is proposed, the applicant shall furnish evidence as to what means
assure that the proposed nightclub will not constitute a nuisance to adjoining
uses (including the hotel) by way of noise, litter, loitering and hours of
operation.
d. Off-street parking spaces have been provided per Section 1511 and located to
conveniently serve the freestanding restaurant, tavern, and/or nightclub, without
interfering with required off-street parking associated with the hotel use.
B. Hotel and Motel
1. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street, as
defined in this Ordinance. Ingress, egress, and traffic circulation on the site shall be designed to
ensure safety and minimize congestion and impact on local streets.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the granting of the proposed use shall not materially increase
traffic congestion on adjacent roads and highways.
3. Site lighting, if proposed, shall be shielded and reflected away from adjacent residential properties
and public streets.
4. Parking:
a. Hotel: 1.5 spaces per rented room, plus one (1) per employee
b. Motel: 1.5 spaces per rented room, plus one (1) per employee
c. Accessory uses: Per Section 1511 or Zoning Hearing Board requirements
5. A connection to both a Public water supply and public sewerage system is required.
6. Site Requirements:
a. Lot area: 2 acres
b. Lot Width: 250 feet minimum
c. Front yard: 50 feet minimum
d. Side yard: 50 feet minimum
e. Rear yard: 50 feet minimum
` f. Impervious Coverage: 60%
g. Max Height: 60 feet (hotel)
35 feet (motel)
176
h. No structure, except a permitted sign and parking areas, shall be nearer to any lot line
than fifty (50) feet.
C. Bed and Breakfast Establishments
1. A maximum of no more than six (6) rental units shall be provided; no more than three (3) adults
may occupy one rental unit; and no more than twelve (12) adult guests total may occupy the
facility at one (1) point in time.
2. One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each rental unit. The off-street parking
spaces for the bed and breakfast shall be located either to the rear of the principal building or
screened from the street and abutting dwellings by landscaping.
3. There shall not be any signs, show windows or any type of display or advertising visible from
outside the premises, except for a single non-internally illuminated sign with a maximum sign
area of four (4) square feet on each of the two (2) sides and with a maximum height of eight (8)
feet. The sign shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet to any side lot line. The sign shall require a
zoning permit until 10 pm.
4. The bed and breakfast shall have a residential appearance and character.
5. The bed and breakfast shall be operated by a permanent resident of the lot.
6. There shall not be separate cooking facilities in any guest room.
7. Food shall only be served to guests who are staying overnight.
8. No guests shall stay for more than fourteen (14) days in a month.
9. No retail sales are permitted.
10. No sales of alcohol are permitted.
11. The municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer must confirm if the sewage facilities are adequate for
the number of rental units utilized. This confirmation must accompany the application to the
Municipal Zoning Hearing Board.
12. The municipal Road Master and the Municipal Engineer must confirm if the access drive(s) are
adequate for safe ingress and egress for the anticipated volume of traffic for the proposed use. A
Municipal driveway permit (or PA DOT HOP permit if applicable) needs to accompany the
application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
13. The Municipal Road Master and Municipal Engineer must confirm if the applicant will be
required to address stormwater issues prior to the issuance of any driveway, zoning and/or
building permits.
Section 1649. Restaurants
A. Restaurants are those establishments defined in this Ordinance in Section 201.
B. Fast Food Restaurant
1. Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
177
3. Access requirements:
a. Such use must have direct access to a collector or arterial street.
b. There shall be only one point of ingress to the collector or arterial street. This may be
accomplished in one of the following ways:
i. The ingress and egress are adjacent to each other with no physical separation.
This arrangement must be at least twenty-four (24) feet wide and not more than
thirty-six (36) feet wide.
ii. The ingress and egress are adjacent with a raised island separating the two. The
island shall be more than ten (10) feet wide. Each driveway shall be at least
fourteen (14) feet wide but not more than twenty-four (24) feet wide.
iii. The ingress and egress would be completely separated on the site. In this case,
the driveways shall be at least one hundred (100) feet apart measured center line
to center line. Each driveway shall be at least fourteen (14) feet wide, but not
more than twenty-four (24) feet wide.
c. When this use is adjacent to, or on the same lot with, a group of commercial facilities, it
shall use the common access with the other business establishments and not have a
separate access to the abutting collector or arterial street.
d. The access driveway shall be located so as to allow for adequate acceleration and
deceleration lanes.
e. The access shall be at least forty (40) feet from any existing street intersection. The
distance shall be measured from the street right-of-way to the edge of the access
driveway.
f. A traffic impact analysis of the proposal shall be prepared by a traffic engineer or traffic
planner when required by the municipality. The study shall identify existing traffic levels
on the street, project traffic generated by the restaurant, identify potential problems
created by restaurant generated traffic and propose solutions to control and provide safe
access to and from the site and maintain an acceptable level of service on the frontage
street.
4. Parking requirements
a. One off-street parking space for every two (2) seats, or three (3) off-street parking spaces
for every one-hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, whichever requires the
greater number of spaces, plus one (1) additional space for each employee of the largest
shift.
b. Parking areas shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from any side or rear lot line except
when the buffer yard provisions require a greater distance.
c. At least two (2) parking space in close proximity to the entrance to the restaurant shall be
reserved for the handicapped. These spaces shall be twelve point five (12.5) feet wide by
twenty (20) feet deep.
d. Parking areas shall be paved and shall be subject to all applicable parking lot standards of
Section 1509 and the ESP SALDO
178
5. Where a drive-in or drive-through window is proposed, a stacking lane shall be provided to serve a
minimum of ten (10) cars. The stacking lane shall not be used for parking lot circulation Aisles
shall not in any way conflict with through circulation or parking. Drive-in and drive-through
windows shall meet the requirements of Section 1509.
6. A pedestrian walkway shall be provided between an existing sidewalk and the entrance to the
restaurant.
7. Service areas provided for delivery trucks shall be screened from the street and adjacent
properties. In addition, the service areas shall be so located as not to conflict with patron traffic,
either vehicular or pedestrian.
8. There shall be no outdoor storage other than trash which shall be within an enclosed area.
9. The entrance to the restaurant shall be designed to accommodate handicapped persons.
10. A maximum of two (2) outdoor menu boards are permitted, beyond the signs normally permitted,
with a maximum sign area of forty (40) square feet each if drive-through service is provided, and
only if the words on such signs are not readable from beyond the lot line.
11. Lighting:
a. All portion of the parking area shall be adequately lighted during after-dark operating
hours.
b. All light standards shall be located on the raised parking islands or planting areas and not
on the parking surface.
c. The lighting facilities shall be planned, erected, and maintained so the light is confined to
the property and will not cast direct light or glare upon adjacent properties or public
rights-of-way.
12. Covered trash receptacles shall be provided outside the restaurant for patron use.
13. All exterior seating and/or play areas shall be enclosed by a minimum three (3) foot high fence.
C. General Restaurant
1. Parking requirements: one (10 per every two (20 seats or one (1) per fifth (50) sq. ft. of customer
use, whichever is greater; and one (1) for each employee of the largest shift.
D. Take Out Restaurant
Section 1650. Regulations for Taverns; Nightclubs; Bottle Clubs; After Hours Clubs
A. Taverns
1. For the purpose of this section, taverns are those facilities as defined in this Ordinance.
2. Taverns may include, but not be limited to, beer gardens, bars, barrooms, pubs, cocktail lounges,
saloons, and taprooms. A nightclub, (as defined in this Ordinance) where entertainment is the
primary use, shall not be classified in this definition.
3. Taverns shall hold a valid license for the premise in which the establishment is located.
179
4. All taverns (unless the establishment holds a EHF license), shall only operate between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 2:30 a.m. the following day.
5. No tavern shall contain less than three hundred (300) square feet of usable floor area.
6. All taverns shall comply with all state and local codes regulating such establishments.
7. Taverns shall not include adult entertainment or adult business of any type.
8. Except in non-residential zoning districts where it is allowed, no tavern shall be located within
five hundred (500) feet of another tavern or other PLCB licensed establishment.
9. Except in non-residential zoning districts no tavern shall be located within one thousand (1,000)
feet of a school, church, playground, hospital, child day care facility or charitable institution.
10. Accessory Use Entertainment (as defined in this Ordinance) in Taverns shall be allowed subject to
the following:
a. Entertainment Accessory Use may be permitted as an accessory use to taverns in certain
residential and commercial zoning districts provided that the use meets the following
requirements:
1. The tavern shall be a permitted, special exception or legal nonconforming use.
2. The tavern shall have no more than three (3) Accessory Use Entertainment
performances per week (Monday thru Sunday) in any zoning district where it is
allowed.
3. All Accessory Use Entertainment performances in taverns in residential districts
where it is allowed shall begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and terminate no later
than 12:00 a.m.
4. Accessory Use Entertainment performances in taverns in non-residential
districts where it is allowed shall begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and terminate
no later than 1 a.m. of the following day.
11. Parking: one (1) space for every thirty (30) sq. ft. of gross floor area.
B. Nightclubs
1. Nightclubs, as defined, may be permitted by Special Exception in certain zoning districts,
provided that the following standards and those in Section 2002 are met as well as any
requirements of this Ordinance or those set forth by the Zoning Hearing Board.
2. Except in a non-residential zoning district, no nightclub shall be located within five hundred (500)
feet of another nightclub, tavern, or other PLCB licensed establishment.
3. Except in a non-residential zoning district, no nightclub shall be located within one thousand
(1000) feet of a school, church, playground, hospital, child day care facility, or charitable
institution.
4. All nightclubs shall hold a valid license for the premise in which the establishment is
located.
180
5. All nightclubs shall only operate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 2:30 a.m. the following day.
6. No nightclub shall contain less than five hundred (500) square feet of usable floor area.
7. All nightclubs shall comply with all state and local codes regulating such establishments.
8. Parking: one (1) space for every twenty-five sq. ft. of net floor area.
C. Bottle Clubs
1. A bottle club shall be in accordance with and subject to the requirements and limitations provided
in Title 18, PA. Consolidated Statutes.
2. A site plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale, shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing
Board. These plans shall show the location and dimensions of off-street parking, private
entrances, walkways, landscaping, the dimensions and square footage of each room and storage
space and shall indicate the intended use of each room.
3. A statement must be presented setting forth the full particulars of the use, including the hours of
operation and any proposed entertainment and dancing.
4. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed use in the intended location will not adversely
affect the value, or the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights for adjacent property
owners.
5. The club shall not be located within one-thousand (1000) feet of any school, church, day or
residential care facility, municipal park, playground, recreation facility, adult business, game
room, after hour’s club, or other bottle club or five-hundred (500) feet to any tavern.
6. Parking requirements shall be met as set forth in this Ordinance.
7. Lighting requirements are per Section 1506.
8. Parking: one (1) for every one hundred (100) sq. ft. of gross floor area.
D. After-hours club.
1. As a condition of any approval under this Section, the applicant shall prove full compliance with
State Act 219 of 1990, as amended (Section 7327 of Title 18 of the Pennsylvania statutes).
2. A site plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale, shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing
Board. These plans shall show the location and dimensions of off-street parking, private
entrances, walkways, landscaping, the dimensions and square footage of each room and storage
space and shall indicate the intended use of each room.
3. A statement must be presented setting forth the full particulars of the use, including the hours of
operation and any proposed entertainment and dancing.
4. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposes use in the intended location will not adversely
affect the value, or the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property right for adjacent property
owners.
5. The club shall not be located within on-thousand (1000) feet of any school, church, day or
residential care facility, municipal park, playground, recreation facility, adult business, game
181
room, bottle club, other after hours club, or five-hundred (500) feet to any tavern.
6. Parking requirements as set forth in this Ordinance.
7. Lighting requirements are per Section 1506.
Section 1651 through 1658 (Reserved)
Section 1659. Recreation Uses
A. General regulations:
1. If the subject property contains more than two acres, it shall front on an arterial or collector road.
2 Those uses involving outdoor activities shall provide sufficient screening and/or landscaping measures to
mitigate any visual and/or audible impacts on adjoining properties. All uses must comply with the provisions of
this chapter.
3. Structures exceeding the maximum permitted height may be permitted, so long as they are set back from all
property lines at least the horizontal distance equal to their height, plus an additional 50 feet. Furthermore, such
structures shall not be used for occupancy.
4. The applicant shall furnish qualified evidence that the proposed use will not be detrimental to the use of
adjoining properties due to hours of operation, noise, light, litter, dust, and pollution.
5 Required parking will be determined based upon the types of activities proposed and the schedule listed in this
ordinance. In addition, any recreation use not specifically regulated may require an unimproved, grassed,
overflow parking area to be provided for peak use periods. Such overflow parking areas shall be accessible only
from the interior driveways of any permanent parking lot. Overflow parking areas shall contain fencing to
prevent vehicles from crossing adjoining properties or directly accessing adjoining roads.
6 Any booths or other structures used for the collection of admission and/or parking fees shall be set back and
arranged to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining roads during peak arrival periods. Any other collection of fees
(roaming parking lot attendants) shall be conducted in a manner to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining roads.
If, at any time after the opening of the commercial recreation facility, the Governing Body determines that
traffic backups are occurring on adjoining roads, and such backups are directly related to the means of access to
the subject property, the Governing Body can require the applicant to revise means of access to relieve the
undue congestion.
7. Any outside pedestrian waiting lines shall be provided with a means of shade.
8. Wherever woods exist adjacent to an exterior lot line of the use, such woods shall be preserved to
within 50 feet of said lot line, except for approved driveways or utility crossings.
9. Any accessory use such as restaurants, tavern, retail business activity, etc., shall only be allowed if
those uses are permitted in the underlying zoning district and they meet all the requirements for said
use.
10. The use shall only be conducted between the hours of 9 a.m. and 10 p.m. unless more restrictive hours
are established.
Section 1660. Hunting Lodges and Clubs, Gun Clubs and Archery Clubs; Game Preserves; Wildlife
Sanctuary
A. Hunting Lodges and Clubs; Gun Clubs Archery Clubs
1. Minimum Lot Area: Ten (10) acres
182
2. Parking: One (1) space for each four (4) seats.
3. Impervious Coverage: Five percent (5%).
4. Firing and Target ranges:
a. No part of a firing range shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet from any
property line.
b. Firing Ranges:
i. May not substantially injure or detract from the lawful existing or permitted use
of neighboring properties.
ii. May not substantially damage the health, safety, or welfare of the Municipality
or its residents and property owners.
iii. Must comply with all applicable state and local laws, rules, and regulations
regarding the discharge of a firearm.
iv. Shall store ammunition only in an approved secure vault.
v. Shall limit the number of shooters to the number of firing points or stations
identified on the development plan.
vi. Shall require all shooters to satisfactorily complete an orientation safety program
given in accordance with the PA Game Commission, or show a valid hunting
permit or gun permit, before they are allowed to discharge firearms without
supervision.
vii. Shall prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages within the area approved
as the shooting range.
viii. Shall limit firing to the hours between one hour after official sunrise and one
hour preceding official sunset, unless sufficient lighting is used, in which case
all shooting shall cease by 10:00 p.m.
c. A development plan shall identify the safety fan for each firing range. The safety fan
shall include the area necessary to contain all projectiles, including direct fire and
ricochet. The safety fan configuration shall be based upon qualified expert testimony
regarding the trajectory of the bullet, and the design effectiveness of beams, overhead
baffles, or other safety barriers to contain projectiles to the safety fan.
d. The firing range, including the entire safety fan, shall be enclosed with a six (6) foothigh,
non-climbable fence to prevent unauthorized entry into the area. Range caution
signs with eight (8) inch-tall red letters on a white background shall be posted at a
maximum of one-hundred-foot (100’) intervals around the range perimeter. Signs shall
read “SHOOTING RANGE AREA. KEEP OUT!”
e. Range flags shall be displayed during all shooting activities. Range flags shall be located
in a manner visible from entrance drives, target areas, range floor, and the perimeter of
the safety fan.
183
f. All surfaces located within the safety fan, including the backstop, overhead baffles,
berms, and range floor, shall be free of hardened surfaces, such as rocks or other
ricocheting producing materials.
g. All shooting rang facilities, including buildings, parking, firing range, and safety fan shall
be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the property line and street rightof-
way;
h. The applicant shall present credible evidence that sounds of shooting in the nearest
residential zone do not exceed the ambient noise level.
B. Game Preserves
1. Where game preserves are permitted, all activities and services should be directed at the
protection, care and feeding of the animals on the preserve and to ensure that the animals from the
preserve do not interfere with the health and welfare of a municipality and neighboring residents
or their property. Additionally, game preserves are subject to the following standards:
2. The entire game preserve must be surrounded by a fence of sufficient height to prevent the animals
from leaving the game preserve.
3. The keeping of dangerous animals is prohibited.
4. The owner/operator of the game preserve must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Municipality
that they have the training, experience and knowledge necessary to safely handle those animals
what will be kept in the game preserve.
5. The owner/operator will show proof to the Municipality that any and all required Federal, State,
and local licenses and permits have been obtained.
6. The game preserve must be a minimum of twenty-five (25) acres.
7. All game preserves shall comply with any and all local, state, and federal regulations governing
game preserves.
C. Wildlife Sanctuary
Section 1661. Campground and Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks
A. Campground and Recreational Vehicle Parks
1. Intent:
The intent of this section shall be to provide rules, regulations and standards for development of
RV parks and campgrounds in the County of Page, ensuring that the public health, safety and
general welfare are protected; that orderly growth and development together with the
conservation, protection and proper use of land shall be ensured; that proper provisions for all
public facilities shall be made; and that local government is given appropriate control over the
zoning and location of RV parks and campgrounds in their respective municipalities.
2. Definitions for Section 1661.A:
ACCESSORY USES —Offices, recreational facilities, convenience stores, gift shops,
service buildings, rest rooms, dumping stations, showers, laundry facilities, storage units and
184
other uses and structures customarily a part of the RV park or campground operation for the
use of occupants.
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION — The organization, office or individual
responsible for approving equipment, equipment installation, a permit or a procedure.
CABIN/CAMPING —A hard-sided tent or shelter less than four hundred (400) square feet
in area.
CABIN/HOUSEKEEPING —A rustic cabin less than four hundred (400) square feet in
area providing guests with full service amenities as an alternative to other forms of rental
lodging.
CAMPERS —A person or persons participating in RV'ing or camping (also see RV’ers).
CAMPGROUND/RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SITE —A plot of ground within a recreation
vehicle park or campground intended for the accommodation of either a recreation vehicle, tent or
other individual camping unit on a temporary basis.
PRIMITIVE —A site where no hookups are providing at the individual sites.
DEVELOPED— A site accessible by vehicular traffic where RV sites are substantially
developed with two or more utilities, i.e., sewer, water or electricity.
CAMPING UNIT —A structure, shelter or vehicle designed, and intended for occupancy by
persons engaged in RVing or camping. The basic units are recreational vehicle, camping cabin,
housekeeping cabin, tent and other rental accommodations for enjoying the outdoor experience.
DENSITY —The number of camping unit sites on a unit of land area.
GREENBELT — A strip of land, containing landscaping or other aesthetic site obscuring features,
intended to buffer potentially incompatible uses. Greenbelts may include utilities and other underground
facilities but not camping units, buildings or recreation areas.
MINIMUM LOT SIZE —The minimum land area required to accommodate an RV park or campground.
OCCUPANCY —The presence of guest(s) in a camping unit for a site night where rent is received.
OPERATOR — The owner of RV park or campground or his/her designee.
OWNER — The owner of an RV park or campground or his/her designee.
RECREATION AREA —A specific area of the RV park or campground, either of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water, which is designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of guests of
the RV park or campground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) —A vehicular-type camping unit certified by the manufacturer as
complying with ANSI A119.2 or A119.5 and primarily designed to provide travel and destination RV'ing
that either has its own mode of power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle. The basic units are
camping trailer, fifth-wheel trailer, motor home, park trailer, travel trailer and truck camper as described
below.
CAMPING TRAILER— A recreational vehicle that is mounted on wheels and constructed with
collapsible partial sidewalls that fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold for use.
FIFTH-WHEEL TRAILER —A recreational vehicle designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle
that contains a towing mechanism that is mounted above or forward of the tow vehicle's rear axle.
MOTOR HOME —A recreational vehicle built on or permanently attached to a self-propelled
motor vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van that is an integral part of the completed vehicle.
185
PARK TRAILER — A recreational vehicle that meets the following criteria:
Built on a single chassis mounted on wheels.
Certified by the manufacturer as complying with ANSI A119.5.
TRAVEL TRAILER —A recreational vehicle designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle
containing a towing mechanism that is mounted behind the tow vehicle's bumper.
TRUCK CAMPER – A recreational vehicle consisting of a roof, floor, and sides designed to be
loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE/DEPENDENT — A recreational vehicle not containing sanitary facilities
and/or devices for connecting said facilities to a community waste disposal system.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE/INDEPENDENT —A recreational vehicle containing sanitary facilities
and devices for connecting said facilities to a community waste disposal system. This type of RV is also
referred to as a "self-contained recreational vehicle."
RENT — Compensation or other consideration given for a prescribed right, use, possession or occupancy
of an RV park or campground.
RENTAL/ON-SITE —A camping unit placed within an RV park or campground which is available for
rental to guests.
RVers —Individuals who use recreational vehicles for RV'ing and camping, including but not limited to
the following categories:
DAILY/OVERNIGHTER— Typical are the many RV'ers and campers who stay for a short time
as an alternative to other types of lodging; the length of stay is specified in this section of the
ordinance typically travelers, area visitors or tourists enjoying local attractions of a given area.
EXTENDED STAY —Those who stay in a given recreational vehicle park or campground for an
extended period of time; the length of stay is specified in this section of the ordinance. The term
"extended stays" is generally used in describing three groups as follows:
Individuals who have selected a recreationally centered lifestyle and who list a
specific location for a traditional season.
Individuals who have selected interim lodging during temporary transfer to a new
locality or while awaiting construction of conventional housing who list a specific
location.
Individuals who frequently relocate for employment purposes who list a specific
location.
A type of camper not a period of time.
SERVICE BUILDING —A structure or portion thereof that is used to house sanitary facilities, such as
water closets or lavatories. It may include other facilities for the convenience of the RV park or
campground guests.
SITE — The portion of an RV park or campground where the camping unit is situated.
TENT —A portable shelter, consisting of synthetic fabrics or natural skins stretched over a flexed or rigid
framework.
3. Minimum Lot Size: Thirty (30) acres
186
4. Density and Campground/Recreation Vehicle:
a. Campgrounds and RV Parks may be used by campers and RV’ers. Campers and Rv’ers
shall rent Camping Units on Campground/Recreational Vehicle Sites on a daily/overnight
basis only and the renters of said Campground/Recreational Vehicle Sites shall remain in
the Campground/RV Park for not more fourteen (14) days unless the renters are of the
Extended Stay category.
b. Size and separation of Campground/Recreation Vehicle Sites
i. Daily/Overnight: minimum of sixteen hundred (1600) square feet with
minimum site width of twenty-five (25) feet.
ii. Extended Stay: minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet with a
minimum site width of fifty (50) feet.
iii. The minimum distance between sites shall be fifteen (15) feet.
c. The maximum number of Campground/Recreation Vehicle Sites per acre shall be fifteen
(15).
5. Areas for recreation/open space:
a. A minimum of twenty (20%) percent of the gross area of the campground of which no
more than fifty 50) percent ca be a body of water shall be devoted to active and passive
recreation areas. Responsibility for maintenance of the recreation area shall be with the
landowner.
6. Buildings, structures, and accessory uses:
a. Every campground shall have an office in which shall be located the office of the person
responsible for the operation of the campground.
b. “Accessory Uses”, as defined in this section are permitted. Such accessory and
commercial uses shall be solely designed and constructed to serve the campground’s
registered guests and their visitors. Any parking spaces provided for these commercial
uses shall have vehicular access from the campground’s internal road, rather than the
public street. All accessory commercial uses and related parking shall be screened from
adjoining residentially zoned parcels.
7. Setbacks and Greenbelts:
a. A greenbelt shall be provided between the campground and any abutting property unless
natural or physical man-made barriers exist.
b. Any existing healthy trees within any setback shall be preserved, except as needed for
entrance roads and utility crossings.
c. Campground Recreation Vehicle Sites shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100)
feet from any public street right-of-way; fifty (50) feet from any side or rear property
line; and one hundred and fifty 91500 feet from all residential lot lines.
d. No Camping Unit used for sleeping quarters shall be within the one-hundred-year
floodplain or on slopes over fifteen (15) percent.
187
e. Any “Accessory Use” shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any
property line.
f. All outdoor play areas shall be set back one hundred (100) feet from any property line
and screened from adjoining residentially zoned properties. Such outdoor play areas
shall be used exclusively by register guests and their visitors.
g. Any swimming pools, recreation centers, clubhouses, restrooms, trash receptacles or
other similar areas of high use or noise potential shall be located not less than two
hundred (200) feet from all property lines, and screened from residential properties
8. Access and circulation:
a. A commercial campground shall include at least one gravel or paved entrance road from
a street, with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. The first one hundred (100) feet of
the campground road from the street cartway shall be paved.
b. Entrances and exits to RV Parks and Campgrounds shall be designed for safe and
convenient movement of traffic into and out of the park and to minimize marginal friction
with free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. All traffic into or out of the park shall
be through such entrances and exits. No entrance or exit shall require a turn at an acute
angle for vehicles moving in the direction intended, and radii of curbs and pavements at
intersections shall be such as to facilitate easy turning movements for vehicles with
trailers attached. No material impediment to visibility shall be created or maintained
which obscures the view of an approaching driver in the right lane of the street within one
hundred (100) feet, where speed limit is less than 45 miles per hour, or one hundred fifty
(150) feet, where speed limit is 45 miles per hour or more, or to PennDOT standards,
whichever is more restrictive.
c. No entrance or exit from a Campground/RV Park shall be permitted through a residential
district nor require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district.
d. Except for these surfaces which are required to be paved, exposed ground surfaces in all
parts of RV Parks and campgrounds shall be covered with crushed stone or gravel or
protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and
eliminating objectionable dust.
e. Roads within the campground/RV Park shall have a minimum width of 12 feet for oneway
streets and 20 feet for two-way streets. Vehicular access to campsites shall be
provided only by way of the road network within the campgrounds.
f. A traffic impact study is required subject to the requirements of the ESP SALDO.
9. Sewage, water, and trash:
a. All drinking water used in the operation of a campground shall be provided from a supply
approved by PA DEP.
b. All sewage disposal systems serving a campground shall be approved by PA DEP.
c. Restrooms with toilet and water facilities shall be provided on the premises of each
campground for the use of the employees and occupants of the campground. These
facilities shall be approved by the PA DEP.
188
d. Solid waste disposal and vector control shall be the responsibility of the campground
landowner and shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of PA DEP.
10. Impervious Coverage:
a. Maximum: Ten (10) percent
11. Signs:
a. A Campground/RV Park may construct one (1) freestanding on-illuminated sign
containing no more than thirty-two (32) square feet. Any reference to accessory
commercial or recreational facilities shall remain secondary in size to the reference of the
principal campground use. Such sign shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the
street right-of-way line, and at lest twenty-five (25) feet from adjoining lot lines.
12. Lighting:
a. All lighting shall be arranged and shielded so that no glare or direct illumination shall be
cast upon adjacent properties or public streets.
13. Plot Plan:
a. Every application for the construction, operation, maintenance and occupancy for an RV
park or campground shall be accompanied by plans, and specifications, at a minimum
scale of one inch to 50 feet fully setting out the trailer spaces, the position of each travel
trailer, motor vehicle parking spaces, the interior road giving access thereto, buildings,
recreation areas and a plan of landscaping. The plan shall also show adjoining property
uses and any structures within fifty (50) feet of any property lines.
14. Occupancy:
a. Every campground shall have an office in which shall be located the person responsible
for operation of the campground. Such person shall maintain a daily registration log of
tenants; such registration log shall be maintained for each calendar year. Any caretaker
or person responsible for the operation of the campground is subject to Section 1551.
b. Permanent occupancy prohibited: No Camping Unit shall be used as a permanent place
of abode, dwelling, or business or for indefinite periods of time. Continuous occupancy
extending beyond six (6) months in any twelve-month period shall be presumed to be
permanent occupancy.
15. Zoning Permit/Certificate of Use and Occupancy:
a. Upon the proper installation of the campground, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
temporary use and occupancy permit. Such permit shall be reviewed every 12 months.
A fee, in the amount to be set by the Municipality, shall be paid by the landowner upon
each renewal of the temporary use and occupancy permit. Such fee shall be based upon
the cost of the annual review of the permit;
b. Prior to the issuance of renewal of a certificate of use and occupancy, the owner of a
campground shall file with a set of campground regulations.
c. The owner of the campground shall make certain that zoning and building permits are
obtained prior to the construction or installation of all structures on the premises. This
provision includes structures proposed on camping site other than tents or campers.
189
d. Upon due notice, the Zoning Officer may revoke a certificate of use and occupancy for
failure by the owner to enforce such regulations, or for the violation of this chapter or
other provisions, and the same shall be reinstated or renewed until satisfactory guarantees
of future enforcement are provided.
B. Camps
1. Minimum Lot Area: Twenty (20) acres.
2. Definitions:
CAMP – Those organized camp establishments which provide food or lodging accommodations
of tents or cabins for groups of children or adults engaged in organized recreational or educational
programs. The term “camp” shall include, but shall not be limited to, camps with special program
emphasis, such as horseback riding, conservation, music and sports, as well as “retreat camps”.
The term “camp shall not include manufactured home parks, migrant labor camps or recreational
vehicle parks.
CAMPSITE – for purposes of this section, “campsites” are those plots of ground in a “camp”
which are used for “tents” or “cabins”.
CABINS – a rustic fully enclosed structure less than four hundred (400 square feet in area
providing shelter and/or cooking and sanitary facilities.
TENT – a soft or hand sided shelter less than four hundred (400) square feet in area used for
shelter and sleeping with no fixed cooking or sanitary facilities.
3. Campsite and Density Regulations:
a. Campsites shall be a minimum of fifteen hundred (1500) square feet with a minimum width of
thirty (30) feet.
b. Cabins and tents shall be placed only on campsites and shall be no closer than five (5) feet to
campsite lines
c. Campsites shall be delineated on the ground.
d. No more than fifteen (15) campsites per acre shall be allowed.
e. No campsites shall be permitted on slopes more than fifteen (15) percent.
4. Buildings, Structures, and Accessory Uses
a. Every camp shall have an office in which shall be located the person responsible for operation
of the facility. Such person shall maintain a registration log of guests and staff on the site on
a daily basis.
b. Offices may be a stand along fully enclosed structures are part of fully enclosed a structure,
but in no case shall any structure be more than fifteen hundred (1500) square feet (except for
caretakers).
c. No lodging shall be allowed in any structure other than cabins or tents except for living
accommodations for a care taker. Such accommodations shall be no more than nine hundred
(900) square feet in size.
190
d. Any items sold or provided shall be for the users of a camp.
5. Parking:
a. Each campsite shall either provide a parking space which will not interfere with the
convenient and safe movement of traffic, or equivalent parking shall be provided in a
common parking area.
b. Required parking will be determined based upon the types of activities proposed and the
schedule listed in this Ordinance. In addition, if warranted by the conduct of special events or
community gatherings, the Zoning Hearing Board may require an unimproved/grassed
overflow parking area for peak use periods. Overflow parking areas may also require fencing
to prevent vehicles from crossing adjoining properties.
6. Setbacks and buffers:
a. No building, off-street parking lot or loading area, athletic field or court, playground, picnic,
pavilion, campsite, dumpster or other similar structure shall be located within one hundred
(100) feet of a property line.
b. Those uses involving outdoor activities shall provide sufficient screening and/or measures to
mitigate any visual and/or audible impacts on adjoining properties;
c. Any sanitary and garbage collection/recycling facilities shall be screened from adjoining
residentially zoned properties;
d. No buildings or campsites in a floodplain.
7. Access and circulation:
a. A commercial campground shall include at least one gravel or paved entrance road
from a street, with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. The first one hundred (100) feet of
the camp road from the street cartway shall be paved.
b. Entrances and exits to the camp shall be designed for safe and convenient movement of traffic
into and out of the park and to minimize marginal friction with free movement of traffic on
adjacent streets. All traffic into or out of the park shall be through such entrances and exits.
No entrance or exit shall require a turn at an acute angle for vehicles moving in the direction
intended, and radii of curbs and pavements at intersections shall be such as to facilitate easy
turning movements for vehicles with trailers attached. No material impediment to visibility
shall be created or maintained which obscures the view of an approaching driver in the right
lane of the street within one hundred (100) feet, where speed limit is less than 45 miles per
hour, or one hundred fifty (150) feet, where speed limit is 45 miles per hour or more, or to
PennDOT standards, whichever is more restrictive.
c. No entrance or exit from the camp shall be permitted through a residential district nor require
movement of traffic from the park through a residential district.
d. Except for these surfaces which are required to be paved, exposed ground surfaces in all parts
of the camp shall be covered with crushed stone or gravel or protected with a vegetative
growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust.
191
e. Roads within the camp shall have a minimum width of 12 feet for one-way streets and 20 feet
for two-way streets. Vehicular access to the camp shall be provided only by way of the road
network within the campgrounds.
f. A traffic impact study is required subject to the requirements of the ESP SALDO.
8. Sewage, water and trash:
a. All drinking water used in the operation of a the camp shall be provided from a supply
approved by PA DEP.
b. All sewage disposal systems serving the camp shall be approved by PA DEP.
c. Restrooms with toilet and water facilities shall be provided on the premises of the camp
for the use of the employees and occupants of the camp. These facilities shall be
approved by the PA DEP.
d. Solid waste disposal and vector control shall be the responsibility of the camp landowner
and shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of PA DEP.
9. Impervious Coverage:
a. Maximum: Five (5) percent
10. Signs:
a. One (1) freestanding non-illuminated sign containing no more than thirty-two (32) square feet
is allowed at the entrance to a camp. It shall be setback at lest ten (10) feet from a road rightof-
way line and at least twenty five (25) feet from adjoining lot lines.
b. An unlimited number of on-site directional and information signs are permitted provided such
signs reasonably relate to the number and scale of facilities contained on the site. Such signs
shall be limited to no more than ten (10) square feet of total sign area, with a maximum
permitted height of eight (8) feet.
c. The applicant shall provide for adequate safety signs to warn pedestrians and motorists of rail
crossings.
11. Lighting:
a. All lighting shall be arranged and shielded so that no glare or direct illumination shall be cast
upon adjacent properties or public streets.
12. Plot Plan:
a. Every application for the construction, operation, maintenance and occupancy for the
camp shall be accompanied by plans, and specifications, at a minimum scale of one inch
to 50 feet fully setting out the trailer spaces, the position of each travel trailer, motor
vehicle parking spaces, the interior road giving access thereto, buildings, recreation areas
and a plan of landscaping. The plan shall also show adjoining property uses and any
structures within fifty (50) feet of any property lines.
b. The Plot Plan shall also show any of the following:
i. One-hundred-year floodplains;
192
ii. Steep slopes (greater than 15%)
iii. Wetlands, wellhead protection areas, streams, ponds, or other water
bodies;
iv. Sinkholes, caves, vistas, or other significant geologic features;
v. Threatened or endangered species habitats;
vi. Archaeological resources;
vii. Historic resources; and
viii. Significant stands of mature trees.
13. Occupancy
a. Occupancy of any campsite shall be limited to no more than one hundred eighty-one
(181) consecutive days during any calendar year, except for a caretaker.
14. Zoning Permit/Certificate of Use and Occupancy:
a. Upon the proper installation of the camp, the Zoning Officer shall issue a temporary use
and occupancy permit. Such permit shall be reviewed every 12 months. A fee, in the
amount to be set by the Municipality, shall be paid by the landowner upon each renewal
of the temporary use and occupancy permit. Such fee shall be based upon the cost of the
annual review of the permit;
b. Prior to the issuance of renewal of a certificate of use and occupancy, the owner of the
camp shall file with a set of the camp regulations.
c. The owner of the camp shall make certain that zoning and building permits are obtained
prior to the construction or installation of all structures on the premises. This provision
includes structures proposed on camping site other than tents or campers.
d. Upon due notice, the Zoning Officer may revoke a certificate of use and occupancy for
failure by the owner to enforce such regulations, or for the violation of this chapter or
other provisions, and the same shall be reinstated or renewed until satisfactory guarantees
of future enforcement are provided.
Section 1662. Riding Academy; Riding Stables and Horse Boarding Facilities
A. “Riding Academies”, “Riding Stables”, and “Horse Boarding Facilities” are a use by right in the EAP and
A-P Zoning Districts if they meet the criteria of “Family Farm Support Business” in the regulations of the
EAP and A-P zoning regulations.
B. “Riding Stables” and “Horse Boarding Facilities” in the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts which do not meet
the Family Farm Support Business criteria of the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts and which are operated as
a commercial use are allowed by special exception. This does not apply to non-commercial agricultural
accessory uses in these Zoning Districts.
C. “Riding Stables” and “Horse Boarding Facilities” which operated as a commercial use are allowed by
special exception in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts. This does not apply to non-commercial agricultural
accessory uses in these Zoning Districts.
D. “Riding Academies” in the EAP and A-P Zoning Districts which do not meet the criteria in subsection.
1662. A above, are allowed by special exception. “Riding Academies” are a special exception use in the
R-1 and R-2 Zoning District.
193
E. The aggregate number of horses allowed by right for agricultural uses and the special exception uses of a
“Riding Academy” “Riding Stable”, and a “Horse Boarding Facility” shall not exceed the number of
animal units allowed in Section 456 (EAP Zoning District); and Section 1616 (A-P, R-1 and R-2 Zoning
Districts). These Animal Units are determined by Section 1617.
F. In addition to the regulations pertaining to the EAP, A-P, R-1, and R-2 Zoning Districts, as well as General
Regulations of this ordinance, the following shall apply:
1. Riding Academies
a. All stables shall be maintained so as to minimize odors perceptible at the property line.
b. All outdoor training or show facilities or areas shall be set back one hundred (100) feet
from all property lines.
c. All outdoor training, show, riding, and boarding, areas shall be enclosed by a minimum
four-foot-high fence, which will be located at least ten (10) feet from all property lines.
d. All parking compounds and unimproved overflow parking areas shall be set back at
least ten (10) feet from adjoining lot lines. Unimproved overflow parking areas shall
also provide a fence delineating occasional parking facilities for any shows preventing
the parking environment or movement of vehicles across neighboring properties.
e. The number of anticipated shows shall be part of any special exception use. It must be
shown to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board there will be adequate parking
facilities available for any shows associated with a Riding Academy.
f. In addition to any other parking requirements for any other uses on the subject
property, there shall be one (1) space for each horse stall.
2. Riding Stables and Horse Boarding Facilities
a. All stables shall be maintained so as to minimize odors perceptible at the property
lines.
b. In addition to any other parking requirements for any other uses on the subject
property, there shall be one (1) space for each horse stall.
Section 1663. Motor sports Facility
A. Motor sports Facilities, when allowed by special exception shall meet the criteria of Section 2002 of this
ordinance and shall provide the following to the municipality’s Zoning Hearing Board:
1. A conceptual site plan of the property that shows the approximate location, scale and character of
all proposed site features and facilities, including, but not limited to, all areas devoted to racing,
maintenance, spectator seating, parking, vehicle and pedestrian access and circulation, camping,
and concessions. Proposals for site landscaping, buffering and lighting shall be included on the
plan.
2. A preliminary grading plan that shows the existing and proposed topography of the site, including
the elevations of all proposed facilities and features, and their relationship to the elevation of
surrounding properties and uses.
194
3. A detailed written narrative describing:
a. Al proposed uses of the property, including the frequency of each use proposed and the
anticipated hours of operation for each use.
b. The types of motor sports events proposed and the types of vehicles involved in each event.
c. Plans for providing safety and security on the property during all proposed events.
d. Plans for the provision of a public water supply and a public sewerage system to the
property, or (if public facilities are not proposed), methods by which potable water shall be
provided and sewage shall be disposed.
e. Plans for the abatement of noise generated by the use and operation of the property, with
information on methods to be employed.
f. Plans for the mitigation of lighting impacts on surrounding and nearby properties.
g. Plans for the adequate management of traffic generated by the proposed use, including an
analysis of existing traffic patterns in the area, and any plans or proposals for off-site traffic
improvements.
4. All proposals for Motor sports Facilities shall meet the following minimum standards; however,
stricter standards may be established as a condition of the issuance of a special exception:
a. A minimum lot size of fifty (50) acres shall be provided.
b. All proposed uses, structures, and other developed or activity areas shall be located at least two
hundred (200) feet from any adjoining property line.
c. All exterior lighting on the property shall be designed, located and arranged so as not to direct
glare on adjoining streets or properties. Lighting intensity at adjoining property lines shall not
exceed 0.5 foot candles.
d. No recurrent or sustained noise generated from the operation of the motor sports facility shall
exceed 80dB (A), when measured from any adjoining property line.
Section 1664. Game Room/Video Arcade
A. A Game Room/Video Arcade shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of another Game
Room/Video Arcade, Adult Business Establishment, church, school or public or private recreational
facility.
B. No amusement device shall be audible beyond the premises in which it is situated.
C. Where allowed by special exception it must be proved to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that
the hours of operation will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and that the Game
Room/Video Arcade will control loitering outside the establishment.
D. Parking: One (1) off-street parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of net floor area.
Section 1665. Golf Course; Driving Range
A. Golf Course.
195
1. A “Golf Course” is as defined in this Ordinance. A nine (9) hole course (or any less than eighteen
[18]), and/or “chip and putt” courses and driving ranges are considered outdoor recreation and are
regulated as such in this ordinance.
2. Golf courses may include the following accessory uses, provided such uses are reasonably sized
and located, so as to provide incidental service to the golf course employees and users:
a. Clubhouse, which may consist of:
i. Restaurant, snack bar, lounge, and banquet facilities;
ii. Locker and rest rooms;
iii. Pro shop;
iv. Administrative offices;
v. Golf cart and maintenance equipment storage and service facilities;
vi. Fitness and health equipment, including workout machines, spas, whirlpools,
saunas, and steam rooms;
vii. Baby-sitting rooms and connected fence-enclosed play lots.
b. Accessory recreation amenities located outside of a building, including:
i. Driving range, provided that all lighting shall comply with the ESP SALDO;
ii. Practice putting greens;
iii. Swimming pools as regulated in this ordinance, and setback one hundred (100)
feet from property line;
iv. Tennis, platform tennis, handball, racquetball, squash, volleyball, and badminton
courts;
v. Bocce ball, croquet, shuffleboard, quoits, horseshoe pits, and washers courses;
vi. Picnic pavilions, picnic tables, park benches, and barbeque pits;
vii. Hiking, biking, horseback riding, and cross-country ski trails; and
viii. Playground equipment and play lot games, including four-square, dodge ball,
tetherball, and hopscotch.
c. Freestanding maintenance equipment and supply buildings, and storage areas for items
other than maintenance equipment or golf carts. These must be stored in fully enclosed
structures.
3. Minimum lot area: thirty (30) acres.
4. The course shall be designed so that golf balls are highly unlikely to enter public streets or
property that is not part of the golf course. The design of the course shall not require a golf ball to
be driven across any building, road, or parking lot.
196
5. Any outdoor lighting shall be located and designed in such a way that it does not produce a glare
or direct illumination onto abutting property, and is regulated by the ESP SALDO and Section
1508 of this Ordinance.
6. All golf course buildings or structures shall be set back seventy-five (75) feet from a street right of
way, and one hundred (100) feet from adjoining residential structures.
7. Fairways and greens shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any boundary line and a
minimum of one hundred (100) feet from a residential structure.
8. Golf paths – Golf paths shall be graded so as to discharge stormwater runoff. Surface conditions
of paths shall be adequately protected from an exposed soil condition. The golf course design
shall minimize golf path crossings of streets, access drives and driveways. Easily identifiable golf
paths must be provided for crossings of streets, access of drives or driveways. The golf course
design shall both discourage random crossing and require use of the golf path crossings of streets,
access drives and driveways. Golf path and crossings shall conform with the following:
a. Each crossing shall be perpendicular to the traffic movements;
b. Only one (1) street, access drive or driveway may be crossed at each location;
c. No crossing is permitted between a point fifteen (15) feet and one hundred and fifty (150)
feet from the cartway edge of a street, access drive or driveway intersection;
d. The crossing must be provided with a clear sight triangle of seventy-five (75) feet,
measured along the street, access drive or driveway center line and the golf path center
line, to a location on the center line of the golf path, five (5) feet from the edge of the
roadway. No permanent obstruction over thirty (30) inches high shall be placed within
this area;
e. Golf path intersections shall be designed to provide adequate site distance with regard to
both horizontal and vertical alignment. The required sight distance shall be governed by
ESP SALDO.
f. The golf cart path shall nor exceed a slope of eight percent (8%) within twenty-five (25)
feet of the cartway crossing;
g. Golf path crossings shall be signed, warning motorist and pedestrians and golfers. The
surface of the golf path shall be brightly painted with angle stripes;
h. Golf path crossings of collector or arterial streets shall consist of a tunnel or bridge that is
not located at street grade. The golf course design shall both prohibit on-grade crossing
of collector or arterial streets and require the use of the tunnel. The construction of the
collector or arterial roadway crossing of the tunnel shall comply with PennDOT
standards.
B. Golf Driving Range
197
Section 1666. Outdoor Motion-Picture Establishment
A. Outdoor Motion-Picture Establishments may include facilities for the sale and consumption of food
and non-alcoholic beverages.
B. The establishment shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial street or color
street.
C. No structure of the establishment (except for fences) shall be located within one thousand (1,000)
feet of a dwelling.
D. The establishment shall provide sufficient stocking area(s) (and/or a marginal access road) to ensure
that entering vehicles will have safe turning into the establishment and not to obstruct the flow of traffic on
the streets adjacent to the establishment.
E. The motion-picture screen shall be no closer to any property line than one point two five (1.25) times
the height of the picture screen or the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district, whichever setback
is greater. Other buildings shall be subject to the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district. The
motion picture screen shall not be oriented toward an arterial or collector street.
F. The applicant shall provide a plan for buffering and shall meet the standards:
1. The minimum buffer width shall be fifty (50) feet.
2. Along an adjacent property line that is zoned or a property line with an existing residential or
institutional use and along any street, there shall be either:
a. A six (6) foot-high solid wooden fence within the fifty (50) foot buffer yard and a oneand-
one half (1 1/2) caliper deciduous tree at an average of one (1) tree per forty (40)
lineal feet of buffer plus one three (3) foot evergreen tree at an average of one (1) tree per
twenty (20) lineal feet of buffer; the trees shall be placed between the fence and the
property line.
b. A five (5) foot high berm planted on top as in subsection F.2.a (above) with the plant
material listed in subsection F.2.c (below).
c. A one and one half inch (1 ½) deciduous tree at an average of one (1) tree per forty (40)
lineal feet of buffer plus a three (3) foot evergreen tree at an average of one (1) tree per
twenty (20) lineal feet of buffer plus a three (3) foot deciduous shrub per four (4) lineal
feet of buffer.
G. The volume and direction of outdoor speakers shall be regulated to achieve the performance standards in
Section 1553.B of this Ordinance.
H. Lighting per Section 1506 of this Ordinance.
I. Minimum Lot Area: Ten (10) acres
J. Maximum Impervious Coverage: Sixty (60) percent.
Section 1667 through 1674 (Reserved)
Section 1675. Kennels; Animal Hospitals/Veterinary Clinic; Animal Shelter
198
A. Kennels
1. Prior to establishment of a kennel, an approved Land Development Plan per the requirements of
the ESP SALDO is required.
2. For the purposes of this section, the word “animal” shall be defined as “non-hoofed animals of a
type customarily kept for pets for companionship by persons within the community, except
animals customarily used for agricultural purposes”.
3. Kennels shall comply with all federal, state, county, and municipal regulations.
4. The minimum lot size for this use shall be five (5) acres. A kennel may be located on the same lot
with a single family residence. In such case the kennel, a commercial use, will be considered the
principal use for that lot.
5. The setback distance for all buildings and structures in which animals are housed and all pens and
runs shall be at least two hundred (200) feet from lot lines or road lines and three hundred (300)
feet any dwelling on adjoining properties.
6. No more than thirty (30) animals shall be housed or boarded at one (1) time.
7. A Kennel License shall be obtained from the Municipality annually after inspection by the Zoning
Officer, if required by the Municipality. Each new and renewal license shall be subject to the
conditions that the Zoning Officer may impose as a result of complaints that are reasonable, as
determined by the Zoning Officer and the Governing Body. Complaints to be considered include,
but are not limited to, offensive noise or odors, and animals not confined on the kennel property.
8. All buildings in which animals are housed shall be made soundproof enough that noises from
those animals are not heard beyond the lot lines.
9. Animals shall not be allowed in outdoor areas between 7:00 PM and 7:30 AM, local time
10. A visually impenetrable landscape screen or fence at least six (6) feet in height shall be installed
such that any pens, runs, and exercise areas are not visible from adjoining lots or public roads. All
outdoor areas for animals shall be fully enclosed with a fence at least six (6) feet in height.
11. All animal waste shall be removed from the premises for proper lawful disposal, or processed and
disposed of in an on-lot facilities approved by the Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer
12. Disposal of deceased animals shall not be done on the kennel property.
13. All organic waste, including material from grooming, clipping, or other procedures performed on
the animals, shall be lawfully disposed of.
14. The sale of any animal-related products shall remain accessory to the kennel.
15. There shall be no outdoor storage of any materials whatsoever.
16. All loading and unloading of animals and supplies related to the kennel operation shall be
accomplished on the kennel property.
17. Parking: one (1) for every four-hundred (400) sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area but not less than four (4).
18. Impervious Coverage: ten (10) percent of Lot Area.
199
B. Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic
1. Minimum Lot Area: Sixty-five thousand (65,000) sq. ft.
2. A Land Development plan per the ESP SALDO is required.
3. Any structure in which animals are treated or housed shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from
any lot line. Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds generated within the
buildings cannot routinely be perceived within any adjacent dwellings.
4. All animal boarding buildings that are not wholly enclosed and any outdoor animal pens, stalls or
runaways shall be located within the rear yard.
5. All animal boarding buildings that are not wholly enclosed and any outdoor animal pens, stalls or
runways shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from all property lines and shall be
screened from all adjacent properties.
6. Outdoor animal runs may be provided for small animals for use between 7:30 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.,
provided the runs are at least one hundred and fifty (150) feet from any existing dwelling and
provided that the runs for dogs are separated from each other by visual barriers a minimum of four
feet in height, to minimize dog barking.
7. All outdoor pasture/recreation areas shall be enclosed to prevent the escape of the animals; all
such enclosures shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines.
8. Although animals may be kept as an accessory use, a commercial kennel shall only be allowed if a
kennel is permitted in that district and if the applicable requirements are met for a kennel as well
as those in this section.
9. Where permitted by Special Exception, the maximum number of animals shall be determined by
the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the area of the facility and the nature and character
of the surrounding neighborhood.
10. Parking: Four (4) per Veterinarian and one point two (1.2) per employee.
11. Impervious Coverage: fifteen (15) percent of Lot Area.
C. Animal Shelters
1. A Land Development Plan per the ESP SALDO is required.
2. The minimum lot size for this use shall be five (5) acres: The maximum size in the EAP Zoning
District is three (3) acres. An Animal Shelter may be located on the same lot with a single family
residence. In such case the shelter will be considered the principal use for that lot.
3. The setback distance for all buildings and structures in which animals are housed and all pens and
runs shall be at least two hundred (200) feet from lot lines or road lines and three hundred (300)
feet any dwelling on adjoining properties.
4. A Certificate of Use shall be obtained from the Municipality annually after inspection by the
Zoning Officer, if required by the Municipality. The Certificate of use shall be subject to the
conditions that the Zoning Officer may impose as a result of complaints that are reasonable, as
determined by the Zoning Officer and the Governing Body. Complaints to be considered include,
but are not limited to, offensive noise or odors, and animals not confined on t he kennel property.
200
5. All buildings in which animals are housed shall be made soundproof enough that noises from those
animals are not heard beyond the lot lines.
6. Animals shall not be allowed in outdoor areas between 7:00 PM and 7:30 AM, local time.
7. A visually impenetrable landscape screen or fence at least six (6) feet in height shall be installed
such that any pens, runs, and exercise areas are not visible from adjoining lots or public roads. All
outdoor areas for animals shall be fully enclosed with a fence at least six (6) feet in height.
8. All animal waste shall be removed from the premises for proper lawful disposal, or processed and
disposed of in an on-lot facility approved by the Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer.
9. Disposal of deceased animals shall not be done on the shelter property.
10. All organic waste, including material from grooming, clipping, or other procedures performed on
the animals, shall be lawfully disposed of.
11. The sale of any animal-related products shall remain accessory to the shelter.
12. There shall be no outdoor storage of any materials whatsoever.
13. All loading and unloading of animals and supplies related to the shelter operation shall be
accomplished on the shelter property.
14. Parking: one (1) for every four hundred (400) sq. ft. of gross floor area but not less than four (4)
spaces.
15. Impervious Coverage: Ten (10) percent
Section 1676. Airports; Heliports
A. Airport Regulations:
1. Tract size and boundary requirements
a. Minimum tract size shall be 100 acres.
b. Maximum tract size shall be 250 acres.
c. Airport boundaries shall be as shown on the official airport layout plan as approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and the Federal Aviation Administration.
2. Any airport operation shall be conducted under and subject to all licensing, safety and applicable airport
design criteria and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Aviation.
3. The operation of all aircraft shall be subject to all applicable state and federal regulations, including control
of noise, vibration and emissions.
4. Any building to be constructed within an airport shall be set back at least two hundred (200) feet from any
runway and shall conform to all other dimensional standards of this article.
201
5. Airport uses. In an airport operation, structures, buildings or improvements may be erected or used and the
lot area may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes:
a. Aircraft runways.
b. Aircraft taxiways.
c. Aircraft parking and tie-down areas.
d. Hangars.
e. The sale, storage, repair, development, installation, fabrication and maintenance of aircraft,
aircraft accessories and aircraft parts.
f. Training for repair and maintenance of aircraft and aircraft accessories.
g. Flight training facilities.
h. The sale and storage of fuels and lubricants for aircraft and support equipment, in compliance with
all applicable state and federal regulations.
i. Facilities for aircraft painting and washing.
j. Terminal facilities.
k. Aircraft rental.
l. Navigational and/or guidance systems.
m. Automobile rental.
n. Restaurant facilities, subject to Section 1649.
o. Administrative offices related to other permitted uses.
Section 1677. Self Storage Facility
A. Site Requirements.
1. Minimum Lot Area: 5 Acres
2. Minimum Setback From Road: 75 feet
3. Minimum Setbacks From Property Lines: 50 feet
4. Minimum lot Width: 150 feet
5. Maximum Height Storage units: 12 feet
6. Maximum Height Other Building: 35 feet
7. Maximum Impervious Surface: 35%
8. Minimum aisle width between buildings shall be twenty-six (26) feet.
B. The storage facilities complex shall be surrounded by a fence at least eight (8) feet in height of a type
approved by the municipality.
C. Outdoor storage of automobiles, boats and recreational vehicles is permitted if they are within the fenced
area. All such items must be licensed, inspected, in operable condition, and on all weather surfaces. A
maximum of two (2) square feet of outdoor storage area shall be permitted for every one (1) square foot of
202
indoor storage area. The parked vehicles shall not interfere with traffic movement through the comple4x
and shall meet the minimum setbacks noted in subsection A above.
D. Buffers shall be provided in accordance with the ESP SALDO. In addition, any parked vehicles which are
stored outdoors shall be properly screened so as not to be visible from any adjacent streets or property.
E. One (1) office and one (1) living accommodation unit for a caretaker is allowed.
F. Approval shall be obtained from any municipal Police Chief and Fire Marshall regarding security and fire
protection.
G. Each structure shall not exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet in size.
H. Minimum Requirements for Lease Restrictions.
1. No business activities other than the leasing of storage units shall be permitted.
2. No trash, garbage or refuse; explosive, toxic, radioactive, hazardous or highly flammable
materials; or animals or animal carcasses or skins shall be stored on the property.
I. A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis.
J. Parking:
1. One (1) space for each five (5) storage units or, one (1) space for each two thousand (2,000)
square feet of total floor area and outside storage area whichever is more. These parking spaces
should be distributed equally throughout the storage area.
2. If a manager’s living quarters are included, two (2) additional spaces are required.
K. Nothing shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, off-street parking areas, loading areas, or driveway areas.
L. Servicing or repairing of boats, vehicles, trailers, lawn mowers or nay similar equipment shall not be
permitted.
M. Adequate lighting shall be provided to illuminate the area, but directed away or shielded to direct light
away from adjacent uses.
N. All storage units shall be fireproof and waterproof. Each shall have separate ingress and egress secured by
a locking device.
Section 1678. Telecommunications Facilities
Purposes. The purposes of this section shall be as follows:
1. To identify a hierarchy of areas where future telecommunication facilities can be located, while
minimizing the proliferation of towers and monopoles.
2. To require co-location of telecommunication facilities on existing structures and towers.
3. To attempt to ensure compatibility of telecommunication facilities with nearby land uses.
4. To establish sitting and design criteria to mitigate negative impacts.
5. To establish telecommunication signal removal policies.
203
6. To establish a process by which an applicant can demonstrate their compliance with these policies.
7. To stay abreast of changing technologies that may reduce the need for new telecommunication
signal sites.
8. To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties through engineering and proper siting of
telecommunication facilities.
9. To preserve local authority to govern and control telecommunications facilities to the fullest extent
allowable by law.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) – A national organization which formulates guidelines and
standards. ANSI standards are recognized as authoritative by the FCC.
Antenna – (See Telecommunications Antenna)
Antenna Height – (See Telecommunications Antenna Height)
Area – the extent of surface contained within the boundaries or extremities of land.
Co-location – The utilization of a proposed or existing structure for telecommunication antennae by more
than one carrier.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) – The Federal government agency charged with regulating
the national airways.
Telecommunications – The transmission of words, sounds, images or data in the form of electronic or
electromagnetic signals or impulses using wire, optical cable, radio, television, microwave, and satellite.
Telecommunications Antenna (or Antenna) - Any device used for the transmission or reception of radio,
television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service or any other wireless
telecommunications signals, including without limitation omni-directional or whip antennas and directional
or panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by the FCC to operate such device.
This definition shall not include private residence mounted satellite dishes or television antennas or
amateur radio equipment including without limitation ham or citizen band radio antennas.
Telecommunications Antenna Height (or Antenna Height) – The vertical distance measured from the base
of the antenna support structure or tower at grade to the highest point of the structure. If the support
structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in
calculating the antenna height.
Telecommunications Antenna Support Structure (or Antenna Support Structure) - Any pole, telescoping
mast, tower, tripod, Telecommunications Tower or any other structure which supports a device used in the
transmitting or receiving of radio frequency energy.
Telecommunications Equipment Building – An unmanned building or cabinet containing
telecommunications equipment required for the operation of Telecommunication Antennas and covering an
area on the ground not greater than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet.
Telecommunications Facility - A tract or parcel of land that contains a telecommunication antenna as the
principal use, its support structure, accessory building(s), equipment cabinet, and parking, and may include
other uses associated with and ancillary to telecommunication signal transmission or processing at the tract.
204
Telecommunications Tower - Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto.
Telecommunications Tower Height – The vertical distance measured from the ground level to the highest
point on a telecommunications support structure, including antennas mounted on the tower.
C. Telecommunication Antennas and Telecommunication Equipment Buildings Attached to Existing
Structures.
The following provisions shall apply to Telecommunications Antennas that are attached to an existing
building, existing structure or existing Telecommunications Antenna Support Structure.
1. A Telecommunications Antenna that is attached to a pre-existing Telecommunication Antenna
Support Structure such as, but not limited to, smoke stacks, water towers, Public Utility
Transmission Towers, telephone poles and similar existing utility structures is permitted in all
zoning districts. If the antenna is to be mounted on a pre-existing structure, a full site plan shall
not be required; however, applicable Zoning Permits and Certificate of Use Permits are required.
An existing structure, building, or tower is one that physically existed prior to identification of a
site for constructing a new antenna.
2. Building-mounted Telecommunications Antennas shall be permitted to exceed the height of the
existing structure limitations of the applicable zoning district by no more than twenty (20) feet.
3. Building mounted Telecommunications Antennas shall not be located on any structure housing
fully or in part a residential use.
4. Any applicant proposing Telecommunications Antennas to be mounted on a building or other
structure shall submit evidence from a Pennsylvania Registered Professional Engineer certifying
that the proposed installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building or other
structure, considering wind and other loads associated with the antenna load.
5. Any applicant proposing Telecommunications Antennas to be mounted on a building or other
structure shall submit detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating how the antennas
will be mounted on the structure for review by the appropriate Municipal Zoning Officer. Any
applicant proposing Telecommunications Antennas to be mounted on a building or other structure
shall submit evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary to provide access to the building
or structure on which the antennas are to be mounted so that installation and maintenance of the
antennas and Telecommunications Equipment Building can be accomplished.
6. Telecommunications Antennas shall not cause radio frequency interference with other
telecommunications services (including, but not limited to, other towers, transmitting facilities,
telecommunications services reception by other property owners, etc.) in accordance with FCC
requirements for the applicant’s class of service.
7. Telecommunications Antennas shall comply with all applicable standards established by the
Federal Communications Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
8. A Telecommunications Equipment Building shall be subject to the height and setback
requirements of the applicable zoning district for an accessory structure. The Telecommunications
205
Equipment Building shall cover an area on the ground of not more than two hundred and fifty
(250) square feet.
9. The owner or operator of Telecommunications Antennas shall be licensed by the Federal
Communication Commission to operate such antennas.
10. All other uses, such as business offices, maintenance depot, vehicle storage, broadcast studios and
vehicle storage unless specifically necessary and ancillary to the operation of the
Telecommunications Facility are not permitted unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district in
which the telecommunication facility is located. No outside storage is permitted on the
Telecommunications Facility.
11. The applicant is required to demonstrate, using technological evidence that the
Telecommunications Antenna must go where it is proposed in order to satisfy its functions in the
company’s grid system.
12. Telecommunications Antennas shall not be lighted unless lighting is required by the FAA, FCC, or
other governmental agency which has jurisdiction over such facilities.
D. Standards for the Construction of New Telecommunication Towers With or Without Telecommunications
Antenna.
Telecommunications Antennas to be attached to a new building, structure, or new tower must comply with
provisions of this Section, as well as those in Subsection 1678.C of this Section and the special exception
provisions of the ESP Region Zoning Ordinance. All references to “telecommunications towers” in this
Section shall also be considered to refer to such other new buildings and structures.
1. The construction of new Telecommunications Towers is allowed in all zoning districts by Special
Exception.
2. Telecommunications Towers with their Telecommunications Equipment Buildings are a principal
use. No other principal use is permitted on a leased lot with a tower.
3. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed Telecommunications Tower and
Telecommunications Antennas proposed to be mounted thereon comply with all applicable
standards established by the Federal Communications Commission governing human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation.
4. Telecommunications Towers shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation and applicable Airport Zoning Regulations.
5. Any applicant proposing construction of a new Telecommunications Tower shall demonstrate that
a good faith effort has been made to obtain permission to mount the Telecommunications
Antennas on existing buildings, Telecommunications Antenna Support Structures or other
Telecommunications Towers. These potentially suitable structures include, but may not be limited
to, smokestacks, water towers, antenna support structures of other telecommunications companies,
other telecommunication towers (fire, police, etc.) and Public Utility transmission towers. A good
faith effort shall require that all owners of potentially suitable structures within a two (2) mile
radius of the proposed Telecommunications Tower site be contacted and that one or more of the
following reasons for not selecting such structure apply:
a. The proposed antennas and related equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing structure and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
206
b. The proposed antennas and related equipment would cause radio frequency interference
with other existing equipment for that existing structure and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost.
c. Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space, access or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.
d. Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment would result in electromagnetic
radiation from such structure exceeding applicable standards established by the FCC
governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
e. A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owners of such
structures.
f. In the event that co-location is found to be not feasible, a written statement of the reasons
for the unfeasibility shall be submitted. The Municipality may retain a technical expert in
the field to verify if co-location at the site is not feasible, or is feasible given the design
configuration most accommodating to co-location. The cost for such a technical expert
will be at the expense of the applicant.
6. Access shall not be provided to the Telecommunications Tower and Telecommunications
Equipment Building by means of a public street or easement to a public street. The easement
shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and shall be improved to a width of at least ten
(10) feet with a dust-free, all weather surfaces for its entire length.
7. Recording of a land development plan shall be required for any lot or leased lot on which a
Telecommunications Tower is proposed to be constructed.
8. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the Telecommunications Tower is the
minimum height necessary to perform its function.
9. In all Zoning Districts the maximum height of any Telecommunications Tower shall be two
hundred (200) feet.
10. Setbacks from Base of Antenna Telecommunications Tower. If a new antenna support structure
or tower is constructed (as opposed to mounting the antenna on an existing structure), the
minimum distances between the base of the structure or tower or any guy-wire anchors and any
property line or right-of-way line shall be the largest of the following:
a. Thirty (30) percent of the height of the Antenna Structure or tower.
b. The minimum front yard setback in the underlying zoning district.
c. Forty (40) feet.
11. The base of a Telecommunications Tower shall be landscaped so as to screen the foundation and
base and Telecommunications Equipment Building from abutting properties. The following
landscaping shall be required to 1) screen as much of the tower as possible; 2) screen the fence
surrounding these towers; 3) screen any other ground-lever features (such as a building); and 4)
in general soften the appearance of the Telecommunication Facilities. The Municipality may
permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other
features instead of landscaping if they achieve the same degree of screening as the required
landscaping. If the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, landscaping shall not be required.
207
a. An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the site. The screen can be either a
hedge (planted three (3) feet on center maximum) or a row of evergreen trees (planted ten
(10) feet on center maximum). The evergreen screen shall be a minimum height of six
(6) feet at planting and shall grow to a minimum of fifteen (15) feet at maturity.
b. In addition, existing vegetation on and around the site shall be preserved to the greatest
extent possible.
12. The Telecommunications Equipment Building shall comply with the applicable zoning regulations
for a non-residential accessory structure.
13. The applicant shall submit:
a. Certification from a Pennsylvania Registered Professional Engineer that a proposed
Telecommunications Tower will be designed and constructed in accordance with the
current Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting
Structures, published by the Electrical Industrial Association/Communications Industry
Association.
b. The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal Communications license under
which the Telecommunication Tower will operate.
c. The name, address and emergency phone number for the local person(s) responsible for
operation of the Telecommunications Tower.
d. A Certificate of Insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence covering the Telecommunications Tower and
Telecommunications Antennas.
e. A statement from the FCC, FAA, and Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation stating that the
proposed Telecommunications Tower complies with applicable regulations or is exempt
from those regulations.
14. All guy wires associated with guyed Telecommunications Towers shall be clearly marked so as to
be visible at all times. Telecommunications towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at
all times. Telecommunication Towers under two hundred (200) feet in height shall be painted
silver or have a galvanized finish retained, in order to reduce the visual impact.
Telecommunications Towers may be painted green up to the height of nearby trees.
Telecommunications Towers two hundred (200) feet in height or taller shall meet all Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. No Telecommunication Towers may be artificially
lighted except when required by the FAA.
15. Signs shall be limited to those needed to identify the property and the owner and warn of any
danger. All signs shall comply with the requirements of the ESP Region’s Zoning Ordinance,
FCC, FAA, or other governmental agency facilities.
16. No signs or lights shall be mounted on a Telecommunications Tower, except as may be required
by the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration or other
governmental agency which has jurisdiction over such facilities. Lighting of equipment structures
and any other facilities on site shall be shielded from abutting properties. There shall be total
cutoff of all light at the property lines of the parcel to be developed, and foot-candle measurements
at the property line shall be 1.0 initial foot-candles when measured at grade.
208
17. Telecommunications Towers shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with any
requirements imposed by the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board.
18. An applicant or its successors shall remove all unused structures and facilities from a
Telecommunication Facility, including towers, within ninety (90) days of the cessation of
telecommunication use or the expiration of the ground lease, whichever occurs first, and the site
should be restored as closely as possible to it’s original condition. A bond or other suitable
financial surety to cover the costs of dismantling the tower shall be provided by the applicant, in a
form reviewed and approved by the Municipal Solicitor, to the Municipality prior to the filing of
an application with the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board for a special exception. A certified letter
shall be sent to the Municipality each year, due by January 15th, signed by an officer of the
company owning the tower, stating the intention to continue operation. Failure to receive this
letter shall be considered the beginning of the ninety (90) day cessation period.
19. At least one off street parking space shall be provided within the fenced area. If the
Telecommunication Facility is fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for
maintenance workers. If the facility in not automated, the number of required parking spaces shall
equal the number or people on the largest shift.
20. A land development plan shall be required for all Telecommunications Facilities showing the
antenna, antenna support structure(s), tower, equipment building(s), fencing, vegetative screening,
access drive(s) and all other pertinent information required by the ESP Region Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance. The land development plan shall not be required if the antenna is
to be mounted on an existing structure.
21. The site of a Telecommunications Tower, including all structures, guy wires, and guy wire
anchors on the site shall be required to be fenced. The fence shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in
height and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height, shall completely enclose the antenna, support
structure, and related facilities, shall not contain openings greater than nine (9) square inches and
shall contain, at all entrances, gates which shall be locked except during such times as the site is
manned by authorized operations and maintenance personnel, and shall also conform to the
provisions of Section 1511 of this Ordinance. The fence shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from
any structure inside it.
22. The applicant shall demonstrate, by expert testimony and in reports to the satisfaction of the
Municipal Zoning Hearing Board, that the proposed Telecommunications Antenna and
Telecommunication Tower are safe and the surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by
support structure failure, falling ice or other debris, electromagnetic fields or radio frequency
interference. All Telecommunication Towers shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as
approved by the manufactures of such devices.
Section 1679. Off Track Betting Parlor
A. An Off-Track Betting Parlor shall not be permitted to be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other
off-track betting parlor.
B. No Off-Track Betting Parlor shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residentially zoned land.
C. No Off-Track Betting Parlor shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land which
contains any one or more of the following specified land uses:
1. Adult Business Establishment
2. Amusement Park
209
3. Camp
4. Child Day Care Facility
5. Place of Worship or other similar location for religious congregation
6. Playground
7. School
8. Other lands where minors congregate
D. The distance between any two (2) Off-Track Betting Parlors shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures, from the closest point on the exterior parcel line of each establishment.
The distance between any Off-Track Betting Parlor and any land use specified above shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest point on the exterior property line of
the Off-Track Betting Parlor to the closest point on the property line of said land uses.
E. No more than one (1) Off-Track Betting Parlor may be located within one (1) building or shopping center.
F. The applicant shall furnish expert evidence that the proposed use will not be detrimental to the use of
adjoining properties due to hours of operation, light and/or litter.
G. The applicant shall furnish expert evidence as to how the use will be controlled so as to not constitute a
nuisance due to noise or loitering outside the building.
H. A working plan for the cleanup and recycling of litter shall be furnished and implemented by the applicant.
I. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one (1) space per each sixty-five (65) square feet of gross
floor area, including related dining, restaurant and snack bar areas.
J. All Off-Track Betting Parlors shall comply with the Pennsylvania Horse and/or harness Racing
Commission’s Rules and Regulations pertaining to non-primary locations, as defined therein.
Section 1680. Adult Business and Adult Establishment
A. Adult Business and Adult Establishment may include, but is not limited to, the following types of
businesses:
adult arcades;
adult bookstores;
adult novelty stores;
adult video stores;
adult cabarets;
adult dance halls;
adult club;
adult bar;
adult tavern;
adult night club;
adult restaurant or similar adult establishment;
adult motion picture theatres;
adult theatres;
nude model studios
sexual encounter centers.
any other type of sexually oriented business.
210
B. Special Exception Use Provisions. The purpose of these Special Exception Use Provisions is to minimize,
where conditions permit, the secondary concerns that often arise with the commencement or Adult
Business and Adult Establishment uses in a municipality and, which include difficulties for law
enforcement, municipal maintenance, trash, deleterious effects on business and residential property values,
increased crime, particularly corruption of the morals of minors and prostitution, and encourage residents
and businesses to move elsewhere.
1. In addition to the area and height regulations applicable to the Zoning District where this use is
permitted, no Adult Business or Adult Establishment use shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of:
a. a church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious
worship and related religious activities;
b. a public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care
facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools,
intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational
schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, and universities, school includes the school grounds, but does not include the
facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
c. a license premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
d. a boundary of a residential district as defined in this Ordinance;
e. a public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational
activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool,
reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness
areas, or other similar public land within the Municipality which is under the control,
operation, or management of private parties and open and available for use by the general
public;
f. an entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children and family
entertainment.
g. any use of the same general character as any of the above permitted uses, subject to such
additional reasonable safeguards as the Zoning Hearing Board may determine.
2. For the purpose of subsection 1680.B.1 above, measurement shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or
structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the
nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection 1680.B.1 of this Ordinance.
Presence of a municipal, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for
purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this Subsection 1680.B.1 above.
3. No pornographic material, displays, or words shall be placed in view of persons who are not inside
of the Adult Business or Adult Establishment. Definite precautions shall be made to prohibit
minors from entering the premises.
4. No such use shall be allowed in combination with the sale of alcoholic beverages.
5. Any signs to be erected on the premises of an Adult Business or an Adult Establishment shall be
regulated as follows:
211
a. Only two (2) On-Premise Signs are allowed as follows:
i. One (1) free standing sign, limited to two (2) sides, with each side of said sign
being limited to a maximum size of thirty-two (32) square feet.
ii. One (1) wall sign limited in sign area to fifteen (15) percent of the building face
on which the sign is attached.
6. Any lot which is to be used for any Adult Business or Adult Establishment use shall contain
screening along property lines. The screening shall be such as to completely screen the adult
establishment from adjoining properties containing dwellings or other business establishments.
The Municipality may permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls,
decorative fences, or other features for screening.
If the applicant proposes the screening to be landscaping, the screening must at a minimum meet
the following:
a. An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the site. The screen can be either two
(2) rows of hedge or two (2) rows of evergreen trees. The hedge and evergreen screen
shall be a minimum height of six (6) feet at planting. The evergreen screen shall grow to
a minimum of fifteen (15) feet at maturity.
b. In addition, existing vegetation on and around the site shall be preserved to the greatest
extent possible.
c. If the applicant proposes any other landscaping screening different than subsection
1680.B.6.a. and b. above, it must achieve the screening effect as required in Subsection
1680.B.6 of this Ordinance.
d. The landscape screening shall be maintained permanently and plant material which does
not live shall be replaced after one (1) year.
e. The hedge and evergreen screen plants shall be installed as follows:
i. The hedge shall be planted three (3) feet on center maximum.
ii. The evergreen trees shall be planted ten (10) feet on center maximum.
iii. Each row of hedge and evergreen trees shall be installed so as to “stagger” the
individual plants between rows.
iv. The buffer shall be maintained permanently and plant material which does not
live shall be replaced within one (1) year.
7. Sufficient additional data shall be submitted to enable the Zoning Hearing Board to determine that
the requirements of this and other ordinances of the Municipality relevant to the proposed use
have been fulfilled, and that the owners and operators of proposed adult entertainment facilities
demonstrate a desire and ability to comply with the ordinances of the Municipality and to prevent
their establishments from being used for any illegal activities.
Section 1681. Private Surface Parking Facilities; Parking Garages
A. Private surface parking facilities are permitted in certain zoning districts provided the following standards
and those in Section 2002 are met as well as any other requirements or this Ordinance of those deemed
212
necessary by the Zoning Hearing Board.
1. The facility is to be used solely for the parking of automobiles and light trucks.
2. The facility shall not be used for the sales, long term storage, repair, or servicing of motor
vehicles.
3. Entrances to and exists from the facility are to be placed in a location which provided adequate
safe sight distance for vehicles entering or existing the facility.
4. Only one (1) advertising sign having a maximum size of fifteen (15) sq. ft. may be located on the
facility.
5. There shall be provided a wheel block securely anchored into the ground for each parking space.
6. The parking facility shall be adequately screened from the street and adjoining properties as
required
7. All surface parking facilities shall meet the design and construction standards set forth in this
Ordinance.
B. Parking Garages (Reserved)
Section 1682 through 1684 (Reserved)
Section 1685. Water Extraction; Forestry.
A. Water Extraction Regulation
1. Water extraction involving removal of an average of more than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day
from a lot for off-site consumption is required to be regulated.
2. A copy of the permits and approvals issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Delaware
River Basin Commission for water extraction shall be submitted to the Municipality prior to granting
of a Special Exception by the Municipal Zoning Hearing Board. It shall be accompanied by all
supporting papers submitted to the Commonwealth.
3. The application for Special Exception shall include a drawing to scale showing the boundaries of the
lease or property on which the water extraction facilities are to be located, the proposed location of
the water extraction facilities, and the location of any roads within or abutting the lease or property.
4. The application for Special Exception shall be accompanied by the name of the owner of the surface
of the area of operations, the owner of water rights, if any, and the proposed operator.
5. The application for Special Exception shall include a detailed map clearly identifying and delineating
the local and state roadways which will be utilized by any trucks, tankers, or similar vehicles to haul
or ship the extracted water to the corporate limits of the ESP Region. This map shall clearly indicate
the name and route number of each affected roadway. The applicant shall provide a written report by
a professional traffic engineer. Such study shall analyze the suitability of the area street system to
accommodate the truck traffic that will be generated. The application shall only be approved if the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the area street system is suitable
in terms of structure, geometry, safety and capacity to accommodate the additional truck traffic.
213
6. All regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the Delaware River
Basin Commission and any other regulatory agency or body with jurisdiction over water extraction
shall be complied with.
7. The applicant shall provide a written report by a professional hydrologist describing in technical detail
and in a narrative understandable by a layperson how the proposal would affect wells, agricultural
activities and surface water levels in the surrounding region. The application shall only be approved
if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed application
will not adversely affect wells of neighboring properties, considering drought conditions, nor aquatic
habitats of surface waters, nor agricultural yields.
8. Any areas used for loading or unloading of tractor-trailer trucks shall be set back a minimum of 100
feet from any adjacent residential lot.
9. Minimum Lot Area: one hundred (100) acres.
B. Forestry Regulations
1. In accordance with state law, forestry (as defined in this Ordinance) is permitted, by right, in every
zoning district.
2. Logging plan requirements. Every landowner on whose land timber harvesting is to occur shall
obtain a Zoning Permit. The applicant shall prepare and submit a written logging plan in the form
specified below. No timber harvesting shall occur until a Zoning Permit has been issued. The
provisions of the permit shall be followed throughout the operation. The logging plan shall be
available at the harvest site at all times during the operation, and shall be provided to the Zoning
Officer upon request. The landowner and the operator shall be jointly and severally responsible
for complying with the terms of the logging plan and the Zoning Permit.
a. Minimum requirements. At a minimum, the logging plan shall include the following:
i. Design, construction, maintenance, and retirement of the access system,
including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails, and landings;
ii. Design, construction and maintenance of water control measures and structures,
such as culverts, broad-based dips, filter strips, and water bars;
iii. Design, construction and maintenance of stream and wetland crossings;
iv. The general location of the proposed operation in relation to Municipal and State
Roads, including any accesses to those roads.
b. Map. Each logging plan shall include a sketch map or drawing containing the
following information:
i. Site location and boundaries, including both the boundaries of the property on
which the timber harvest will take place, and the boundaries of the proposed
harvest area within that property;
ii. Significant topographic features related to potential environmental problems;
iii. Location of all earth disturbance activities, such as roads, landings and water
control measures and structures;
iv. Location of all crossings of waters of the commonwealth;
214
v. The general location of the proposed operation to municipal and state roads,
including any accesses to those roads.
c. Compliance with state law. The logging plan shall show how it will comply with the
requirements of all applicable state regulations, including, but not limited to, the
following:
i. Erosion and sedimentation control regulations contained in Title 25,
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, promulgated pursuant to the Clean Streams
Law.
ii. Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations contained in Title 25,
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 105, promulgated pursuant to the Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act.
d. Relationship of state laws, regulations and permits to the logging plan. Any and all
permits required by state laws and regulations shall be attached to, and become part of,
the logging plan. An erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan that satisfies the
requirements of Title 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, shall also satisfy the
requirements for the logging plan and associated map specified in subsection 2.a and 2.b
above provided that all information required by these sections is included or attached.
3. Required forest practices. The following requirements shall apply to all timber harvesting
operations:
a. Felling or skidding on, or across, any public road is prohibited without the express
written consent of the Municipality, or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
whichever is responsible for maintenance of the thoroughfare;
b. No tree tops or slash shall be left within twenty-five (25) feet of any public road, or
private roadway providing access to adjoining residential property;
c. All tree tops or slash shall between twenty-five (25) feet and fifty (50) feet from a public
roadway, or private roadway providing access to adjoining residential property, or within
fifty (50) feet of adjoining residential property, shall be lopped to a maximum height of
four (4) feet above the ground;
d. No tree tops or slash shall be left on or across the boundary of any property adjoining the
operation without the consent of the owner thereof;
e, Litter resulting from a timber harvesting operation shall be removed from the site before
it is vacated by the operator.
4. Responsibility for road maintenance and repair; road bonding. Pursuant to Title 75 of the Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes, Chapter 49; and Title 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189; the landowner and the
operator shall be responsible for repairing any damage to municipal roads caused by traffic associated
with the timber harvesting operation, to the extent the damage is in excess of that caused by normal
traffic, and shall be required to furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of such potential damages, as
determined by the Municipal Engineer.
5. A sawmill owned or rented by the property owner for his conduction of forestry practices on lands
owned by said property owner is an accessory use to forestry as defined in this Ordinance.
215
Section 1686. Solid Waste Disposal Facilities. Solid Waste Disposal Facilities, including Solid Waste
Landfills, Resource Recovery Facilities and Low-Level Radioactive Waste Facilities, are permitted by special
exception within the General Industrial (G-I) Zoning District. If a special exception is granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board, the applicant shall be subject to all conditions, standards, and controls listed under subsections
1686.A, 1686.B, and 1686.C.
A. Solid Waste Landfills
1. For the purposes of this chapter, a “solid waste landfill” shall be defined as a site on which
engineering principles are utilized to bury deposits of solid waste without creating public health or
safety hazards, nuisances, pollution, or environmental degradation.
2. If a special exception is granted, then the applicant is subject to all conditions, standards and
controls listed below:
a. The minimum lot size shall be fifty (50) acres.
b. The initial application for a Solid Waste Landfill shall be accompanied by impact
statements. A plan for the reuse of the land shall be submitted, in writing, to the
Municipal Governing Body at the time of securing a permit for a landfill operated by the
municipal authority. The plan shall be in compliance with the prevailing zoning at time
of application.
c. The construction and operation of a Solid Waste Landfill shall not be permitted unless a
permit for such landfill has been issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the landfill is constructed and operated in full compliance
with the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the rules and regulations of
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Operation of any Solid
Waste Landfill shall at all times be in full compliance with the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the provisions of this chapter. In the event
that any provisions of this part are less restrictive than any present or future rules or
regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection, the more restrictive
Department rules and regulations supersede and control in the operation of such Solid
Waste Landfill.
d. A Solid Waste Landfill operation shall be under the direction at all times of a responsible
individual who is qualified by experience or training to operate a landfill.
e. Burning of solid waste is prohibited at a Solid Waste Landfill. Suitable measures shall be
taken to prevent fires by means and devices mutually agreeable to the Department of
Environmental Protection and the Municipality.
f. Gaseous and particulate emission from the Solid Waste Landfill site shall conform to
prevailing federal, state, and local air pollution control codes and regulations.
g. Direct access shall be taken from an arterial or collector highway. No more than one
access road shall be constructed to the entrance of the Solid Waste Landfill. The access
road shall be an all-weather paved surface road negotiable by and capable of supporting
loaded solid waste collection vehicles. All existing public roads shall be kept mud free.
h. A tire cleaning area shall be provided on site. All tires of trucks leaving the Solid Waste
Landfill shall be cleaned. Runoff from the tire cleaning area shall be controlled and
disposed of in accordance with all pertinent federal, state, and/or Municipal standards.
216
i. An equipment cleaning area shall be provided on site. All equipment used to grade and
compact solid waste at the Solid Waste Landfill shall be cleaned daily. Runoff from the
equipment cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all
pertinent federal, state, and/or Municipal standards.
j. Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is on duty.
Unloading of waste shall be continuously supervised. In order to protect against
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every Solid Waste Landfill shall be protected
by locked barricades, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the
area at unauthorized times or locations. Such barricade, fence or gate shall be at least six
(6) feet high and shall be kept in good repair and neatly painted in a uniform color.
k. No site activity shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays. Dumping shall be
permitted only between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. No vehicles shall be staged
or parked at entrance and/or access road of the Solid Waste Landfill prior to 6:30 a.m.
Overnight parking shall be prohibited.
l. Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris. The entire area shall be kept clean
and orderly. The perimeter of the Solid Waste Landfill shall be inspected for debris on a
daily basis.
m. Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly
flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes, and radioactive materials, shall not
be disposed of in a Solid Waste Landfill.
n. The disposal of sewage liquids and solids and other liquids shall be specifically
prohibited in a Solid Waste Landfill.
o. Salvaging of materials as permitted by law shall be conducted by the operator only and
shall be organized so that it will not interfere with prompt sanitary disposal of waste or
create unsightly conditions or health hazards. The storage of salvage shall be controlled
in a manner that will not permit the inhabitation or reproduction of deleterious vectors.
p. The entire site, including the fill surface, shall be graded and provided with drainage
facilities to minimize runoff onto and into the fill surface, to prevent erosion or washing
of the fill surface, to drain off rainwater falling onto the fill surface, and to prevent the
collection of standing water. The operator shall comply with the requirements of Chapter
75 and Chapter 102 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and applicable Municipal
ordinances so that there is no adverse off-site impact from the drainage of surface water.
Cracks in, depressions in, and/or erosion of cover shall be repaired daily.
q. Operation of any Solid Waste Landfill shall at times be in full compliance with the
Pennsylvania Clean Stream Law, Act 157 of 1980, as amended.
r. An operation permit shall be obtained on an annual basis on or before June 1 from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the Municipality if
required.
s. A final inspection of the entire site shall be made by the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Municipality and their authorized representative to determine
compliance with approved plans and specifications before the earthmoving equipment is
removed from the site. Any necessary corrective work shall be performed before the
Solid Waste Landfill project is accepted as completed. Arrangements shall be made for
the repair of all cracked, eroded and uneven areas in the final cover during the first two
217
years following completion of the Solid Waste Landfill. A bond shall be posted to ensure
that all corrective work is completed.
t. Maximum active dumping area shall be three (3) acres. Continued operation of the Solid
Waste Landfill shall be subject to compliance with all state and Municipal regulations
pertaining to a Solid Waste Landfill.
u. No operation, activity, use, or occupation of any type for the Solid Waste Landfill shall
be carried on within one hundred (100) feet of any property line and/or within one
hundred (100) feet of any street right-of-way. In addition, a Solid Waste Landfill shall
not be located within three hundred (300) feet of any residential zoning district or
occupied residential dwelling unit.
v. The storage of fuel to be used on the Solid Waste Landfill site shall be in accordance with
all applicable federal, state, and municipal regulations.
w. A chain-link fence with a minimum height of fifteen (15) feet shall be erected along all
boundary lines of the area which is approved for operational use as a Solid Waste
Landfill by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The fence shall
not contain openings greater than four (4) square inches and shall contain, at all
entrances, gates which are locked except during operating hours.
x. A fifty (50) foot wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for
operational use as a Solid Waste Landfill by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. The buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen and
is to be located and maintained along all boundary lines of the Solid Waste Landfill,
except at entrances. The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of twelve (12)
feet and shall be staggered on twelve (12) foot centers. No materials of any nature shall
be stored within this buffer yard. In addition, the buffer yard shall meet all pertinent
standards specified in this section. A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the
Municipality for review and approval.
y. The Solid Waste Landfill shall contain an on-site scale, and all solid waste material
delivered to the site shall be weighed and recorded pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act (Act 101, as amended). All weigh receipts shall be submitted to
the Municipality on a quarterly basis.
z. A Land Development Plan for a Solid Waste Landfill must be submitted to the
Municipality for review. The Land Development Plan shall demonstrate complete
conformity with the requirements specified under this section. Upon approval, the Land
Development Plan shall be received in accordance with the provisions stipulated by the
Municipality.
B. Resource Recovery Facilities
1. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
Resource Recovery Facility – A facility or land that is used for any one or a combination of the
following or similar uses: composting, incineration, material separation, recycling or trash
transfer.
Composting Facility – A facility for the composting of the organic matter in a manner consistent
with local, State, and Federal laws.
218
Incinerator – A facility designed to reduce municipal solid waste by combustion. This use may
or may not include heat exchange equipment for energy recovery.
Municipal Solid Waste – The un-separated and/or unprocessed combination of residential and
commercial solid waste materials generated in a municipality.
Recycling Facility – A business that accumulates material such as paper, glass, aluminum and/or
plastic that is no longer useful for its intended purpose. The materials are then sold to another
business as a raw material which can be used to manufacture a new product.
Refuse-Derived Fuel (RDF) Facility – A facility for the extraction of materials from municipal
solid waste for recycling or for use as refuse-derived fuel (RDF).
.
Transfer Station – A facility where municipal solid waste is delivered for the purpose of
transferring the material into another container or vehicles for transport to a final disposal site or
processing facility. (A transfer station may include the separation and collection of material for
the purpose of recycling).
2. If a special exception is granted, then the applicant is subject to all conditions, standards and
controls listed below:
a. The minimum lot size shall be ten (10) acres.
b. Parking areas shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any property line.
c. Operation of a resource recovery facility shall at all times be in full compliance with the
statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the rules and regulations of the
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) and the provisions of this chapter. In
the event that any of the provisions of this chapter are less restrictive than any present or
future rules or regulations of PADEP, the more restrictive PADEP regulations shall
supersede and control.
d. Gaseous and particulate emission from the resource recovery facility site shall conform to
the prevailing federal, state and local air pollution control codes and regulations.
e. Direct access shall be taken from an arterial or collector highway. No more than one
access road shall be constructed to the entrance of the resource recovery facility. The
access road shall be an all-weather paved surface road negotiable by and capable of
supporting loaded solid waste collection vehicles. All existing public roads shall be kept
mud free.
f. A tire cleaning area shall be provided on site. All tires of all trucks leaving the resource
recovery facility shall be cleaned. Runoff from the tire cleaning area shall be controlled
and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent federal, state and/or municipal standards.
g. An equipment cleaning area shall be provided on site. All equipment used at the resource
recovery facility shall be cleaned daily. Runoff from the equipment cleaning area shall
be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent federal, state, and/or local
municipal standards.
h. Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is on duty.
Unloading of waste shall be continuously supervised. In order to protect against
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every resource recovery facility shall be
protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny
219
access to the area at unauthorized times or locations. Such barricade, fence or gate shall
be at least six (6) feet high and shall be kept in good repair and neatly painted in a
uniform color.
i. No site activity shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays. Dumping shall be
permitted only between hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. No vehicles shall be staged or
parked at entrance and/or access road of the resource recovery facility prior to 6:30 a.m.
Overnight parking shall be prohibited.
j. Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris. The entire area shall be kept clean
and orderly. The perimeter of the resource recovery facility shall be inspected for debris
on a daily basis.
k. Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly
flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes, and radioactive materials, shall not
be disposed of at the resource recovery facility.
l. The disposal of sewage liquids and solids and other liquids shall be specifically
prohibited at the resource recovery facility.
m. All parts of the process-unloading, handling and storage of municipal solid waste shall
occur within a building. However, certain separated recyclable materials such as glass,
aluminum, and other metals may be stored outdoors. The storage of paper shall be within
a building. Any materials stored outdoors shall be properly screened so as not to be
visible from any adjacent streets or property. No material shall be placed or deposited to
a height greater than the height of the fence or wall herein prescribed.
n. No municipal solid waste shall be stored at a resource recovery facility longer than state
and federal regulations allow.
o. A contingency plan for disposal of municipal solid waste during a plant shutdown must
be submitted to the municipality and approved by the Municipal Governing Body.
p. Waste from the Resource Recovery Facility process (such as but not limited to ash from
an incinerator) shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried from
the site by wind or water. This process waste shall be located at least two hundred (200)
feet from any property line and stored in leak proof containers. Such process waste shall
be disposed of in a sanitary resource recovery facility approved by PADEP or in another
manner approved by PADEP.
q. Solid waste landfill operations and open burning of any materials are not permitted under
this use.
r. No use shall emit noise in such quantity as to be audible beyond its lot lines. In addition,
the nuisance standards of this chapter shall be met.
s. An operational permit shall be renewed on an annual basis on or before June 1.
t. No operation, activity, use, or occupation of any type for a Resource Recovery Facility
shall be carried on within two hundred (200) feet of any property line and/or within two
hundred (200) feet of any street or right-of-way. In addition, a Resource Recovery
Facility shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of any residential zoning
district or occupied residential dwelling unit.
220
u. A Resource Recovery Facility shall be under the direction at all times of a responsible
individual who is qualified by expertise or training to operate such a facility.
v. The storage of fuel to be used at the Resource Recovery Facility site shall be in
accordance with all federal, state, and Municipal regulations.
w. A chain link fence with a minimum height of fifteen (15) feet shall be erected along all
boundary lines of the area which is approved for operational use as a Resource Recovery
Facility by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The fence shall
not contain openings greater than four (4) square inches and shall contain, at all
entrances, gates which are locked except during operating hours.
x. A fifty (50) foot buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for operational
use as a Resource Recovery Facility by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. The buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen and is to be located
and maintained along all boundary lines of the Resource Recovery Facility, except at the
entrances. The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall
be staggered on ten (10) foot centers. No materials of any nature shall be stored within
this buffer yard. In addition, the buffer yard shall meet all pertinent standards specified
in the ESP Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. A landscaping plan shall be
submitted to the governing body for review and approval.
y. The Resource Recovery Facility shall contain an on-site scale, and all solid waste
material delivered to the site shall be weighed and recorded pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act (Act 101, as amended). All weigh receipts shall be
submitted to the Municipality on a quarterly basis.
z. A Land Development Plan for a Resource Recovery Facility must be submitted to the
Municipality for review. The Land Development Plan shall demonstrate complete
conformity with the requirements specified under this section. Upon approval, the Land
Development Plan shall be recorded in accordance with the provisions stipulated by the
Municipality.
C. Low-Level Radioactive Waste Facilities.
1. For the purpose of this section, a “Low-Level Radioactive Waste Facility” shall be defined as a
site in which engineering principles are utilized for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste as
defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
2. If a special exception is granted to permit a Low-Level Radioactive Waste Facility, the applicant
and/or the developer for the site shall be subject to all standards and requirements which are
specified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, and by such other governmental bodies and agencies that may have
jurisdiction.
3. If a special exception is granted to permit Low-Level Radioactive Waste Facility, the applicant
and/or the developer of the site shall be subject to all standards and requirements which are
specified under all local, state, and federal laws, as amended.
4. If a special exception is granted to permit a Low-Level Radioactive Waste Facility, the applicant
and/or the developer of the site shall be subject to all standards and requirements which are
specified in Section 478 (a).
221
5. A Land Development Plan for a Low-Level Radioactive Waste Facility must be submitted to the
Municipality for review. The Land Development Plan shall demonstrate complete conformity
with the requirements specified under this section. Upon approval, the Land Development Plan
shall be recorded in accordance with the provisions stipulated by the Municipality.
Section 1687. Mineral Extraction
A. The activities and residual effects shall not create conditions hazardous or otherwise significantly adverse
to the value and customary use of adjacent properties. Adequate and reasonable protection shall be
provided to adjacent uses.
B. The site shall be reclaimed in phases to a non-hazardous state permitting some economically productive
future use and that extracting activities and resulting condition of the site will not result in environmental
degradation of the surrounding area.
C. Buffer Yard. A buffer yard within the standards of the ESP Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
and with a width of two hundred (200) feet shall be required between the lot line of any existing residential
use and any mineral extraction use.
D. Minimum setback from all exterior lot lines shall be one hundred (100) feet.
E. Minimum setback from any publicly owned recreational land, school, place of worship, creek, river, lake or
wetland shall be two hundred (200) feet.
F. The Governing Body may require fencing where it is needed to protect public safety and welfare.
G. Noise and vibration standards, as per Section 1553.
H. The Governing Body may require that the applicant submit a copy of all submitted materials to the
Schuylkill County Conservation District for a review.
I. The Governing Body may submit an application affecting greater than ten (10) acres to the Municipal
Engineer for a review. Such reasonable, necessary and routine review fees as occur shall be paid for by the
applicant.
J. The Governing Body may reasonably limit the hours of operation of the use and of related trucking
operations to protect the character of adjacent residential areas.
K. The applicant may be required to post such reasonable and necessary bonds to provide for any serious and
extraordinary damage that may result from the use of Municipal roads by heavy trucks from the mining
operation (The Board may require a traffic impact study of the current and potential traffic in the affected
region).
L. The Zoning Hearing Board shall determine that the proposed use will not adversely affect the public health
or safety of the community. In reaching this determination, the Board shall consider the following
information as supplied by the applicant or any other party to the proceeding:
1. The location of the proposed extraction operation;
2. The anticipated depth of any excavations;
3. The depth of the existing water table;
4. The probable effect of the mining operation on the existing water table or confined aquifer;
222
5. The relationship of the mine site to surface watercourses and bodies of water;
6. The established water quality of surface waters which may be affected by the mining operations;
7. The probable effect of the mining operation on the quality of those surface waters (The Board may
require the applicant to prepare studies of the present water quality of surface or underground
water which may be affected by the proposed mining operation, and receive other qualified
evidence on water quality.);
8. The nature and content of the overburden to be removed in the course of mining;
9. The underlying strata in which the minerals to be mined are located; and
10. The probable effect of blasting and other excavation methods upon lawful existing and permitted
uses in the area surrounding the proposed mine site.
M. The applicant shall submit a complete copy of all application materials to the Governing Body and to the
Planning Commission to allow them to make advisory reviews to the Zoning Hearing Board.
N. It is not the intent of this Section to unlawfully preempt any Federal or State law or regulation. Unless a
preemption of this Ordinance would exist, the most strict and least permissive requirements shall be in
effect where a conflict might exist.
O. No mineral extraction use may begin, expand or continue without having in effect all required State and
Federal permits and being in compliance with all applicable regulations.
P. Suitability of Roads
1. It is the responsibility of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the Board that the public road
system to be used will be adequate for the amount of heavy truck traffic to be created.
2. If it is determined that the mineral extraction use would create unusually heavy truck traffic and
that the State and Municipal roads to be used would be inadequate to handle this unusually heavy
traffic and non-customary traffic; the applicant may be required by the Board to fund such
improvements to roads within one (1) mile of the use as are reasonably necessary to handle the
heavy truck traffic that will be generated. Such improvements shall be in direction related to the
traffic generated by the use. Such improvements may be made in phases and may be handled
through posting of bonds.
3. The Board may deny a mineral extraction application if the public roads would be physically
unable to handle the heavy truck traffic and if the applicant refused to fund the improvements
necessary. The applicant shall not be responsible for routine maintenance of public roads.
Q. Each application for Mineral Extraction covering an area greater than one (1) acre shall contain the
following information:
1. Present uses of the land to included in the requested permit.
2. A location map (prepared by a registered professional engineer) showing:
a. The extent of the area to be excavated;
b. Boundaries of land to affected by the mineral extraction operation, including the
locations of storage sites for overburden, access and haulage roads, storage sites for
223
equipment, and offices and other structures to be used in conjunction with the mining
operation;
c. Boundaries of adjoining lands owned by persons other than the applicant and the existing
uses of those adjoining lands;
d. The location of all watercourses, bodies of water, public rights-of-way, public buildings,
public recreation areas or other public property on or within four hundred (400) feet of
the boundaries of land to be affected by the mineral extraction operation; and
e. Physical or topographical relationship of the land area encompassed within the
boundaries in subsection 1687.Q.2.b to those features described in subsection 1687.Q.2.d.
3. A development plan for the area to be affected by mineral extraction, prepared by a registered
professional engineer:
a. The nature and depth of the various strata of overburden above and between mineral
seams to be excavated;
b. The location and quality of underground water known to be present on the mine site;
c. The location of known aquifers and the estimated elevation of the water table;
d. The nature and thickness of minerals above the seam to be mined;
e. A good faith estimate (prepared by a qualified soils engineer or geologist) of the
probable impact of the mining operation upon the community water supply.
4. A detailed land reclamation plan of the area included within the permit, showing:
a. A proposed use or uses of the land following the mineral extraction operations;
b. Proposed topography of land following the mineral extraction operations;
c. Actions to be taken during mining to conserve and replace topsoil removed during
mining operations;
d. The sedimentation and erosion control plan for the operation including the type of
vegetation to be planted for soil stabilization purposes;
e. Proposed location of future roads, private or public rights-of-way, drainage courses and
other proposed improvements; and
f. Reasonable assurances that the applicant will be capable of reclaiming the land in
accordance with the plan within a reasonable time after completion of the mineral
extracting operations to be covered by the requested permit.
5. Such other information as the Zoning Hearing Board may require by rule and which examination
of the application may reveal to be necessary in order to determine that the proposed mineral
extraction operation will comply with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
R. Regulation of the Maximum Acreage Available for Active Mineral Extraction.
1. The intent of this Section is to control the pace of mineral extraction operations in a manner
commensurate with the Municipality’s ability to promote orderly growth and to assimilate
224
development activity created through mineral extraction operations and related activities, to
provide necessary public services throughout the Municipality to assure adequate protection of life
and property, to provide for coordinated and practical community development, to prevent
overcrowding of land, blight, congestion in travel and transportation, loss of life or property from
flood or other danger, to encourage expedient reclamation of mined lands, and to provide
incentives for the re-mining of inadequately reclaimed lands.
2. The gross acreage under active mineral extraction at any one time in the municipality shall not
exceed two hundred and fifty (250) acres.
3. No permit for mineral extraction issued under this Section for the conduct of mineral extraction
operations shall be deemed to authorize the applicant to begin, or to continue existing, mineral
extraction operations on land covered by the permit until the Zoning Officer shall certify that the
mineral extraction operation covered by the permit will not cause the total amount of land under
active mineral extraction to exceed the maximum gross amount of land which may be affected by
mineral extraction at any one time under the provisions of this Section.
4. Land Affected by Mineral Extraction shall, for the purposes of this determination, include land
currently under active mineral extraction at the time of the determination, land not adequately
reclaimed or backfilled following prior mining operations, land containing waste or spoil piles
from existing or prior mining activities, and other land determined to be so affected for reasons
set forth in this Ordinance containing the determination required by this provision.
5. It is the responsibility of the applicant to periodically document to the Board that the maximum
gross area being mined is less than two hundred and fifty (250) acres, if requested to provide such
documentation by the Board.
6. It is the intent of this Ordinance that any surface mining operations that are closely related
business ventures and that are being conducted within close proximity to each other shall be
considered as one (1) operation within the maximum gross area requirement.
Section 1688. Planned Industrial Park
A. Permitted Uses.
1. Scientific or Industrial Research
2. Wholesale Business Establishment
3. Printing
4. Contractors
5. Warehousing, subject to Section 1689.
6. Child Day Care Center, subject to Section 1627.
7. Bank or Financial Establishment
8. General Restaurant, subject to Section 1649.
9. Fitness/Health Center
B. At least seventy percent (70%) of the total floor space of the park shall be utilized for Industrial uses.
225
C. Dimensional Regulations.
1. Site Regulations
Minimum Site Area: 5 acres
Minimum Site Width: 200 feet
(at right-of-way line)
Minimum Setbacks: 75 feet (from site boundaries)
Maximum Impervious Coverage: 80%
2. Minimum Lot Regulations
Minimum Lot Area: 1 acre
Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet
Minimum Front Yard: 50 feet
Minimum Side Yard: 20 feet (50 feet from corner side yards)
Minimum Rear Yard: 30 feet
Minimum Building Spacing: 35 feet
3. Maximum Lot Regulations
Maximum Building height: 40 feet
Maximum Impervious coverage 60%
D. All uses within the park shall take access from an interior roadway. Access for the park shall be from an
arterial or collector street.
E. Interior roadways shall have street trees set on forty (40) foot centers
F. All parking and loading facilities shall be located to the rear or side of buildings.
G. The buffer requirements of the ESP SALDO shall be met.
H. Lighting facilities shall be provided and arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and
neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
I. The display of materials or goods is not permitted within a park.
J. A Traffic Impact Study shall be required per the ESP SALDO.
K. Individual uses may be located in detached and attached structures and on either fee simple lots or leased
parcels.
L. All commonly owned elements shall be owned and maintained in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act or other ownership arrangement reviewed by the Governing Body’s Solicitor.
M. The applicant shall submit a plan for the overall design and improvements for the park to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
N. No use shall emit noise in such quantity as to be audible beyond its lot lines. The standards of Section
1520 shall be met.
O. Parking areas must be adequately screened per the ESP SALDO when situated within fifty (50) feet of land
zoned for or in residential use.
226
Section 1689. Truck Terminal; Warehousing; Distribution Center; Truck Stop
A. Truck Terminal
1. The truck terminal shall be licensed by the Public Utilities Commission.
2. Dimensional Requirements.
a. Minimum Lots Area: 10 acres
b. Minimum Lot Width: 300 feet
c. Minimum Front yard: 100 feet
d. Minimum Side Yard: 100 feet
e. Minimum Rear Yard: 100 feet
f. Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
g. Minimum Setback for parking Lots: 50 feet (public street); 100 feet (residential use or
zoned land)
h. Minimum Building spacing: 50 feet
i. Maximum Impervious Surface: 60%
3. All structures (including, but not limited to, air compressors, fuel pump islands, kiosks) shall be
set back at least two hundred (200) feet from any street right-of-way line. Unless the fuel pump
islands are set back two hundred (200) feet from the street line, they shall be designed so t hat,
when fueling, trucks must be parallel to street.
4. Not structure, including parking areas and access driveways shall be located closer than two
hundred (200) feet to any residential use property line or any property line of a School Child Day
Care Facility, Healthcare Facility, hospital, park or playground.
5. Trucks with compressors running twenty-four (24) hours a day shall be located within a
quadrangle of buildings or walls.
6. Access driveways shall be a minimum or twenty-eight (28) feet, and a maximum of thirty-five
(35) feet wide. All access drives onto the same road shall be set back at least one hundred and
fifty (150) feet from one another, as measured from closest points of cartway edges.
Any gates or other barriers used at the entrance to parking areas shall be set back and arranged to
prevent vehicle backups onto adjoining roads during peak arrival periods.
7. All vehicle service and/or repair activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building. Outdoor storage of parts, equipment lubricants, fuels, or other materials used or
discarded in any service or repair operations must be screened from adjoining roads and
properties.
8. The outdoor storage of unlicensed and/or un-inspected vehicles is prohibited.
9. The demolition or junking of vehicles and machinery is prohibited. Demolished vehicles and/or
parts thereof shall be removed within thirty (30) days after arrival.
10. Any exterior public address system shall be designed and operated so that the audible levels of any
messages conveyed over the system will not exceed the ambient noise levels of the use, as
measured at each of the property lines.
11. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the storage and disposal of materials and wastes will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with all applicable state and federal regulations.
227
12. Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee or one (1) space for every five
hundred (500) square feet of total floor area, which ever requires the greater number of spaces;
plus one (1) space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.
13. The applicant shall furnish a traffic impact report, prepared by a professional traffic engineer, in
accordance with the ESP SALDO.
B. Warehousing
1. Dimensional Requirements.
a. Minimum Lot6s Area: 10 acres
b. Minimum Lot Width: 300 feet
c. Minimum Front yard: 100 feet
d. Minimum Side Yard: 100 feet
e. Minimum Rear Yard: 100 feet
f. Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
g. Minimum Setback for parking Lots: 50 feet (public street); 100 feet (residential use or
zoned land)
h. Minimum Building spacing: 50 feet
i. Maximum Impervious Surface: 60%
2. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the following
topics:
a. The nature of the on-site activities and operations, the types of materials stored the
frequency of distribution and restocking, the duration period of storage of materials, and
the methods for disposal of any surplus or damaged materials. In addition, the applicant
shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a manner that
complies with state and federal regulations.
b. The general scale of the operation, in terms of its market area, specific floor space
requirements for each activity, the total number of employees on each shift, and an
overall needed site size.
c. Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust,
litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, wastewater, stormwater, solid waste, etc.),
and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The
applicant shall further furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the proposed use
fall within acceptable levels, as regulated by applicable laws and ordinances.
d. A traffic impact report prepared in accordance with the ESP SALDO.
3. Access driveways shall be a minimum of twenty-eight (28) feet, and a maximum of thirty-five
(35) feet wide. All access drives onto the same road shall be set back at least one hundred and
fifty (15) feet from one another, as measured from closest points of cartway edges.
4. Any gates or other barriers used at the entrance to parking areas shall be set back and arranged to
prevent vehicle backups onto adjoining roads during peak arrival periods.
5. Parking of Trucks shall be limited to those trucks picking up or delivering warehouse or wholesale
materials twenty-four (24) hours prior to or after said pickup or delivery.
6. The outdoor storage of unlicensed and/or un-inspected vehicles is prohibited.
7. The demolition or junking of vehicles and machinery is prohibited. Demolished vehicles and/or
parts thereof shall be removed within 30 days after arrival.
228
8. The applicant shall designate and reserve sufficient space on the sire to accommodate staged or
queued vehicles awaiting loading/unloading at a rate of no less than five percent (5%) of the
projected maximum number of trips per day.
9. No structure including parking areas and access driveways shall be located closer than two
hundred (200) feet to any residential use property line or any property line of a school Child Day
Care Facility, Healthcare Facility, hospital, park, or playground.
Section 1690. Junk Yard
A. Junk Yard
1. Minimum Lot Area: Five (5) acres
2. Junk Yard materials shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any residence other than
that owned by the owner of the premises or any residential or business districts or one thousand
(1,000) feet from a lake, river or stream. No junk or salvage operation shall be carried on within
one hundred (100) feet of any highway right-of-way. No junk yard or salvage material or
accessory structures shall be placed in the front, side or rear setbacks.
3. Junk Yard materials shall not be located in a wetland or floodplain.
4. Junk Yard materials shall be enclosed by a suitable fence or vegetative screening so that the
materials are not visible from other property in the vicinity of the Junk Yard nor from a public
road or from navigable water. The fence or vegetative screen shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet
in height and shall be property maintained to satisfy the obscuring objective.
5. Junk Yard materials shall not be piled higher than the height of the fence or vegetative screen.
6. All junk shall be stored or arranged to permit access by emergency equipment and personnel, and
to minimize the accumulation of water. For fire protection, an unobstructed fire break shall be
maintained fifteen (15) feet in width and completely surrounding the Junk Yard.
7. At the site, appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent water and soil contamination from oils,
gasoline, grease or other contaminants. At a minimum, there shall be five (5) feet of soil between
the water table or bedrock.
8. Any junkyard shall be maintained in such a manner to minimize public or private nuisance, nor to
cause any offensive or noxious sounds or odors, nor to cause the breeding or harboring of rats,
flies, or other vectors.
Section 1691. Commercial Slaughterhouse
A. Commercial Slaughterhouse
1. Minimum lot area: Five (5) acres.
2. The subject site shall have access to a collector or arterial road.
3. A public sewerage system and public water supplies shall be utilized.
4. All aspects of the slaughtering, processing, rendering, and packaging operation, excepting the
unloading and holding of live animals, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
229
5. All live animals held outside shall be within secure holding pens or runways, sufficiently large to
accommodate all animals without crowding, and not located within the front yard.
6. The applicant shall furnish a working plan for animal containment and for the recovery of escaped
animals which minimizes the potential for animals to enter traffic or cross property lines, and
which shall be continuously implemented.
7. All animal wastes shall be regularly cleaned up and properly disposed of, so as not to be
objectionable at the site’s property line.
8. The unloading of live animals from trucks into holding pens and their movement into the plant
shall be continuously supervised by a qualified operator, whose responsibility it shall also be to
immediately identify and appropriately dispatch any obviously ill or injured animals.
9. The unloading of live animals and their movement into the plant shall be conducted in an orderly
and calm manner so as to minimize noise levels.
10. The loading and unloading of trucks shall be restricted to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
11. No exterior animal holding pens and/or areas devoted to loading/unloading of animals shall be
located within two hundred (200) feet of any property line of a residential, retail business,
professional service, personal service or institutional use; or any Place of Worship or Playground.
12. All animal holding pens and/or areas used for the loading/unloading of animals shall be screened
from all adjoining properties and shall include a minimum fifty (50) foot-wide landscape strip.
13. Sewer and water lines shall not meet within or beneath the plant, and shall further be designed and
installed to minimize the potential for leakage and contamination, by maximizing the separation
distance between lines and laying sewer lines at greater depth than water lines.
14. Where wastewater pretreatment is required by the EAP or local authority, wastewater shall be kept
completely covered at all times to reduce the potential for release of odors. In no event shall
wastewater be disposed of in a storm sewer, to the ground, or in any other manner inconsistent
with PA DEP regulations.
15. Public water supplies shall be tested for water potability prior to approval, and annually thereafter,
the results of which shall be regularly submitted to the USDA.
16. All unusable animal by-products shall be stored indoors in leak-proof containers. In the case of
slaughtering or processing operations which do not do their own rendering, the applicant shall
provide evidence of a written contract with a rendering operation for the daily disposal of such
waste products. In no case shall any waste products remain on the site for more than twenty-four
(24) hours.
17. The applicant must demonstrate written compliance with, and continue to comply with, all
applicable local, state and federal standards and regulations.
18. The use shall provide sufficiently long stacking lanes and on-site loading/unloading area, so that
trucks waiting to be loaded/unloaded will not back up onto public roads. No parking or
loading/unloading shall be permitted on or along any public road.
19. Vehicular access shall be so arranged as to minimize danger and congestion along adjoining roads
and to avoid the creation of nuisances to nearby properties. Access drives used by trucks shall
only intersect with major collector or arterial roads.
230
20. All access drives onto the site shall have a paved minimum thirty-five (35) foot-wide cartway for a
distance of at least one hundred (100) feet from the street right-of-way. In addition, if portions of
on-site access drives are unpaved, then a one-hundred-fifty (150) foot long gravel section of
driveway shall be placed just beyond the preceding two-hundred (200) foot paved section, to help
collect any mud that may have attached to a vehicle’s wheels.
21. The applicant shall furnish a traffic impact report prepared by a professional traffic engineer in
accordance with the ESP SALDO.
Section 1692. Wind Energy Facility
A. Purpose. The purpose of the section is to provide for the construction and operation of Wind Energy
Facilities in The ESP Region, subject to reasonable conditions that will protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
Applicant - The person or entity filing an application under this Ordinance.
Facility Owner - The entity or entities having an equity interest in the Wind Energy Facility, including their
respective successors and assigns.
Operator - The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the Wind Energy
Facility.
Hub Height - The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation to the height of the Wind
Turbine hub, to which the blade is attached.
Occupied Building - A residence, school, hospital, church, public library or other building used for public
gathering that is occupied or in use when the permit application is submitted.
Turbine Height - The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation to the highest point of the
turbine rotor plane.
Wind Turbine - A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use
of a wind turbine generator, and includes the nacelle, rotor, tower, and pad transformer, if any.
Wind Energy Facility - An electric generating facility, whose main purpose is to supply electricity,
consisting of one or more Wind Turbines and other accessory structures and buildings, including
substations, meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant
structures and facilities.
Non-Participating Landowner - Any landowner except those on whose property all or a portion of a Wind
Energy Facility is located pursuant to an agreement with the Facility Owner or Operator.
C. Applicability
1. This Ordinance applies to all Wind Energy Facilities proposed to be constructed after the effective
date of the Ordinance, except that this Ordinance is not intended to apply to stand-alone Wind
Turbines constructed primarily for residential or farm use.
2. Wind Energy Facilities constructed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be
required to meet the requirements of this Ordinance; Provided that any physical modification to an
231
existing Wind Energy Facility that materially alters the size, type and number of Wind Turbines or
other equipment shall require a permit under this Ordinance.
D. Permitted Use
A Wind Energy Facility shall be considered a permitted use By Right in the AP and EAP Zoning
Districts.
E. Permit Requirement
1. No Wind Energy Facility, or addition of a Wind Turbine to an existing Wind Energy Facility,
shall be constructed or located within the ESP Region unless all applicable Local, State, and
Federal permits have been issued to the Facility Owner or Operator approving construction of the
facility.
2. The permit application or amended permit application shall be accompanied with a fee to be
established by the Municipality in which the Wind Energy Facility is located.
3. Any physical modification to an existing and permitted Wind Energy Facility that materially alters
the size, type and number of Wind Turbines or other equipment shall require a permit modification
under this Ordinance. Like-kind replacements shall not require a permit modification.
F. Permit Application
Among other things, the application shall contain the following:
1. A narrative describing the proposed Wind Energy Facility, including an overview of the project;
the project location; the approximate generating capacity of the Wind Energy Facility; the
approximate number, representative types and height or range of heights of Wind Turbines to be
constructed, including their generating capacity, dimensions and respective manufacturers, and a
description of ancillary facilities.
2. An affidavit or similar evidence of agreement between the property owner and the Facility Owner
or Operator demonstrating that the Facility Owner or Operator has the permission of the property
owner to apply for necessary permits for construction and operation of the Wind Energy Facility.
3. Identification of the properties on which the proposed Wind Energy Facility will be located, and
the properties adjacent to where the Wind Energy Facility will be located.
4. A site plan showing the planned location of each Wind Turbine, property lines, setback lines,
access road and turnout locations, substation(s), electrical cabling from the Wind Energy Facility
to the substation(s), ancillary equipment, buildings, and structures, including permanent
meteorological towers, associated transmission lines, and layout of all structures within the
geographical boundaries of any applicable setback.
5. Documents related to decommissioning.
6. Other relevant studies, reports, certifications and approvals as may be reasonably requested by the
ESP Region to ensure compliance with all applicable ordinances.
G. Design and Installation
1. Design Safety Certification
232
The design of the Wind Energy Facility shall conform to applicable industry standards, including
those of the American National Standards Institute. The Applicant shall submit certificates of
design compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturers from Underwriters Laboratories, Det
Norske Veritas, Germanishcer Llloyd Wind Energies, or other similar certifying organizations.
2. Uniform Construction Code
To the extent applicable, the Wind Energy Facility shall comply with the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code, 34 Pa. Code §§403.1 – 403.142.
3. Controls and Brakes
All Wind Energy Facilities shall be equipped with a redundant braking system. This includes both
aerodynamic over-speed controls (including variable pitch, tip, and other similar systems) and
mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation shall
not be considered a sufficient braking system for over-speed protection.
4. Electrical Components
All electrical components of the Wind Energy Facility shall conform to relevant and applicable
local, state and national codes, and relevant and applicable international standards.
5. Visual Appearance; Power Lines
a. Wind Turbines shall be a non-obtrusive color such as white, off-white or gray.
b. Wind Energy Facilities shall not be artificially lighted, except to the extent required by
the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority that regulates air safety.
c. Wind Turbines shall not display advertising, except for reasonable identification of the
turbine manufacturer, Facility Owner and Operator.
d. On-site transmission and power lines between Wind Turbines shall, to the maximum
extent practicable, be placed underground.
6. Warnings
a. A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be placed at the base of all padmounted
transformers and substations.
b. Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, reflectors, or tape shall be placed on the
anchor points of guy wires and along the guy wires up to a height of ten feet from the
ground.
7. Climb Prevention/Locks
a. Wind Turbines shall not be climbable up to fifteen (15) feet above ground surface.
b. All access doors to Wind Turbines and electrical equipment shall be locked or fenced, as
appropriate, to prevent entry by non-authorized persons.
H. Setbacks
1. Occupied Buildings
233
a. Wind Turbines shall be set back from the nearest Occupied Building a distance not less
than the normal setback requirements for that zoning classification or 1.1 times the
Turbine Height, whichever is greater. The setback distance shall be measured from the
center of the Wind Turbine base to the nearest point on the foundation of the Occupied
Building
b. Wind Turbines shall be set back from the nearest Occupied Building located on a Nonparticipating
Landowner’s property a distance of not less than five (5) times the Hub
Height, as measured from the center of the Wind Turbine base to the nearest point on the
foundation of the Occupied Building.
2. Property lines:
All Wind Turbines shall be set back from the nearest property line a distance of not less than the
normal setback requirements for that zoning classification or 1.1 times the Turbine Height,
whichever is greater. The setback distance shall be measured to the center of the Wind Turbine
base.
3. Public Roads:
All Wind Turbines shall be set back from the nearest public road a distance of not less than 1.1
times the Turbine Height, as measured from the right-of-way line of the nearest public road to the
center of the Wind Turbine base.
I. Waiver of Setbacks
1. Property owners may waive the setback requirements in 9(A)(2) (Occupied Buildings on Nonparticipating
Landowner’s property) and 9(B) (Property Lines) by signing a waiver that sets forth
the applicable setback provision(s) and the proposed changes.
2. The written waiver shall notify the property owner(s) of the setback required by this Ordinance,
describe how the proposed Wind Energy Facility is not in compliance, and state that consent is
granted for the Wind Energy Facility to not be setback as required by this Ordinance.
3. Any such waiver shall be recorded in the Recorder of Deeds Office for the County where the
property is located. The waiver shall describe the properties benefited and burdened, and advise
all subsequent purchasers of the burdened property that the waiver of setback shall run with the
land and may forever burden the subject property.
4. Upon application, the municipality may waive the setback requirement for public roads for good
cause.
J. Use of Public Roads
1. The Applicant shall identify all state and local public roads to be used within the municipality to
transport equipment and parts for construction, operation or maintenance of the Wind Energy
Facility.
2. The municipality’s engineer or a qualified third party engineer hired by the municipality and paid
for by the Applicant, shall document road conditions prior to construction. The engineer shall
document road conditions again thirty (30) days after construction is complete or as weather
permits.
3. The municipality may bond the road in compliance with state regulations.
234
4. Any road damage caused by the applicant or its contractors shall be promptly repaired at the
applicant’s expense.
5. The Applicant shall demonstrate that it has appropriate financial assurance to ensure the prompt
repair of damaged roads.
K. Local Emergency Services
1. The Applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary and site plan to local emergency
services, including paid or volunteer Fire Department(s).
2. Upon request, the Applicant shall cooperate with emergency services to develop and coordinate
implementation of an emergency response plan for the Wind Energy Facility.
L. Noise and Shadow Flicker
1. Audible sound from a Wind Energy Facility shall not exceed fifty (55) dBA, as measured at the
exterior of any Occupied Building on a Non-participating Landowner’s property. Methods for
measuring and reporting acoustic emissions from Wind Turbines and the Wind Energy Facility
shall be equal to or exceed the minimum standards for precision described in AWEA Standard 2.1
- 1989 titled Procedures for the Measurement and Reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Wind
Turbine Generation Systems Volume I: First Tier.
2. The Facility Owner and Operator shall make reasonable efforts to minimize shadow flicker to any
Occupied Building on a Non-participating Landowner’s property.
M. Waiver of Noise and Shadow Flicker Provisions
1. Property owners may waive the noise and shadow flicker provisions of this Ordinance by signing
a waiver of their rights.
2. The written waiver shall notify the property owner(s) of the sound or flicker limits in this
Ordinance, describe the impact on the property owner(s), and state that the consent is granted for
the Wind Energy Facility to not comply with the sound or flicker limit in this Ordinance.
3. Any such waiver shall be recorded in the Recorder of Deeds Office of the County where the
property is located. The waiver shall describe the properties benefited and burdened, and advise
all subsequent purchasers of the burdened property that the waiver of sound or flicker limit shall
run with the land and may forever burden the subject property.
M. Signal Interference
The Applicant shall make reasonable efforts to avoid any disruption or loss of radio, telephone, television
or similar signals, and shall mitigate any harm caused by the Wind Energy Facility.
N. Liability Insurance
There shall be maintained a current general liability policy covering bodily injury and property damage
with limits of at least $1 million per occurrence and $1 million in the aggregate. Certificates shall be made
available to the municipality upon request.
O. Decommissioning
235
1. The Facility Owner and Operator shall, at its expense, complete decommissioning of the Wind
Energy Facility, or individual Wind Turbines, within (12) twelve months after the end of the
useful life of the Facility or individual Wind Turbines. The Wind Energy Facility or individual
Wind Turbines will presume to be at the end of its useful life if no electricity is generated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months.
2. Decommissioning shall include removal of Wind Turbines, buildings, cabling, electrical
components, roads, foundations to a depth of 36 inches, and any other associated facilities.
3. Disturbed earth shall be graded and re-seeded, unless the landowner requests in writing that the
access roads or other land surface areas not be restored.
4. An independent and certified Professional Engineer shall be retained to estimate the total cost of
decommissioning (“Decommissioning Costs”) without regard to salvage value of the equipment,
and the cost of decommissioning net salvage value of the equipment (“Net Decommissioning
Costs”). Said estimates shall be submitted to the [municipality] after the first year of operation
and every fifth year thereafter.
5. The Facility Owner or Operator shall post and maintain Decommissioning Funds in an amount
equal to Net Decommissioning Costs; Provided, that at no point shall Decommissioning Funds be
less than twenty five percent (25%) of Decommissioning Costs. The Decommissioning Funds
shall be posted and maintained with a bonding company or Federal or Commonwealth chartered
lending institution chosen by the Facility Owner or Operator and participating landowner posting
the financial security, provided that the bonding company or lending institution is authorized to
conduct such business within the Commonwealth and is approved by the [municipality].
6. Decommissioning Funds may be in the form of a performance bond, surety bond, letter of credit,
corporate guarantee or other form of financial assurance as may be acceptable to the
[municipality].
7. If the Facility Owner or Operator fails to complete decommissioning within the period prescribed
by Section 1692 O.1., then the landowner shall have six (6) months to complete decommissioning.
8. If neither the Facility Owner or Operator, nor the landowner complete decommissioning within
the periods prescribed by Paragraphs 17(A) and 17(G), then the [municipality] may take such
measures as necessary to complete decommissioning. The entry into and submission of evidence
of a Participating Landowner agreement to the [municipality] shall constitute agreement and
consent of the parties to the agreement, their respective heirs, successors and assigns that the
[municipality] may take such action as necessary to implement the decommissioning plan.
9. The escrow agent shall release the Decommissioning Funds when the Facility Owner or Operator
has demonstrated and the municipality concurs that decommissioning has been satisfactorily
completed, or upon written approval of the municipality in order to implement the
decommissioning plan.
P. Public Inquiries and Complaints
1. The Facility Owner and Operator shall maintain a phone number and identify a responsible person
for the public to contact with inquiries and complaints throughout the life of the project.
2. The Facility Owner and Operator shall make reasonable efforts to respond to the public’s inquiries
and complaints.
O. Remedies
236
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate or fail to comply with or take
any action which is contrary to the terms of the ordinance, or any permit issued under the
ordinance, or cause another to violate or fail to comply, or to take any action which is contrary to
the terms of the ordinance or any permit issued under the ordinance.
2. If the municipality determines that a violation of the Ordinance or the permit has occurred, the
municipality shall provide written notice to any person, firm, or corporation alleged to be in
violation of this Ordinance or permit. If the alleged violation does not pose an immediate threat to
public health or safety, the municipality and the parties shall engage in good faith negotiations to
resolve the alleged violation. Such negotiations shall be conducted within thirty (30) days of the
notice of violation.
3. If after thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation the municipality determines, in its
discretion, that the parties have not resolved the alleged violation, the municipality may institute
civil enforcement proceedings or any other remedy at law to ensure compliance with the
Ordinance or permit.
Section 1693. Ethanol Production Facilities
A. Ethanol Production Facility
1. For the purposes of this chapter, an “Ethanol Production Facility” shall be defined as a site on
which engineering principles are utilized including, but not limited to fermenting, milling, and
distilling from feed stocks (such as but not limited to grain, sorghum, wheat, corn, sugarcane
barley, or potatoes) for the purposes of making ethanol fuel.
2. If a special exception is granted, then the applicant is subject to all conditions, standards, and
controls below:
a. Minimum lot size: 10 acres
b. Maximum Building Height: 100ft.
c. Ethanol Production Facilities are allowed in the EAP and AP Zoning Districts by Special
Exception only.
d. A Land Development Plan for an Ethanol Production Facility must be submitted to the
Municipality for review. The Land Development Plan shall demonstrate complete
conformity with the requirements specified under this section. Upon approval, the Land
Development Plan shall be received in accordance with the provisions stipulated by the
Municipality.
e. An Emergency Management Plan shall be filed in accordance with all applicable local,
state, and federal agencies.
f. The initial Land Development Plan for an Ethanol Production Facility shall be
accompanied by traffic, hydrogeologic, and environmental impact statements. A plan for
the reuse of the land shall be submitted, in writing, to the Municipal Governing Body at
the time of securing a Land Development Plan for an Ethanol Production Facility. The
plan shall be in compliance with the prevailing zoning at time of application.
g. The construction and operation of an Ethanol Production Facility shall not be permitted
unless a permit for such Ethanol Production Facility has been issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and/or Federal Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and the Ethanol Production Facility is constructed and operated in full
237
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the rules and
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and Federal
EPA. Operation of any Ethanol Production Facility shall at all times be in full
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the rules and
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Federal EPA
and the provisions of this chapter. In the event that any provisions of this part are less
restrictive than any present or future rules or regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection and/or Federal EPA, the more restrictive Department rules and
regulations supersede and control in the operation of such Ethanol Production Facility.
h. An Ethanol Production Facility shall be under the direction at all times of a responsible
individual who is qualified by experience or training to operate an Ethanol Production
Facility.
i. No site activity shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays. Operations shall be
permitted only between hours of 5:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. No vehicles shall be staged or
parked at entrance and/or access road of the facility prior to 5:00 a.m. Overnight parking
shall be prohibited.
j. Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris. The entire area shall be kept clean
and orderly. The perimeter of the ethanol production facility shall be inspected for debris
on a weekly basis.
k. Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly
flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes, and radioactive materials, shall not
be disposed of at the Ethanol Production Facility.
l. No operation, activity, use, or occupation of any type for the Ethanol Production Facility
shall be carried on within three (300) feet of any property line and/or within three
hundred (300) feet of any street right-of-way. In addition, an Ethanol Production Facility
shall not be located within one thousand (1000) feet of any residential zoning district or
occupied residential dwelling unit.
m. A chain-link fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet shall be erected along all
boundary lines of the area which is approved for operational use as an Ethanol Production
Facility by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The fence shall
not contain openings greater than four (4) square inches and shall contain, at all
entrances, gates which are locked except during operating hours.
n. The applicant shall provide a written report by a professional hydrologist describing in
technical detail and in a narrative understandable by a layperson how the proposal would
affect wells, agricultural activities and surface water levels in the surrounding region.
The application shall only be approved if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed application will not adversely affect wells of
neighboring properties, considering drought conditions, nor aquatic habitats of surface
waters, nor agricultural yields.
Section 1694 through 1699 (Reserved)
238
CHAPTER VII. GOVERNMENT AND UTILITY USES
Section 1700. Regulations for Municipal, State, and Federal Uses
A. Municipal Uses
1. In all zoning districts, municipal uses shall be exempt from lot area, width and depth regulations.
Municipal uses shall not be required to comply with regulations concerning yard areas, setback or
lot coverage.
Section 1701. Public Utilities Corporation Exemption Criteria: Public Utilities Regulations.
A. Public Utilities Exemption Criteria
1. This Ordinance shall not apply to any existing or proposed buildings, or extension thereof, used or
to be used by a public utility corporation if, upon petition of said public utility corporation, the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or
proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or
welfare of the public.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to ensure that both the
corporation and the Municipality have notice of the hearing and are granted an opportunity to
appear, present witnesses, cross-examine witnesses presented by other parties and otherwise
exercise the rights of a party to the proceedings.
B. Public Utilities Regulations
1. If it shows the Public Utility is not exempt in subsection A, above:
a. The use shall be licensed by the Pennsylvania Public Utilities commission.
b. The proposed installation in a specific location is necessary for efficient service to the
public in the neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be located.
c. The design of any building in connection with such facility, as approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board, shall conform to the general character of the area and will not adversely
affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights.
d. Approved fencing and other security devices shall be provided.
e. A buffer strip ten (10) feet in width and screening are provided and shall be continually
maintained as well as any landscaping requirements of the ESP SALDO.
f. Adequate off-street parking is required as per Section 1509 of this Ordinance.
g. All area yard and building coverage requirements of the zoning district in which the use
is located shall be met.
239
CHAPTER XVIII. NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES, AND BUILDINGS
Section 1800. Statement of Intent. Within the zoning districts established by this Ordinance or
subsequent amendments thereto, there exist or will exist certain non-conformities which, if lawful before this
Ordinance was passed or amended, may be continued, subject to certain limitations.
Section 1801. Non-conforming Lots of Record.
A. Lots Included in Approved Plans. Any lot shown on a recorded subdivision plan on the effective date of
this Ordinance or after the enactment of subsequent amendments thereto which does not meet the minimum
size or width requirements of the Zoning District in which it is located may be used for the use indicated on
the subdivision plan provided that all yard, height and open space requirements of the Zoning District in
which it is located shall be met. Provided that when a subdivider has had an application for approval of a
Preliminary or Final Subdivision Plan approved prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, no provision
in this Ordinance shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the subdivider to commence and complete
any aspect of the approved Preliminary or Final Plan in accordance with the terms of such approval within
five (5) years from the date of such approval. When approval of a Final Plan has been preceded by
approval of a Preliminary Plan, the five (5) year period shall be counted from the date of preliminary
approval.
B. Lots Held in Single and Separate Ownership. Any lot held in single and separate ownership on the
effective date of this Ordinance or after the enactment of subsequent amendments thereto which does not
meet the minimum size or width requirements of the Zoning District in which it is located may be used for
any use permitted in that district provided that all yard, height and open space requirements are met.
Provided that if two (2) or more lots, combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in
single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance, and if all or part of
the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and/or area, the land involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this Ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall
be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and/or area requirements
established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width
or area below the requirements stated in this Ordinance.
Section 1802. Abandonment. A non-conforming use may not be re-established if the use is discontinued
for a continuous eighteen (18) month period, unless during that eighteen (18) month period the owner informs the
Municipality of their intention not to abandon the use. Proper notification shall be considered to be the filing of a
written “Statement of Intent to Continue” with the Municipal Zoning Officer. Vacation of land or buildings or the
termination of the use normally carried on upon the property shall be evidence of discontinuance.
If, after the filing of a written “Statement of Intent to Continue”, the non-conforming use is not commenced within
one (1) year from the end of the original eighteen (18) month period, the non-conforming use shall be considered
abandoned and shall not be re-established.
Section 1803. Change. A non-conforming use may be changed to a conforming use by right. A nonconforming
use, if changed to a conforming use, shall not be changed back to a non-conforming use. A nonconforming
use may not be changed to any other non-conforming use unless the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a
Special Exception. The proposed use shall be of the same or more restricted classification than the existing use of
the property. The Zoning Hearing Board may specify such appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be
required in connection with the granting of a Special Exception.
Section 1804. Expansion.
A. A single-family detached dwelling in any zoning district which is a nonconforming use or structure (other
than a dimensionally nonconforming structure) may by permitted to expand by right, provided that all yard
and coverage requirements of the district in which the single-family detached dwelling is located are met or
that the expanded part of the structure will not extend nearer to the street than that part of the existing
240
structure which is nearest to the street, whichever restriction is lesser. The total expansion of a single
family detached dwelling shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area occupied by the dwelling at
the effective date of this Ordinance.
B. Except for subsection 1804.A above, a non-conforming use, building or structure may not be expanded
unless such expansion has been approved as a Special Exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Non-Conforming Uses
1. Except for subsection 1804.A above, a non-conforming use shall not be expanded or intensified
unless such expansion has been approved as a Special Exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
2. If expansion is permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board, the following regulations shall apply:
a. A non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or increased upon land not owned, leased or
under option to purchase at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance.
b. Any additional uses established in connection with an existing non-conforming use shall
meet all the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance.
c. Expansion of that portion of a non-conforming use carried on outside a building or
structure (if so allowed) shall be in accordance with all the regulations of this Ordinance.
d. A non-conforming use may be expanded within a building containing that nonconforming
use at the effective date of this Ordinance, provided that the non-conforming
use shall not occupy a portion of the building which contained a conforming use at the
effective date of this Ordinance. A non-conforming use may also be expanded into a new
building or extension of an existing building containing the use.
e. Total expansion of a non-conforming use shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of
the area occupied by the use at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance.
C. Non-conforming Buildings and Structures
1. Except for subsection 1804.A above, a non-conforming building or structure shall not be enlarged
or increased upon land not owned, leased or under option to purchase at the time of the enactment
of this Ordinance.
2. Any additional structures or buildings erected or established in connection with an existing nonconforming
use shall meet all the Area, Yard, and Height Regulations of the applicable zoning
district and all General Regulations of this Zoning Ordinance.
3. A non-conforming building or structure shall not be enlarged, increased, repaired, maintained, or
modified in any manner which will further violate any applicable Area, Yard, or Height regulation
imposed by this Ordinance.
Section 1805. Repair, Movement and Replacement
A. Non-conforming buildings and structures, and building and structures containing non-conforming uses,
may be repaired and maintained provided that no repairs or maintenance shall be made which will further
extend the violation of any requirements of this Ordinance.
B. A building or structure containing a non-conforming use or a non-conforming building or structure may be
replaced by a new building or moved to another location on the same lot provided that the new or relocated
241
building or structure complies with all coverage, yard and height requirements and general regulations
applicable to the zoning district in which it is located.
Section 1806. Damage or Destruction.
A. Any non-conforming building or structure, or a building or structure containing a non-conforming use, of
which the basic structural elements are totally destroyed by any means may be rebuilt and used for the
same non-conforming use or a non-conforming use of a more restricted classification. Any subsequent
building, structure or use of the land shall not be more non-conforming in any respect than the building,
structure or use of the land which was destroyed. Application for reconstruction shall begin within
eighteen (18) months of the date of destruction and be carried to completion without interruption.
B. A non-conforming building or structure, or a building or structure containing a non-conforming use, of
which the basic structural elements are partially destroyed or which is partially destroyed but which has all
basic structural elements remaining may be reconstructed. The reconstructed portions of a building or
structure shall not be more non-conforming in any respect than the portions of the building or structure
which were destroyed.
242
CHAPTER XIX. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 1900. Zoning Officer.
A. Appointment. A Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Municipal Governing Body to administer and
enforce this Zoning Ordinance. Compensation of the Municipal Zoning Officer shall be established by the
Municipal Governing Body. A Zoning Officer shall not hold any elective office in the Municipality and
shall meet qualifications established by the Municipality and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Municipality a working knowledge of municipal zoning.
B. Duties and Powers. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
and the amendments thereto and he shall have such duties and powers as are conferred on him by this
Ordinance and as are reasonably implied for that purpose. The Zoning Officer’s duties shall include, but
are not limited to:
1. Receive applications for Zoning Permits and issue Zoning Permits as set forth in this Ordinance.
2. Keep a record of all official business and activities, including complaints of a violation of any of
the provisions of this Ordinance and of the subsequent action taken on each such complaint. All
such records shall be open to public inspection. File copies of all applications received, permits
issued and reports and inspections made in connection with any structure, building, sign and/or
land shall be retained as long as the structures, etc. remain.
3. Make inspections as required to fulfill his duties. In doing so, however, he shall first seek the
permission of the landowner or tenant, and, in the event such permission cannot be voluntarily
obtained, he shall have the right to take such other legal means as are authorized under the law.
4. Issue Zoning Permits for buildings, structures and land uses, for which Subdivision and Land
Development approval is required, only after all necessary approvals have been secured and plans
recorded.
5. Issue Zoning Permits for uses requiring new or altered on-site sewage disposal facilities only after
any necessary permit has been issued by the Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer.
6. Issue Zoning Permits for special exception uses or for variances only after a special exception or
variance has been approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the regulations of
this Ordinance.
7. Issue Zoning Permits for conditional uses only after a conditional use has been approved by the
Municipal Supervisors.
8. Issue Zoning Permits for buildings requiring approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry only after such approval has been secured.
9. Issue Zoning Permits for a use involving an access point requiring Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation approval only after such approval has been secured.
10. Be responsible for keeping this Ordinance and the Official Zoning Map up to date so as to include
all amendments thereto.
11. Issue Zoning Certificates of Use and Occupancy in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance.
12. Determination of preliminary opinions in accordance with Section 1907.
13. Submit a monthly report of his/her activities to the Municipal Governing Body.
243
14. When directed by the Municipal Governing Body, send enforcement notices as provided in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
15. Institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of
the Zoning Officer’s employment, when authorized by the Municipal Governing Body.
Section 1901. Zoning Permits.
A. Requirements. No building or structure, except temporary fences such as snow fences or fences around
construction sites and farm buildings as noted below, shall be erected, constructed, assembled, extended,
reconstructed, replaced, demolished, converted, moved, added to or structurally altered nor shall land,
buildings and structures be put to any use or additional use or have their use changed without a Zoning
Permit therefore issued by the Zoning Officer. No such permit shall be issued unless there is conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance, except upon written order from the Zoning Hearing Board in the
form of a variance, or upon order from any court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Application Procedures. The application for a Zoning Permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer in
writing on a form prescribed by the Zoning Officer. The application shall be submitted by the owner or
lessee of any building, structure or land or agent of either; provided, however, that if the application is
made by a person other than the owner or lessee, it shall be accompanied by a written authorization from
the owner or lessee authorizing the work and designating the agent. The application shall include two (2)
sets of at least the following information:
1. A map of the lot in question, drawn to scale, indicating the lot size and showing all dimensions of
lot lines and the exact location(s) on the lot of all existing and proposed buildings, fences, signs,
structures and alterations to buildings or structures.
2. The use, height, length, width and proportion of the total lot size covered of all proposed and
existing buildings and structures and additions or alterations to buildings or structures.
3. A statement indicating the number of dwelling units and/or commercial or industrial
establishments to be accommodated within existing and proposed buildings on the lot. In the case
of commercial and industrial uses and home occupations, the floor area to be devoted to each use
shall be indicated.
4. The location, dimensions and design of parking and loading areas, including the size and
arrangement of all spaces and means of ingress, egress and interior circulation, recreation areas,
screens, buffer yards and landscaping, means of egress from and ingress to the lot, routes for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic and outdoor lighting.
5. The location of all utility lines, the method of proposed water supply and sewage disposal, and the
location of any on-lot facilities.
6. All other information necessary for the Zoning Officer to determine conformance with and
provide for enforcement of this Ordinance.
C. Approval or Disapproval. Upon receipt of the application and all accompanying information, the Zoning
Officer shall examine them to determine compliance with this Zoning Ordinance and all other Municipal
ordinances. Within thirty (30) days from the day the Zoning Officer receives a completed application
including any and all required fees, the Zoning Officer shall either approve or disapprove the application
and return one (1) copy of the application and accompanying information containing the Zoning Officer’s
decision and signature to the applicant. The other copy shall be retained by the Zoning Officer. If
disapproved, the Zoning Officer shall attach a statement to the application explaining the reasons therefore,
244
indicating the manner in which the application could be corrected and/or modified to obtain approval, and
informing the applicant of his rights to appeal.
D. Issuance and Posting of Zoning Permit. Upon approval of the completed application by the Zoning Officer
and following the payment of the fees established from time to time by resolution of the Municipal
Governing Body, the Zoning Officer shall issue a Zoning Permit which shall be visibly posted on the site of
operations. A Zoning Permit shall expire if the activity which is authorized by the permit is not begun, in
the opinion of the Zoning Officer, within one (1) year of issuance of the permit. If the activity for which
the Zoning Permit was issued has been started but has not been completed (such as, but limited to,
construction of structures associated with the use) within one (1) year from the date of approval by the
Zoning Officer it may be extended at the discretion of the Zoning Officer.
E. Rights of Zoning Permit Holders. The Zoning Permit is an indication that the proposed use, building, or
structure is in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Officer shall revoke a Zoning Permit or
approval issued under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in case of any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application on which the permit or approval was based on for any other
cause set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 1902. Zoning Certificate of Use and Occupancy.
A. Requirements. It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any building, structure, land or portion thereof for
which a Zoning Permit is required until a Zoning Certificate of Use and Occupancy has been issued by the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall not issue a Zoning Certificate of Use and Occupancy unless he
has inspected such building, structure or land and has determined that all provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance regarding the use of the building, structure, or land and other rules, regulations and ordinances
of the Municipality have been complied with.
B. Issuance. Upon the receipt of written notification that the work for which a Zoning Permit has been issued
has been completed, the Zoning Officer shall inspect the premises within ten (10) days to determine that the
work has been performed in accordance with the approved application and all ordinances of the
Municipality. If he is satisfied that the work has been completed in accordance with the approved
application, he shall issue a Zoning Certificate of Use and Occupancy to the permit holder for the use
indicated on the approved application. A copy of the Zoning Certificate of Use and Occupancy shall be
retained by the Zoning Officer as part of the Municipal records. If he finds that the work has not been
performed in accordance with the approved application, the Zoning Officer shall refuse to issue the Zoning
Certificate of use and Occupancy and give the reasons therefore in writing and inform the permit holder of
his rights of appeal.
For uses for which performance standards are imposed by this Ordinance, no Zoning Certificate of Use and
Occupancy shall become permanent until thirty (30) days after the use is in operation and only after, upon
re-inspection by the Zoning Officer, it is determined that the use is in compliance with all performance
standards. After such re-inspection, the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant that the Zoning Certificate
of Use and Occupancy is permanent, or that the use is not in compliance and that the Zoning Certificate of
Use and Occupancy will be revoked within thirty (30) days of the notification if compliance with all
performance standards is not secured.
C. Temporary Certificate of Use and Occupancy. Upon request of the holder of a Zoning and/or Building
Permit, the Zoning Officer may issue a Temporary Certificate of Use and Occupancy for certain
structures, signs or land. Such portions may be used and/or occupied prior to full completion of the work
provided life and the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents and inhabitants of
the Township are not endangered however, no Temporary Certificate of Use and Occupancy shall be
issued prior to the completion of any required inspections of any County, State or Federal entities or any
required inspections which are required as part of any Township adopted Building Code(s).
245
D. Temporary Use
The Zoning Officer may also issue a Temporary Zoning Certificate of Use and Occupancy for such
temporary uses as tents, trailers and buildings on construction sites, and for the use of land for religious and
other public and semi-public purposes or other temporary use and/or occupancy. A Certificate for such
uses and/or structures may be issued if the life and the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the residents and the inhabitants of the Municipality are not endangered. Such temporary Zoning
Certificates shall be for a period of time as stated in this Zoning Ordinance, or is to be determined by the
Zoning Officer at the time of application, but in no case shall any certificates, except those for uses on
construction sites, be issued for more than one (1) year.
1. Temporary sales uses. The following provisions shall regulate temporary or seasonal retail sales
of Christmas trees, flowers, legal fireworks and similar items:
a. Such sales shall only be permitted in a district permitting retail sales or as accessory to a
lawful nonconforming principal commercial use.
b. An application for a temporary sales use permit shall be submitted on a form prepared by
the Zoning Officer. The application fee shall be established and revised by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors.
c. The retail sales use shall be limited to three time periods per lot per year. A permit for
the sales of Christmas trees may extend for twenty-five (25) days, while any other permit
shall be limited to a maximum of fourteen (14) days.
d. The retail sales shall meet setback requirements of the applicable zoning district and shall
not obstruct sight triangles.
e. Only two sign faces shall be permitted which shall each have a maximum sign area of six
square feet. Such sign shall not be illuminated.
f. The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that adequate parking and traffic control
will be available for both the temporary sales and any other use of the property. The
Zoning Officer may place conditions upon the permit to address parking and traffic
control.
2. Carnivals. The following provisions shall regulate temporary seasonal carnivals:
a. Such use shall only be permitted in a commercial district, or another district permitting
such use, or on a lot occupied or owned by an established place of worship, fire company,
or similar community service use granted nonprofit status by the Internal Revenue
Service.
b. The carnival shall be limited to two time periods per lot per year. Each time period shall
not exceed seven days in length. A temporary use permit shall be obtained from the
Zoning Officer.
c. The carnival shall not obstruct sight triangles.
d. Temporary signs are not regulated during the carnival.
e. The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that adequate parking and traffic control
will be available for both the carnival and any other use of the property. The Zoning
Officer may place conditions upon the permit to address parking and traffic control.
246
f. Any existing carnival or similar event shall be considered an existing non-conforming
use, and is regulated in Section 1801 of the ESP Joint Zoning Ordinance.
Section 1903. Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses. The Township Supervisors shall establish by
resolution, a schedule of fees and charges for requests for Zoning and/or Building Permits, Certificates of Use and
Occupancy, special exceptions, variances, amendments to this Ordinance and other matters pertaining to this
Ordinance. A collection procedure shall also be established. Until all application fees and charges have been paid
in full, no action shall be taken on any application or other matter.
Section 1904. Amendments. The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and the Official Zoning Map may,
from time to time, be amended, supplemented or changed by the governing boards, pursuant to the inter-municipal
agreement.
A. Procedure. The following procedures shall be observed prior to making any amendment or change request
to this Zoning Ordinance or parts thereof, including the Official Zoning Map:
1. Every proposed amendment or change initiated by ESP Regional Planning Commission shall be
referred to the each Municipal Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of
the public hearing by each Municipal Governing Body on the amendment to provide each
Municipal Planning Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations prior to the hearing.
Each Municipal Planning Commission shall review each amendment against the Comprehensive
Plan for the ESP Region.
2. All proposed amendments to this Zoning Ordinance shall be submitted to the County Panning
Commission for their recommendations.
B. Procedure for Landowner Curative Amendments.
1. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of the Zoning
Ordinance or Zoning Map, or any provisions thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the
Municipal Governing Body with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be
heard and decided as provided in Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended. The Municipal Governing Body shall commence a hearing thereon within sixty (60)
days of the request, as provided for in Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended. The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the County and the
Municipal Planning Commission and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as provided in
Section 610 and Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
2. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, and all references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board shall, for the
purpose of this section, be referenced to the Board of Supervisors. If the Township does not
accept the landowner’s curative amendment brought in accordance with this subsection and a
court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court’s decision shall not result in a
declaration of validity for the entire Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map, but only for those
provisions which specifically related to the landowner’s curative amendment and challenge.
3. If the Municipal Governing Body determines that a validity challenge has merit, the Municipality
may accept the landowner’s curative amendment, with or without revisions, or may adopt an
alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The Municipal Governing Body
shall consider the curative amendments, plans and explanatory materials submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
247
a. The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and other
public service facilities.
b. If the proposal is for residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional housing
needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the
challenged provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map.
c. The suitability of the site for the intensity of use aquifers, natural resources and other
natural features.
d. The impact of the proposed use on the site’s soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood
plains, natural resources and natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse environmental
impacts.
e. The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses which
are essential to public health and welfare.
C. Procedure for Municipal Curative Amendments. If the Municipal Governing Body determines that this
Zoning Ordinance or any portion hereof is substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
1. The Municipal Governing Body, by formal action, shall declare this Zoning Ordinance or any
portion hereof substantially invalid, and propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome
such invalidity. Within thirty (30) days following such declaration and proposal, the Municipal
Governing Body shall:
a. By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared invalidity of this Zoning
Ordinance which may include: 1) reference to specific uses which are either not
permitted or not permitted in sufficient quantity, 2) reference to a class of use or uses
which requires revision, or 3) reference the entire ordinance which requires revision.
b. Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this Zoning Ordinance to correct
the declared invalidity.
2. Within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the declaration
and proposal, the Municipal Governing Body shall enact a curative amendment to invalidate, or
reaffirm the validity of, this Zoning Ordinance pursuant to the provisions required by Section 609
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, in order to cure the declared
invalidity of this Zoning Ordinance.
3. Upon the initiation of the procedures, as set forth in subsection 1904.C.1, the Municipal
Governing Body shall not be required to entertain or consider any landowner’s curative
amendment filed under Section 1904.B nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give
report requested under Sections 909.1 or 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended, subsequent to the declaration and proposal based upon the grounds identical to or
substantially similar to those specified in the resolution required by Subsection 1904.C.1. Upon
completion of the procedures as set forth in Subsections 1904.C.2 and 1904.C.2 above, no rights
to cure pursuant to the provisions of Sections 609.1 and 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, shall, from the date of the declaration and proposal, accrue to any
landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of the un-amended Zoning Ordinance for
which there has been a curative amendment pursuant to this Section.
4. The Municipal Governing Body, having utilized the procedures as set forth in Subsections
1904.C.1 and 1904.C.2 may not again utilize said procedures for a thirty-six (36) month period
248
following the date of the enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the validity of
this Zoning Ordinance, pursuant to Subsection 1904.C.2 provided, however, if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the
Municipality by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court
decision, the Municipal Governing Body may utilize the provision of this section to prepare a
curative amendment to this Zoning Ordinance to fulfill said duty or obligation.
D. Submission of Impact Statement. With a request for a zoning amendment initiated by other than the
Municipal Planning Commission or Municipal Governing Body, a statement indicating the impact of the
zoning change on the Municipality shall be submitted with the application for rezoning. The statement
shall compare the impact on the Municipality resulting from the existing zoning with the impact resulting
from the proposed zoning, specifically discussing:
1. Environmental Impact. The impact on wooded areas, flood plains, areas of high water table,
wildlife habitats, storm water runoff, erosion and sedimentation, historic sites, water quality, air
quality, solid waste generation and noise levels.
2. Traffic Impact. The impact on traffic generated per day at peak hours, including numbers and
routes expected to be used. An analysis of traffic capacities of adjacent roads and intersections
and roads and intersections to be significantly affected by the zoning change and shall be prepared.
3. Services Impact. The demand for school, police, sewer, water, sanitation and road maintenance
services.
E. Public Hearing. The Municipal Governing Body shall hold a public hearing before voting on the enactment
of any amendment or change. Public notice of such hearing shall be given as required by law. In addition,
if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of the public hearing shall be
conspicuously Municipality along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The
affected tract or area shall be posted at least one (1) week prior to the hearing. If, after any public hearing
held upon an amendment or change, the proposed amendment or change is changed substantially or is
revised to include land previously not affected by it, the Municipal Governing Body shall hold another
public hearing pursuant to public notice prior to voting on the amendment or change. The Municipal
Governing Body shall vote on the proposed amendment within ninety (90) days after the last public
hearing. Enactment of amendments shall be in accordance with the procedures established in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, as amended.
Once a public hearing has been advertised regarding an individual property, a notice shall be posted on
each side of the affected property which faces a street in such a position that such notice is readily readable.
The notice shall state the following:
1. That an application for amendment to this Zoning Ordinance has been requested.
2. The proposed use of this property.
3. The existing Zoning District and the proposed Zoning District
4. The name of the applicant and the owner of the property.
5. The date, time and place of the public hearing.
F. Publication, Advertisement, and Availability of Ordinances.
1. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of the proposed enactment is given in the
manner set forth in this section, and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which
passage will be considered and a reference to a place within the Municipality where copies of the
249
proposed amendment may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than
the cost thereof. The Municipal Governing Body shall publish the proposed amendment once in
one (1) newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality not more than sixty (60) days nor less
than seven (7) days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall include either
the full text or the title and a brief summary, prepared by the Municipal Solicitor and setting forth
all of the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
a. A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality
at the time the public notice is published.
b. An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the County law library or
other County office designated by the County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no
greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinance.
2. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed amendment, before voting upon
enactment, the Municipality shall, at least ten (10) days prior to enactment, re-advertise, in one (1)
newspaper of general circulation in the ESP Region, a brief summary setting forth all provisions in
reasonable detail together with a summary of the amendment.
Section 1905. Enforcement Notice.
A. If it appears to the Municipal Governing Body that a violation of this Zoning Ordinance has occurred, the
Municipality shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided for in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has
occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
1. The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the Municipality intends to
take action.
2. The location of the property in violation.
3. The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing in
each instance the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
4. The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before which the
steps must be completed.
5. That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a
prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in this Zoning Ordinance and the
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
6. That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanction clearly described.
Section 1906. Enforcement Remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Municipality, pay a judgment of not more than Five Hundred Dollars
250
($500.00) plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Municipality as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination
of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice, determining that there
has been a violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one (1) such violation until
the fifth (5th) day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice, and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this Zoning Ordinance shall be paid over to the
Municipality.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order to stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per
diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity other
than the Municipality the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section
Section 1907. Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinion. In order not to unreasonably delay the time
during which a landowner secures assurance that the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map under which he proposed to
build is free from challenge, and recognizing that the procedure for preliminary approval of his/her development
may be too cumbersome or may be unavailable, the landowner may advance the date from which time for any
challenge to the applicable Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map will run under Section 914.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Codes, as amended, by the following procedures:
A. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his proposed use or development to the
Zoning Officer for preliminary opinion as to their compliance with the applicable Zoning Ordinance and
Zoning Map.
B. If the Zoning Officer’s preliminary opinion is that the use or development complies with the applicable
Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map, notice thereof shall be published once each week for two (2) successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality. Such notice shall include a general
description of the proposed use or development and its location, by some readily identifiable directive, and
the place and time where the plans and other materials may be examined by the public. The favorable
preliminary approval under Section 914.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
and the time therein specified for commencing a proceeding with the Zoning Hearing Board shall run from
the time when the second notice thereof has been published.
Section 1908. Appeals. Proceedings for securing review of any ordinance or any decision, determination
or order of the Municipal Governing Body, their agencies, the Zoning Hearing Board or the Zoning Officer issued
pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance shall be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.
251
CHAPTER XX. ZONING HEARING BOARD
Section 2000. Creation; Appointment; Organization.
A. Creation of Board. The Municipal Governing Body hereby creates a Zoning Hearing Board, herein
referred to as the “Board”, consisting of three (3) residents of the Municipality appointed by the Municipal
Governing Body pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, who shall be
appointed by resolution and serve and shall perform all of the duties and have all of the powers as
prescribed by said Code and as herein provided.
B. Organization. The Board may promulgate such rules and forms for its procedures, not inconsistent with
this and other ordinances of the Municipality and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as it may
deem necessary to the proper performance of its duties and to the proper exercise of its powers. Such rules
shall be continued in force and effect until amended or repealed by the Board or by law. The Board shall
elect from its own membership its officers who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed
themselves.
C. Meetings. Meetings and hearings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other
times as the Board, by majority vote, may determine.
D. Minutes and Records. The Board shall keep full public records of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Board shall also keep
full public records of its business and other official action, copies of which shall be filed with the Municipal
Secretary of the Municipal Governing Body and shall be the property of the Municipality. The Board shall
submit a report of its activities as requested by the Municipal Governing Body.
Section 2001. Hearings. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all members of the Board, but where two (2) members are disqualified to act in a
particular matter the remaining member may act for the Board. The Board may appoint a hearing officer from its
own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive decisions or findings by the Board
and accept the definition of the hearing officer as final as provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, and the rules of the Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal. Public notice shall be given and
reasonable written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer, such other persons as the Municipal
Governing Body shall designate by ordinance and any person who has made timely request for the same. Notice of
all matters coming before the Zoning Hearing Board shall be sent by first class mail or as may be required by this
Zoning Ordinance or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended from time to time. Said notice
shall be sent out by the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board or his designee. Written notice shall be given at such
time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition to the written
notice provided for herein, notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least
one (1) week prior to the hearing. Hearings shall be held within sixty (60) days from the date of the applicant’s
request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
Section 2002. Functions of the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudication in the following matters:
A. Appeals and Challenges
1. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those brought before the
Municipal Governing Body pursuant to Section 609.1 and 916.1.A.2 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
252
2. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance procedural question or alleged defect in the
process of enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within thirty
(30) days after the effective date of said ordinance.
3. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but not limited to the granting or
denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application thereof, the issuance of any cease and
desist order.
4. Appeals from a determination by the Municipal Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to
the administration of any flood plain or flood hazard ordinances or such provisions within a land
use ordinance.
5. Appeals from the Zoning Officer’s determination under Section 1707 of this Ordinance.
6. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Municipal Engineer in the administration
of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control
and storm water management insofar as the same relate to development not involving subdivision
and land development.
7. Application for variance from the terms of this Zoning Ordinance and flood hazard ordinance or
such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to subsection 2002.B, below of this
Ordinance.
8. Application for special exception under this Zoning Ordinance or flood plain or flood hazard
ordinances or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to Section 1802.C of this
Ordinance.
B. Variance. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Zoning Hearing
Board may by rule prescribe the form of the application and may require preliminary application to the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following are
made were relevant in a given case:
1. That where are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or
shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar
to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such condition, and not
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
2. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property
can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
3. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
4. That the variance if authorized will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will
represent that least modification possible of the regulation in issue;
5. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
253
6. In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purpose of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, and this Zoning Ordinance.
C. Special Exceptions. To issue, upon application, only such special exceptions which the Board by the
provisions of this Ordinance is specifically authorized to issue. The granting of a special exception when
specifically authorized by the terms of this Ordinance shall be subject to the following standards and
criteria:
1. Such use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a Special Exception Use in the zoning
district wherein the applicant seeks a special exception.
2. Such Special Exception shall only be granted subject to any applicable condition and safeguards as
required by this Ordinance.
3. Such use shall not adversely affect the character of the zoning district, nor the conservation of
property values, nor the health and safety or residents or workers an adjacent properties and in the
general neighborhood.
4. Such use shall be of such size and so located and laid out in relation to its access streets that
vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and from such use will not create undue congestion or hazards
prejudicial to the general neighborhood.
5. Such use shall not conflict with the direction of building development in accordance with and
Comprehensive Plan or portion thereof which has been adopted by the Municipal Governing
Body.
6. Services and utilities are available to adequately service the proposed use.
In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this Ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
D. To exercise any other power specifically granted to the Board under the terms of this Ordinance.
Section 2003. Procedures for Application to the Zoning Hearing Board. The Board shall not act in
strict accordance with the procedures specified by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, and
by this Ordinance. All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the
Board. Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of this Ordinance involved and shall exactly
set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the grounds for any challenges to the validity of this Ordinance, the use
for which a special exception is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it
is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case may be.
Applications and appeals, together with the required filing fee as established by the Municipal Governing Body,
shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Parties Appellant Before the Zoning Hearing Board. Appeals under subsections 2002.A.1, 2002.A.2 ,
2002.A.3, 2002.A.4, 2002.A.5, 2002.A.6 of this Ordinance may be filed with the Board in writing by the
landowner affected, by any officer or agency of the Municipality, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a
variance under Section 2002.B and for a special exception under Section 1802.C may be filed with the
Board by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
B. Time Limitations. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later than thirty (30)
days after any application for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate
officer of the Municipality, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the
254
approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason
to believe that such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his/her interest after such
approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
The failure of anyone other then the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan
pursuant to Section 709 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, or from an adverse
decision by the Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map pursuant to Section
916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall preclude an appeal from a final
approval except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative
approval.
All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed by the landowner within thirty (30)
days after notice of the determination is issued.
Section 2004. Conditional Use Procedures
A. Application
1. Four (4) copies of an application for permission to conduct a use permitted by condition shall be
submitted to the Municipal Secretary. Such application shall include all information specified for
a zoning permit application in Section 1901 of this Ordinance and any other information necessary
to allow the Municipal Governing Body to determine that all requirements of this ordinance have
been met.
B. Review
1. After receiving an application, the Municipal Governing Body shall refer one (1) copy of the
application to the Municipal Planning Commission for its review and one (1) copy to the
Municipal Zoning Officer for his review. The application shall be reviewed at one (1) or more
advertised meetings of the Municipal Governing Body, and the Municipal Governing Body shall
either approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the date of the application is
received by the Municipal Secretary. The granting of permission to conduct a use permitted by
condition does not exempt an applicant from acquiring all approvals required by the ESP Region
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO).
C. Standards
1. Conditional uses shall meet the specific standards established for each use by this Ordinance and
all other applicable zoning district requirements and General Regulations established by this
Ordinance. In addition, the following standards shall be met:
a. The use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a conditional use in the Zoning
District wherein the applicant is seeking a conditional use.
b. Services and utilities shall be made available to adequately service the proposed use.
c. The use will not generate traffic such that hazardous or unduly congested conditions will
result.
d. The use is appropriate to the site in question.
e. The use shall not adversely affect the character of the general neighborhood, nor the
health and safety of residents or workers on adjacent properties and in the general
neighborhood.
255
2. The applicant shall demonstrate, as a condition to approval of their application, that the standards
in Section 1804.c and those specified elsewhere in this Ordinance for the use in question will be
met.
3. The Municipal Governing Body may impose such additional safeguards as are necessary to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare.
Section 2005. Stay of Proceedings.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in section 804(a) and during its pendency before the Zoning
Hearing Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning
Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action there under, shall be stayed unless the Zoning
Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay would
cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or official action shall not be stayed
otherwise than be a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or
body. When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings
designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by persons other than the
applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons
to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
B. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to determine if the filing of the appeal is
frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the burden of the
applicant for a bond to prove that the appeal is frivolous. After consideration of all evidence presented, if
the court determines that the appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to petition
the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by the appellee, but such waiver may be
revoked by him/her if an appeal is taken from a final decision of the court.
256
CHAPTER XXI. MISCELLANEOUS
Section 2100. Severability. Should any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision
of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect the
validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or
unconstitutional.
Section 2101. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances together with the
amendments and supplements thereto are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force
and effect.
Section 2102. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after the date of its
enactment.
257
258
259
260
261
262
263

Eastern Schuylkill
Planning Region
Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance
2
Table of Contents
ARTICLE I:
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 101. Authority
Section 102. Title
Section 103. Purpose
Section 104. Applicability
Section 105. Exemptions
Section 106. Interpretation
ARTICLE II:
DEFINITIONS
Section 201. General Interpretation
Section 202. Specific Terms
ARTICLE III:
ADMINISTRATION and AMENDMENT
Section 301. Fees
Section 302. Modifications
Section 303. Challenges
Section 304. Reconsideration Appeal
Section 305. Penalties
Section 306. Keeping of Record
Section 307. Responsibility
Section 308. Conflicts
Section 309. Revision and Amendment
Section 310. Severability
Section 311. State Planning Code Amendments
Section 312. Enactment
ARTICLE IV:
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
Section 401. General Procedures
Section 402. Jurisdiction
3
Section 403. Sketch Plan Application and Review
Section 404. Minor Subdivision
Section 405. Preliminary Plan Application Review
Section 406. Final Plan Application and Review
Section 407. Revised Plan of Record
Section 408. Land Development Plans
Section 409. Approval and Recording of Plans
ARTICLE V:
PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section 501. Sketch Plans
Section 502. Preliminary Plans
Section 503. Final Plans
Section 504. Soil Percolation Test Requirements
ARTICLE VI:
DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 601. Application
Section 602. General Standards
Section 603. Streets
Section 604. Blocks
Section 605. Lots and Parcels
Section 606. Sanitary Sewage Disposal
Section 607. Water Supply
Section 608. Stormwater Management
Section 609. Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control
Section 610. Wetlands
Section 611. Solid Waste Management
ARTICLE VII:
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATION
Section 701. General Requirements
Section 702. General Procedures
Section 703. Required Improvements
ARTICLE VIII:
MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section 801. General Requirements
Section 802. Street Layout and Construction
4
Section 803. Entrance to Mobile Home Park
Section 804. Parking Standards
Section 805. Stormwater Management
Section 806. Utilties
Section 807. Pedestrian Walkways
Section 808. Refuse Disposal
Section 809. Landscaping
Section 810. Mobile Home Unit Size
Section 811. Administration
ARTICLE IX:
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES
Section 901. Guarantee of Improvement Installation Required
Section 902. Improvements to be Provided by the Applicant
Section 903. Development Agreement
Section 904. Performance Guarantee
Section 905. Approval of Improvements
Section 906. Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements
Section 907. Maintenance Agreement
Section 908. Maintenance Guarantee
5
ARTICLE I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 101 AUTHORITY. An Ordinance providing for the regulation
and control of the subdivision of lots and the development of land; the
approval of plans, plots or re-plots of land laid out into building lots;
standards for the design of streets, lots, easements, blocks and other
improvements; certain minimum improvements and construction standards
on all streets and required dedications; the administration of this Ordinance
by the Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region and the participating
municipalities; and penalties for the violation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 102 TITLE. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as
“The Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance”.
SECTION 103 PURPOSE. These regulations are adopted to protect,
promote and create conditions favorable to the health, safety, convenience
and general welfare of the citizens of the ESP Region by:
A. Ensuring the sites will be suitable for building purposes,
human habitation, commercial and industrial operations and
other uses for which land may be used;
B. Providing for the orderly, efficient, integrated and
harmonious development of land within the ESP Region;
C. Effectively coordinating the planning, design and construction
of proposed transportation and community facilities with
existing facilities within the ESP Region;
D. Ensuring the conformance of subdivision and land
development plans with the public improvement plans of the
ESP Region;
E. Providing for the efficient and orderly extension of
community facilities and services;
F. Ensuring that all subdivision and land development
applications are consistent with the goals, objectives and
policies of the ESP Region Comprehensive Plan and Zoning
Ordinance;
G. Providing for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light
and air, and for proper distribution of population;
6
H. Assuring the equitable and just processing of subdivision and
land development plans by providing uniform standards and
procedures for observance by both the applicant and Township
officials; and preserving natural features and protecting
sensitive environmental areas.
SECTION 104. APPLICABILITY
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel
of land shall be made, and no street, sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, water main, gas, oil, or electric transmission line, or
other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out,
constructed, opened, or dedicated for public use or travel or
for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon, except in accordance with this ordinance;
B. No lot in a proposed subdivision or land development may be
sold, an no final permit to erect any building upon land in a
subdivision or land development may be issued unless and
until:
1. A Final Plan has been approved by the appropriate
municipality and has been Recorded by the Recorder of Deeds
Office in the Schuylkill County Courthouse and
2. Either:
i. the municipality has been assured by means of a
Maintenance Agreement acceptable to the
governing body that the improvements will
subsequently be installed,
or
ii. the required improvements in connection therewith
have been entirely completed.
C. The regulations of this Ordinance shall apply to any
subdivision or land development;
D. This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other
laws or ordinances except those specifically repealed by this
Ordinance, or with private restrictions placed upon property
by deed, covenant or other private agreement;
7
E. All subdivisions as defined in this Ordinance shall be
submitted for review by the governing body and the Schuylkill
County Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of
this Ordinance.
F. A subdivision of any lot which has been involved in three (3)
prior minor subdivisions shall comply with the requirements
for a major subdivision.
G Applications involving tracts of land along the governing
body’s municipal boundary, shall submit one additional set of
plans. The governing body’s Planning Commissions, Borough
Council, and Boards of Supervisors may review reports from
an adjacent municipality, when applicable.
H. Applications for sub-divisions or land development involving
lots, parcels, and/or tracts of land which is/are located within
more than one (1) municipality shall be submitted, reviewed
by, and ultimately approved or rejected by each municipality
involved
SECTION 105. EXEMPTIONS
A. Agriculture. The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access or residential
dwelling shall be exempted from the regulations of this
Ordinance.
B. Approved subdivisions
1. From the time an application for approval of a plat,
whether preliminary or final, is duly filed as provided
in this Ordinance, and while such application is
pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, this Ordinance
or other governing ordinance shall affect the decision
on such application adversely to the applicant and the
applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinance on
8
plans as they stood at the time the application was
filed.
2. When an application for approval of a plat, whether
preliminary or final, has been approved without
conditions or approved by the applicant’s acceptance
of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in
the Zoning Ordinance, this Ordinance or any other
governing ordinance shall be applied to affect
adversely the right of the applicant to commence and
to complete any aspect of the approved development in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five
(5) years from such approval.
3. If final plan approval is preceded by preliminary plan
approval, the five (5) year period shall be counted from the
preliminary plan approval date.
SECTION 106. INTERPRETATION. The provisions of this Ordinance
shall be interpreted and applied as minimum requirements for the promotion
of public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
A. Where provisions, standards and specifications of this
Ordinance conflict with those of any State statute, other
ordinance or regulations, the more restrictive requirement
shall apply, regardless of its source, unless specified to the
contrary.
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS
SECTION 201. GENERAL INTERPRETATION. Unless otherwise
stated hereafter, words and phrases within this ordinance shall have the
meaning assigned in this Article. Terms not defined in this Article shall be
interpreted according to common usage or as the context may imply. For the
purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words have been defined and/or
interpreted below:
A. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
B. Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the
plural shall include the singular.
9
C. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine and the
neuter.
D. The words “shall”, “will”, and “must” are mandatory.
E. The words “can” or “may” are permissive.
F. The word “person” includes “individual”, “company”,
“partnership”, “corporation”, “association”, “unincorporated
association”, or other similar entities.
G. The words “used for” include “designed for”, “arranged for”,
“intended for”, “maintained for”, or “occupied for”.
H. The word “building” and “structure” shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase “or part thereof”.
I. The word “lot” shall include the terms “lot”, “parcel”, “site”
and “tract”.
J. The word “Municipality” shall refer to Rush Township, Walker
Township, Schuylkill Township, or the Borough of Tamaqua all
of which comprise the Eastern Schuylkill Planning Region
(ESP) and all located within Schuylkill County Pennsylvania.
SECTION 202. SPECIFIC TERMS
Accessory Building or Accessory Structure – A building or structure (such
as a garage, a swimming pool, a storage shed, a children’s playhouse, or a
non-commercial greenhouse) which is clearly subordinate and accessory to a
principal building, located upon the same lot, and which is used for purposes
customarily incidental to those which is conducted within the principal
building.
Accessory Use – A use or structure or part thereof clearly subordinate to, and
located on the same lot as, the principal use or building and which clearly
serves a purpose customarily incidental to the primary use which is
conducted upon the property whether or not said use is conducted within a
building.
Acreage, Gross – The calculated land area contained within the deeded
boundaries of a lot.
10
Acreage, Net – The gross land area (gross acreage) of the tract minus all land
contained within the right of way of any existing roads crossing the tract.
Adult Bookstore – A use with a significant portion of the market value of
total floor area occupied by (or over fifteen [15] square feet of), items for sale
or rent being books, films, magazines, video tapes, coin or token operated
films or video tapes, paraphernalia, novelties or other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by a clear emphasis on matter depicting,
displaying, describing or relating to uncovered male or female genitals or
“specified sexual activities.” This shall include but not be limited to
materials that would be illegal to sell to persons under age eighteen (18)
under State law.
Adult Business – Any commercial establishment which, as one of its
principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any
form of sexually explicit material (i.e. books, magazines, periodicals or other
printed matter, or photographs or film, motion pictures, video cassettes or
video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are
characterized by the depiction or description of sexual activities or display of
human genitals and/or other anatomical areas and/or instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with sexual
activities.) and/or which offers to provide, for entertainment purposes,
persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity (i.e. go-go dancers,
erotic and/or exotic dancers, erotic and/or exotic entertainers, etc).
This definition is a broad overall definition which includes, but is not limited
to the following:
(A) Adult arcade
(B) Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store
(C) Adult cabaret, adult dance hall, adult theatre, adult club, adult bar, adult
tavern, adult night club,adult restaurant or similar commercial establishment
(D) Adult materials rentals and sales
(E) Adult mini motion picture theatre
(F) Adult motion picture theatre
(G) Adult motel
(H) Adult peep shows
(I) Any type of sexual encounter center
(J) Massage parlor
(K) Nude model studio
(L) Adult drive-in theater
Adult Day-Care Facility – Any premises operated for profit or not for profit
in which older adult daily living services, as defined herein, are
simultaneously provided for four or more adults who are not relatives of the
operator. The following types of adult day-care facilities are regulated by
this Ordinance:
11
A. Adult Day-Care Home – Any adult day-care facility in which
services are provided to between four and eight adults and where the
day-care areas are being used as family residence.
B. Adult Day-Care Center – Any adult day-care facility in which
services are provided to eight or more adults and where the day-care
areas are not being used as a family residence.
Adult Establishment – (See also “Adult Business”) Means and includes any
of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business.
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
C. The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business;
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
E. Adult Business – As defined by this Ordinance
Advertising Sign – (See “Sign, Off-premise”)
After-Hours Club – A use that permits the consumption of alcoholic
beverages by five or more unrelated persons between the house of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. and that involves some form of monetary compensation paid
by such persons for the alcohol or for the use of the premises.
Agriculture – The cultivation of the soil and the raising and harvesting of the
products of the soil and animals typically raised on such agricultural lands,
including, but not limited to; nursery, horticulture, forestry, poultry farming
and dairy farming, fish farm, aquaculture, and animal husbandry, excluding
kennels and the keeping of animals solely as pets, and the keeping, breeding,
and/or raising of any type of game animals (eg; Deer, elk, antelope etc.)
and/any type of dangerous predatory animals (eg; wolves, lions, wolverines,
etc.)
Agricultural Buildings – Any building or structure, whether principal or
accessory, the use of which is devoted in whole or in part to an agricultural
use. This may include, but not be limited to, the storage of agricultural
equipment, produce or products, the housing of livestock or poultry, or the
processing of agricultural products. Also includes but is not limited to barns,
silos, corncribs, implement sheds and other similar agricultural structures.
12
Agriculture, Intensive – Specialized agricultural activities including but not
limited to mushroom, pig, egg and poultry production, and dry livestock
production, which due to the intensity of production of raw material storage
needs, necessitate special control of operation, raw material storage and
processing, and disposal of liquid and solid wastes.
Unless stated otherwise in this Ordinance this includes the following:
A. A swine operation in excess of one (1.0) animal unit/acre.
B. The raising and ownership of horses, cattle, sheep, goats, poultry,
rabbits or similar animals in excess of three (3.0) animal units per
acre.
C. The production, processing or cultivation of mushrooms.
D. Mink farms.
Airport/Airstrip – An area of land which is designated, used, or intended to
be used for the landing and take-off of airplanes or ultra-light aircraft, and
any appurtenant areas which are designed to be used for airport support
facilities. Airports and airstrips shall meet all applicable State and Federal
Regulations.
Alley – A private, or in some specific instances a public minor right-of-way,
providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of abutting
properties.
All-Weather Surface – A surface comprised of asphalt, bituminous concrete
and/or cementatious concrete or other similar materials that will not render a
driveway, parking lot, or loading area unusable because of inclement weather
conditions. Stone or gravel is not an All-Weather Surface. For purposes of
this Ordinance “All-Weather Surfaces” are to be considered impervious.
Alteration – (See “Structural Alteration”)
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) – A national organization
which formulated guidelines and standards. ANSI standards are recognized
as authoritative by the FCC.
Amusement Device - A device, other than a jukebox, that is used or designed
to be used to provide amusement or entertainment to the user for a fee, and
13
shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, pinball machines, video
display games, simulated sport machines and billiards.
Animal Cemetery – A place used for the burial of the remains of five or more
non-cremated animals, other than the necessary, proper and customary burial
of farm animals as an accessory to a livestock use.
Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic – An establishment offering veterinary
services for all types of animals and which may include short term outdoor
and short term overnight boarding of animals related to the medical care of
the animals.
Animal Husbandry – The raising and keeping of livestock or poultry for any
commercial purpose. The keeping of livestock or poultry as farm pets or for
domestic purposes and the raising of garbage-fed pigs or minks shall not be
construed as animal husbandry.
Animal Manure Storage Facility – A permanent structure or facility, or
portion of a structure or facility, utilized for the primary purpose of
containing manure. Examples include liquid manure structures, manure
storage ponds, component reception pits an transfer pipes, containment
structures built under confinement buildings, permanent stacking and
composting facilities and manure treatment facilities. The term does not
include the animal confinement areas or poultry houses, horse stalls, free stall
barns or bedded pack animal housing systems.
Animal Shelter – Either a governmental or private organization that provide
temporary homes for stray, surrendered or abandoned pet animals. Animal
shelters may or may not offer low-cost veterinary care.
Animal Unit – One thousand (1,000) pounds live weight of livestock or fowl,
regardless of the actual number of animals comprising the unit.
Animal Unit/Acre – A mathematical figure representing the number of
animal units per acre. This can be represented by a decimal (ex. .125 animal
units/acre, or 1/8 animal units/acre, which is the equivalent of 125 lbs. of
animals per acre of land) or whole number (ex. 2 animal units/acre which is
the equivalent of 2,000 pounds of animals) per acre of land.
Annexation Parcel – A subdivision of land, which shall not be used as a
separate building lot, but shall be incorporated into the legal description of
the lot which is receiving said annexation lot.
Antenna, Standard – (See “Standard Antennas”)
Antenna, Satellite Dish – See “Satellite Dish Antenna”
14
Antenna, Telecommunications – (See “Telecommunications Antenna”)
A-P Agricultural Annexation Parcels – A tract of land within the A-P
Zoning District created by a subdivision after ________ meeting the
requirements of the ESP SALDO, the sole purpose of which is to transfer
land to increase the size of a lot where both the A-P Parent Tract from which
the land is taken and the lot to which the land is added will be greater than
five (5) acres in size after said subdivision.
A-P Agricultural Lot – As defined in this Ordinance, a parcel of land greater
than five (5) contiguous acres within the A-P Zoning District which was
created after __________ by an approved subdivision plan meeting the ESP
SALDO and the ESP Zoning Ordinance which may be used for the
production, keeping or maintenance for sale, lease or personal use of plants
and animals useful to man, including: mushrooms, forages and soil crops;
grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry
products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules
or goats of any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and
grazing of an or all of such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals;
trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and
berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or
lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program.
Development of an A-P Agricultural Lot is regulated within this Ordinance.
A-P Development Unit – A unit of subdivision/land development which is
allocated to an A-P Parent Tract, or portion thereof, which lies within the A-P
Zoning District.
A-P Parent Tract – Contiguous tracts of land deeded either as a single tract
or as one deed with multiple purports prior to adoption of this ordinance, that
are situate within the A-P Zoning District. In cases where individually
deeded tracts of land are under single ownership, each individually deeded
tract will be considered to be its own Parent Tract.
A-P SFD Lots (See also “A-P Development Unit”) – Single Family Dwelling
Lots within the A-P Zoning District created after adoption of this ordinance
by an approved subdivision plan meeting the ESP Region SALDO and the
ESP Region Zoning Ordinance.
Apartments – (See “Dwelling, Multi-family”)
Apartment Building – (See “Dwelling, Multi-family”).
15
Applicant – A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed
an application for development, including his heirs, personal representatives,
successors and assigns.
Approved Private Street – A legally established right-of-way which provides
the primary vehicular access to a lot, or lots, and which has not been
dedicated or deeded to the Municipality, but has been reviewed and approved
by the Governing Body.
Aquaculture – A form of agriculture which is the controlled cultivation of
aquatic plants, animals, and microorganisms.
Arcade, Video Arcade – (See “Game Room”)
Area, Gross or Net – (See “Acreage, Gross” or “Acreage, Net”)
Assisted Living Facility – (Also see “Life Care Retirement Facility”) –
Coordinated and centrally managed rental housing including self-contained
units designed to provide a supportive environment and to accommodate a
relatively independent lifestyle. Such a development may contain a limited
number of supportive services, such as meals, transportation, housekeeping,
linen and organized social activities for residents and their invited guests.
Such a use shall primarily serve persons 55 and older, persons with physical
handicaps and/or the developmentally disabled. Assisted living facilities
shall be licensed as personal care centers by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Auction, Automobile and/or Vehicle – The public sales of autos and/or
vehicles to the highest bidder.
Auction House – Establishment for the public sale of property to the highest
bidder
Auditorium – A structure involving indoor and outdoor space for exhibits,
meetings, live performances or sports events.
Automobile Service Station – A building and/or place of business where
gasoline, oil and greases, batteries, tires and automobile accessories are
supplied and dispensed directly to the motor vehicles trade at retail, and
where the following services may be rendered.
A. Minor Repair
1. Sale and servicing of spark plugs and batteries.
2. Tire repair and servicing, no recapping.
16
3. Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hose, fan belts,
brake and transmission fluids, light bulbs, floor mats, seat
covers, windshield wipers, grease retainers and wheel
bearings.
4. Radiator cleaning and flushing.
5. Washing and polishing, (including mechanical and/or
automatic car wash facilities where allowed).
6. Installation of fuel pumps and fuel lines.
7. Minor servicing and replacement of carburetors.
8. Adjustment and installation of brakes.
9. Tuning engines, except for grinding valves, cleaning carbon or
removing the head of engines and/or crankcases.
10. Greasing and lubrication.
11. Emergency wiring repairs.
12. The sale of retail convenience items as a clearly secondary
activity.
13. Any similar minor service or repair not listed below under
“major repair”.
B. Major Repair
In addition to those repairs and services listed above as “minor
repair”, any general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning not listed
above; collision service including body, frame or fender straightening
or repair; grinding valves, cleaning carbon or removing the head of
engines and/or crankcases; painting or paint shops; but not including
any operations which require the heating or burning of rubber.
Automobile/Vehicle Dismantling Facility- A type of junk yard where the
primary activity is the storage disassemblement, bailing, packaging and
hauling of junk/inoperable automobiles and vehicles for compensation.
Awning- A rooflike structure, often made of canvas, metal, or plastic,
attached to a building that serves as a shelter over a storefront, window, door,
deck, or patio. Awnings may or may not be equipped with a mechanism for
raising/ lowering and holding.
Baby-Sitting – Any of the following types of childcare activity:
A. The temporary or occasional care of any number of children at a
dwelling unit customarily and regularly occupied by the children as
their residence.
B. The regular care of one, two, or three children not related to the
person giving care which takes place at the home of the person giving
care.
17
Bar or Barroom- (See” Tavern”).
Basement – A portion of a building or structure that is completely or partially
beneath the average elevation of the finished grade.
Bed and Breakfast – A single family detached dwelling and/or its accessory
structure(s) which is wholly or partially used for the rental of overnight
sleeping accommodations and bathroom access to temporary overnight
guests, inclusive of the provision of meals to overnight guests, employees,
and residents of the dwelling. Overnight stays shall be restricted to transient
visitors to the area, employees of the Bed and Breakfast and their family.
Billboard – (See “Sign, Off-premise”)
Block – A tract of land, a lot, or group of lots, bounded on one (1) side by a
street, and on the other three (3) sides by streets, public parks, railroad rightsof-
way, watercourses, municipal boundary lines, or by any combination of
the above.
Boarding House – A single-family dwelling occupied by the landowner
thereof (and the landowner’s family, if applicable) in which building the
landowner provides, for compensation, one or more rooms for the lodging of
individuals for five (5) or more consecutive days, where the maximum
number of such persons residing in the building, including the landowner, the
family of the landowner and
boarders is six (6). A boarding house may either involve or not involve the
providing of meals to residents, but does not involve the use of a restaurant or
tavern as defined in this Ordinance.
Bottle Club – Business premises not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board permitting the consumption and/or storage of alcoholic
beverages as provided in Title 18, Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes. Said
use to be conducted in accordance with and shall be subject to the
requirements and limitations provided in said act of The Pennsylvania
legislature or assembly and amendments thereto.
Buffer Strip – A continuous strip of landscaped land which is clear of
buildings and paved areas.
Building – Any structure, including principal or accessory structures,
comprised of any combination of building materials, which is, when erected
on the ground and permanently affixed thereto, designed, intended, or
arranged for the housing, shelter, enclosure, or storage of persons, animals, or
property of any kind.
18
Building Area – The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade
level of all primary and accessory buildings on a lot, excluding unroofed
porches, paved terraces, steps, eaves and gutters, but including all enclosed
structures.
Building Coverage – (See also “Impervious Coverage”) The ratio obtained
by dividing the maximum horizontal cross-section of all principal and
accessory buildings on a lot (including balconies and decks, covered porches,
carports, breezeways, and patios) by the total area of the lot upon which the
buildings are located.
Building Height – The vertical distance measured from the average elevation
of the finished grade at the two (2) front corners of the building to the highest
point of the roof. Chimneys, spires, cupolas, antennas and other similar
projections shall not be included in calculating the height of a building.
Building Setback Line – A line defining the minimum required distance
within a lot from, and parallel to a street right of way line and side and rear
lot lines which designates the minimum location of future buildings and
structures.
Building Permit – A permit indicating that proposed construction, alteration
or reconstruction of a structure is in accordance with the construction
provisions of any Building Code which may be adopted by the Municipality
which authorizes an applicant to commence with said construction, alteration
or reconstruction.
Camp- Any organized establishments which provide food or lodging
accommodations of tents or cabins for groups of children or adults engaged
in organized recreational or educational programs. The term camp shall
include, but shall not be limited to, camps with special program emphasis,
such as horseback riding, conservation, music, and sports, as well as retreat
camps. The term camps shall not include manufactured home parks, migrant
labor camps or recreational vehicle parks.
Campground / Recreational Vehicle Park– A campground is a space on a
plot of ground, regardless of whether a fee has been charged for the leasing,
renting or occupancy of said space upon which two (2) or more campsites are
located, for temporary occupancy by persons using recreational vehicles,
motor homes, fifth wheel trailers, travel trailers, tents, and truck campers,
which do not exceed four hundred (400) sq. ft. in floor area, or the applicable
ANSI A.119.2/NFPA standard for recreational vehicles, cabins or other
seasonal homes where persons or families may live temporarily. For the
purposes of this definition, it shall be presumed that the occupancy of any of
19
the foregoing for a continuous period of six months or more shall constitute
permanent occupancy.
This definition doesnot include a property upon which the owner of same
may choose to camp and provide potable water and sanitary sewer within
their boundary lines.
Canopy-a protective roof-like covering, often of canvas mounted on a frame
over a walkway, sidewalk, etc. Canopies are also a freestanding structure
having a roof but no walls.
Carport – A structure which has a roof but is open on two (2) or more sides,
and is used as an accessory structure for the storage of motor vehicles.
Cartway – The portion of a street right-of-way paved or unpaved intended for
vehicular use.
Car Wash Facility – An area of land and/or structure with machine or hand
operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or
waxing of cars.
Cemetery – Land used for the purpose of burial of the deceased, including
columbariums, crematoria, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in
conjunction with the cemetery and located within the boundaries of the
cemetery.
Certificate of Use and Occupancy (Zoning) – A written statement, based on
an inspection signed by the Municipal Zoning Officer, setting forth that a
building, structure, sign and/or land complies with the ESP Region Joint
Zoning Ordinance, and that a building, structure, sign and/or land may be
lawfully employed for a specific use, as provided in this Ordinance.
Child Day-Care Facility – The following types of child day-care facilities are
regulated by this Ordinance:
A. Day-Care Center – A facility in which care is provided for seven (7)
or more children, unrelated to the caregiver, at any one time, for less
than twenty-four (24) hours/day where the child-care areas are not
being used as a family residence.
B. Family Day-Care Home – Any premise other than the child’s own
home in which child care is provided at any one time for less than
twenty-four (24) hours/day to four, five or six children who are not
relatives of the caregiver, and where the child-care areas are being
used as a family residence.
20
C. Group Day-Care Home – A facility in which care is provided for less
than twenty-four (24) hours/day for more than seven but fewer than
twelve (12) children at any one time where the child-care areas are
being used as a family residence.
“Baby-Sitting” as defined in this Ordinance, is not a Child Day-Care Facility.
Church/Place of Worship – A building structure, or group of buildings or
structures, including accessory uses, designed or intended for public worship.
This definition shall include rectories, convents, cemeteries, parsonages, and
church-related educational and/or day-care facilities.
Cinema- (See “Theater”)
Clear sight triangle – An area of unobstructed vision at the street/and or
driveway intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersections of the street and/or driveway center lines.
Club or Lodge – An association of persons for some common non-profit
activity, not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is
customarily carried on as a business, but including associations registered
with the applicable local, state, and federal agencies as a certified not for
profit organization. Clubs and lodges are considered “Social Clubs” as
defined in this Ordinance.
Car Wash Facility – An area of land and/or structure with machine or hand
operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or
waxing of cars.
Cluster Development – A development of single family detached dwellings
in which lot sizes may be reduced when common open spaces are provided.
Cocktail Lounge – (See Tavern)
Commercial – A business which provides services not included in the
definition of “Personal Services” or “Retail Sales.” Examples include but
are not limited to, the businesses of contractors and tradesmen; the sale of
goods in large quantities; commercial and hobby schools; offices. Also
providing services to other business eg; cleaning, temp staffing or cafeteria.
Community Center – A use that exists solely to provide primarily indoor
leisure and educational activities and programs and meeting space to
members of the surrounding community and/or certain age groups, and which
does not involve substantial use of machinery or noise-producing equipment.
The use also may include the preparation and/or provision of meals to low21
income elderly persons, as accessory to leisure activities. This shall not
include residential uses or a treatment center.
Composting Facility – (Also see “Resource Recovery Facility”) A facility
for the composting of the organic matter in municipal solid waste.
Conditional Use – Conditional uses are those uses to be allowed or denied by
the municipalities governing body pursuant to public notice and hearing and
recommendations by the planning agency and pursuant to express standards
and criteria set forth in the zoning ordinances. In allowing a conditional use,
other than those related to off-site transportation or road improvements, in
addition to those expressed in the ordinance, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code and this zoning
ordinance.
Condominium – A form of ownership of real property, including an
undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel, together with a
separate interest in a space within a structure, subject to the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act.
Congregate Residence – Any building or portion thereof that contains
facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation as required by this code, and may
include facilities for eating and cooking for occupancy by other than a family.
A congregate residence shall be permitted to be a shelter, convent,
monastery, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, but does not include jails,
hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses.
Convalescent Home/Nursing Home –An establishment providing housing,
nursing care, dietary and other similar personal services to convalescents,
invalids, or aged persons, but excluding mental cases, cases of contagious or
communicable disease, surgery, or other treatments which are customarily
provided in sanitariums, hospitals and similar institutions. (Also see
“Healthcare Facility”)
Convenience Store- A retail business housed in a building having less than
10,500 square feet of gross floor area which specializes in providing
household products and foods. “Convenience Stores” may also provide for
any or all of the following accessory uses:
A. The retail sales or rental of books, magazines, video tapes, video games
provided that any type of adult business or adult entertainment is
specifically prohibited
B. The preparation and sales of delicatessen sandwiches and foods provided
restroom facilities are made available
22
C. The use of no more than two (2) amusement devices such as pinball
machines, video games or other similar devices.
D . Automated bank teller machines
E. Photomats and film development drop-offs
F. Lottery sales, State and Federally approved
G. Propane fuel sales with no larger than 20 pound tanks which must be
stored outside the building, within a locked enclosure.
H. Car washes, subject to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance
I. “Convenience stores” shall not include the dispensing of gasoline or other
motor vehicle fuels unless appropriate approvals for a service station
have been obtained within the zoning district and from those local,
state, or federal regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such land
uses.
Corner Lot – A lot abutting two or more intersecting public streets, or at the
point of abrupt change of direction of a single street (an interior angle of less
than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees). Any yard adjoining a street shall
be designated the front yard and must meet the front yard requirements of the
applicable zoning district, and the yard opposite that yard shall meet the side
yard requirements of the applicable zoning district. In the case of a building
to be placed on a corner lot such that the front of the building will not be
parallel to a street line, yards shall be provided so that no portion of the
building will be placed closer to a street than the front yard requirement of
the applicable zoning district, so that no portion of the rear of the building
will be placed closer to a lot line than the rear yard requirement of the
applicable zoning district, and so that no portion of a side of the building
when placed closer to a lot line than the side yard requirement of the
applicable district.
Crematorium – A mortuary where corpses are cremated.
Dedication – The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any
general public use, reserving to themselves no other rights than those that are
compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which
the property has devoted.
Density – The number of dwelling units that are allowed to be place upon the
net buildable acreage of a parcel of land.
Developer – Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the
permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision
or land development.
Development – Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
23
Determination – The final action of any duly appointed Municipal Zoning
Officer, Municipal Zoning Hearing Board, Municipal Planning Commission,
or by the Municipal Governing Body charged with the administration of any
land use ordinance or applications there under, within the scope of the ESP
Area’s jurisdiction.
Distribution Center- A type of warehouse for the short term storage, and the
distribution of goods and materials for a specific commercial establishment (
also see warehouse). A Distribution Center is not a Truck Terminal or a
Truck Stop as defined by this ordinance
Dormitory – Residential facilities that are only inhabited by teaching faculty
and/or full-time students or an accredited college, university or medical
training facility or state-licensed teaching hospital, or an approved care and
treatment center for children (as an accessory use to such use) or to an
accredited public or private primary or secondary school, and which are
owned and operated by such principal use to which the dormitory serves.
Lawful dwelling units shall not be regulated as dormitories.
Drive-Through Facility- Any portion of a building or structure from which
business is transacted or capable of being transacted, directly with customers
located in a motor vehicle during such business transactions.
Duplex- (see Dwelling)
Dwelling – A building or portion thereof arranged, intended, designed, or
used as living quarters for one or more families living independently of each
other. The term “dwelling” shall not be construed to include hotel, motel,
boarding house, rooming house, bed & breakfast inns, tourist home, hospital,
nursing home, fraternity or sorority house, dormitory, automobile court,
mobile home park or any other type of group residence. “Dwellings”
include:
A. Dwelling, (Adaptive Reuse) – The conversion of industrial buildings
converted entirely to residential use(s), or office uses, or a
combination thereof, where allowed.
B. Dwelling, (Apartment) – A dwelling unit contained in a building,
structure or part thereof, leased to an occupant for residential
purposes. Three (3) or more apartments is considered an Apartment
Building.
C. Dwelling, (Duplex) – A two-family detached building having two (2)
dwelling units; one above the other, being fully separated by a
24
horizontal floor, and where each dwelling unit has its own separate
access. For purposes of this Ordinance, a duplex is a structure erected
after enactment of this Ordinance expressly built as a duplex. The
conversion of a single family dwelling existing as of enactment of
this Ordinance into a duplex is a “Residential Conversion” (as
defined in this Ordinance) and is further regulated in this Ordinance.
D. Dwelling, (Residential Conversion) – The conversion of a single
family dwelling to a two-family dwelling with the dwelling units one
above the other, fully separated by a horizontal floor, where each
dwelling unit has its own separate access.
E. Dwelling, (Single Family Attached) – A dwelling which is intended
for the exclusive use of one family, with no other dwelling units
located directly and totally above and below it, having side party
walls in common with two (2) adjacent dwelling units, and having its
own independent outside access. For purposes of this Ordinance the
term “row houses” or “row homes” and “townhouses” or “town
homes” are considered a type of Single Family Attached Dwelling.
Those units not meeting the definition of “Townhouses” in this
Ordinance are considered “Row homes.”
F. Dwelling (Single Family Detached) – A single building unattached to
any other dwelling unit which has been arranged, designed, intended
for, and occupied exclusively as a residence by one (1) family.
G. Dwelling (Single Family Semi-detached) – Two (2) buildings
attached one to the other which have been arranged, designed,
intended for, and occupied exclusively as residences by two (2)
families living independently from each other. These dwelling units
shall not have any living, sleeping, storage, cooking or sanitary
facilities in common, with each dwelling being separated from the
other by an un-pierced solid masonry vertical wall.
H. Dwelling (Townhouses) - A multi-family building containing three
(3) to eight (8) dwelling units and not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet
in height, with each dwelling unit being separated from one another
by a solid masonry fire wall, and with each dwelling unit having its
own individual separate access from the outside.
I. Dwelling (Mobile home) – A transportable, single family detached
dwelling intended for occupancy, exclusively as a residence by one
(1) family as defined by this Ordinance.
J. Dwelling (Multi-family) – A building designed for occupancy by
three (3) or more families living independently of each other, and
25
containing three (3) or more dwelling units. Such buildings shall
consist of the following types:
1. Apartment Buildings – A multi-family building
specifically constructed and occupied as separate living
quarters for more than three (3) families with direct access
from the outside provided either through a common hall or by
separate entrance and with each unit being in the apartment
building being provided with separate living, cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of each
family. “Apartment Buildings” include:
a. Medium Density Apartment Buildings – A building
or group of buildings containing three (3) to twelve
(12) apartments, designed as an integrated
development, limited to a height of forty-eight (48)
feet, with the apartments therein leased to the
occupants for a definite period of time of at least thirty
(30) days.
b. High Density Apartment Buildings – An apartment
building or a group of buildings containing more than
twelve (12) apartments, designed as an integrated
development limited to a height of sixty-five (65) feet,
with the apartments therein leased to the occupants for
a definite period of time of at least thirty (30) days.
Dwelling Unit – A building or portion thereof providing one (1) or more
rooms arranged for one (1) or more individuals living together as a single
family (as defined in this Ordinance), and having no cooking or sanitary
facilities in common with any other dwelling unit.
Easement – A right of way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose, and within which the
(lessee) or owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structure, but
shall have the right to make other use of the land which is not inconsistent
with the rights of the grantee.
Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Region – Municipalities in Schuylkill
County which make up the Tamaqua School District and consist of:
Walker Township
Schuylkill Township
26
Rush Township
Borough of Tamaqua
EAP Agricultural Annexation Parcels – A tract of land within the EAP
Zoning District created by a subdivision after enactment of this ordinance
meeting the requirements of the ESP SALDO, the sole purpose of which is to
transfer land to increase the size of a lot where both the EAP Parent Tract
from which the land is taken and the lot to which the land is added will be
greater than twenty-five (25) acres in size after said subdivision.
EAP Agricultural Lot – As defined in this Ordinance, a parcel of land greater
than twenty-five (25) contiguous acres within the EAP Zoning District which
was created after enactment of this ordinance by an approved subdivision
plan meeting the ESP SALDO and the ESP Zoning Ordinance which may be
used for the production, keeping or maintenance for sale, lease or personal
use of plants and animals useful to man, including: mushrooms, forages and
soil crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry
and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses,
ponies, mules or goats of any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the
breeding and grazing of an or all of such animals; bees and apiary products;
fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes,
nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse
products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management
program. Development of an EAP Agricultural Lot is regulated within this
Ordinance.
EAP Development Unit – A unit of subdivision/land development which is
allocated to an EAP Parent Tract, or portion thereof, which lies within the
EAP Zoning District.
EAP Parent Tract – Contiguous tracts of land deeded either as a single tract
or as one deed with multiple purparts prior to enactment of this ordinance ,
that are situate within the EAP Zoning District. In cases where individually
deeded tracts of land are under single ownership, each individually deeded
tract will be considered to be its own Parent Tract.
EAP SFD Lots (See also “EAP Development Unit”) – Single Family
Dwelling Lots within the EAP Zoning District created after enactment of this
ordinance by an approved subdivision plan meeting the ESP Region SALDO
and the ESP Region Zoning Ordinance.
Emergency Service Facilities – Facilities housing fire, ambulance, rescue
and other emergency services of a municipal or volunteer nature. A
membership club may be included if it is a permitted use in the zoning
district in which the facility is located. This use may include housing for
emergency personnel while on-call.
27
Entertainment, Accessory Use- Live, simulated, or recorded music or any
musical, theatrical performances and film or movie showings, which are
accessory to the primary use of the premises.
Entertainment, Primary Use- Live, simulated, or recorded music or any
musical, theatrical performances, and film or movie showings, which are the
primary function and purpose of the premises. Primary use entertainment
shall be limited to nightclubs, theaters and cinemas.
Extended-Care Facility – A long-term care facility or a distinct part of a
facility licensed or approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for
the aged, or a governmental medical institution.
Façade – Any structure, or part of a structure, attached or otherwise mounted
parallel to a wall or other vertical part of a structure.
Family – A “family” consists of one (1) or more persons each related to the
other by blood, marriage, adoption, and or legal foster parentage together
with said relatives’ respective spouses, children, or legal wards who are
living together in a single dwelling and are maintaining a common
household; or a group of not more than five (5) unrelated persons who are
living together in a single, not for profit dwelling unit and maintaining a
common household with a single cooking facility. A “family” includes any
domestic servants and not more than one (1) gratuitous guest residing with
said “family”.
Family Farm Support Business – A resident farm family-owned and
operated business located upon a farm and related to agriculture, to include
small-scale, limited site coverage, agriculturally compatible farmstead
occupations conducted commercially within the context of and/or close
proximity to farmstead buildings, and as regulated by this Ordinance.
Farm – An area of land not less than ten (10) acres in size, which is used for
agricultural purposes as defined in this Ordinance.
Farm-Labor Housing – Separate living quarters to be used for the temporary
seasonal accommodations of workers employed by the owner or operator of a
farm, (provided such seasonal employees perform their duties on such farm
owned or rented the farm owner or operator), and in which lodging with or
without meals is supplied or intended to be supplied to such employees,
Farm-Related Business – A business substantially devoted to serving
agricultural-based customers, which can be conducted on a property within
the EAP and A-P Zoning District. Said businesses must be clearly farm28
related and/or clearly designed to provide goods and services to the
agricultural community and must meet the EAP and the A-P Zoning District
requirements of this Ordinance.
Farm Stand – The sales area shall be limited to one thousand (1,000) square
feet and the building height to twenty (20) feet, in which the display and sale
of farm produced products shall be permitted.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) – The Federal government
agency charged with regulating the national airways.
Fence - A freestanding and uninhabited structure consisting of wood, glass,
metal, plastic, wire, wire mesh, masonry or vegetation singly or in
combination with other materials erected to secure or divide one property
from another or part of a property from a remaining part, to assure privacy, to
protect the property so defined or to enclose all or part of the property. A
freestanding masonry wall shall be considered to be a fence.
Fill – Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface and
shall include the conditions resulting there from. The difference in elevation
between a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher
elevation on the final grade. The material used to make fill.
Fish Hatchery – An establishment which is intended for the incubation or
originating of fish.
Fitness/Health Centers – Facilities providing fitness, health and dietary
instruction and training by certified professionals. Aerobic, cardio-vascular
and weight training instruction and equipment may be available as well as
martial arts instruction, aquatic activities, and massage and other physical
therapy.
Flea Market – An outdoor retail sales area utilizing temporary tables, tents
and/or shelters for the selling of commodities and/or goods which are not
produced on-site, which are usually sold by multiple vendors who are usually
not residents or owners of the property. The sale, preparation and
consumption of food and beverages sold on the site is not included with flea
market use unless said food operations exist even when the flea market is not
in operation. In that instance, any such food operation requires a separate
application, approval and permit as incidental to the flea market.
Floodplain – The area identified by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development, National Insurance Administration along a natural
29
watercourse which is periodically overflowed by water there from.
Floodway – The channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the base flood elevation more then one (1) foot. For the purposes
of this chapter, the term shall include all floodway areas identified in the
Flood Insurance Study prepared for a Municipality by the Flood Insurance
Administration, as well as any such additional areas which have been
identified in any other federal, state, or other acceptable studies, regulations,
or other sources of information.
Forestry – The management of forests and timberlands through the
developing cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling of trees for
commercial purposes which does not involve any land development. This
term does not include the retail sale of living plants, or nursery or
greenhouse.
Frontage – The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public, or private, road
right-of-way measured at the front property line.
Funeral Home/Mortuary – An establishment in which the deceased are
prepared for burial or cremation. The facility shall be permitted to include a
chapel for the conduct of funeral services and spaces for funeral services and
informal gatherings, and/or display of funeral equipment. It is not to include
a crematorium.
Game Preserve – An area of land set aside for the protection and commercial
propagation of animals not traditionally domesticated. Game Preserve does
not include commercial hunting operations.
Game Room/Video Arcade – A place where more than two (2) amusement
devices are provided; where more than two (2) are provided it shall become
as the principal use of the premises. This term shall not include any activities
defined as Adult Business by this Ordinance.
Garage – A building, the primary use of which is for the storage of vehicles.
As defined in this Ordinance, if any garage is deemed to be an accessory
residential us then this term does not include commercial vehicle repair or
maintenance services, nor does it include the sale of gasoline or other
petroleum products. Garages associate with Commercial Business/Services,
Retail Business, or Professional Services shall only be used for vehicles
associated with said enterprise.
30
Gas Station – (see “Automated Service Station” )
Golf Course – A tract of land laid out, landscaped and used primarily for the
playing of the sport known as golf however, this term may additionally
include swimming pools, tennis courts and other facilities for outdoor
recreation normally associated with country club/golf courses. The term shall
include buildings and structures located on a golf course tract which are
incidental to outdoor recreation, such as rain shelters, maintenance and
storage sheds, swimming pools, shower and dressing rooms and also club
houses and/or other buildings having facilities for the sale, rental and storage
of sports equipment, Restaurants ( as defined in this Ordinance) and
accommodations (including lodging) for members of private golf clubs and
their guests, which buildings and structures are normally associated with
tournament-type-eighteen-hole golf courses, provided that only 18 hole golf
courses shall have lodging and no single 18 hole course shall have more than
twenty (20) units of lodging; and provided, further that any commercial
activity permitted by this sentence shall terminate if the golf course served by
it shall cease to operate as a golf course, as defined in the preceding
sentence. Public commercial hotels, motels, restaurants, stores, snack bars
and beverage service bars and taverns are not permitted.
Golf Driving Range – A specified area, which may or may not be located
upon a golf course, on which golfers do not walk, but onto which they drive
golf balls from a central tee.
Government Facility, other than Municipally Owned – A use owned by a
government, government agency or government authority for valid public
health, public safety, recycling collection or similar governmental purpose,
and which is not owned by a municipality of the ESP Region. This term shall
not include uses listed separately in the table or uses in Article III, such as
publicly owned recreation. This term shall not include a prison.
Grade – The level of the ground whether it is adjacent to the exterior walls
of a building, structure, or to a sign, or not, after said ground has been graded
by man-made means or machinery. This is opposed to terms such as Natural
Grade or Gradient/
Greenhouse – An enclosed structure whose roof and sides are made largely
of other transparent or translucent material used for the growing, raising or
distribution of plants.
Grocery Store – A retail business housed in a building having less than
12,500 square feet of gross floor area, which has as its primary purpose to
sell fresh and prepackaged food and groceries, house wares and toiletries.
31
Grocery stores shall not include the dispensing of gasoline or other motor
fuels. (Also see “Supermarket”)
Gross Floor Area – The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls, or
from the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but not including any
space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
GroupHome Facility – A dwelling operated by s responsible individual,
family or organization with a program to provide a supportive living
arrangement for individuals, in a setting in which the total number of persons
in the living arrangement may total more and is in substantive ways different
than the definition of “Family” (as defined in this Ordinance). This home
which is required to be licensed by the state, must be staffed by qualified
persons which provide training, care, supervision, treatment and/or
rehabilitation to the aged, physically challenged/disabled or mentally
challenged/retarded who require personal assistance and supervision on a
continuing around-the-clock basis; this does not include child day care
centers, adult day care facilities, foster homes, schools, hospitals, jails,
prisons, treatment centers or methadone treatment centers. Group Homes
shall be subject to the same limitations and regulations set by this Ordinance
for single family dwellings
Healthcare Facility – A facility or institution, whether public or private,
principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis
or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or physical condition,
including a general hospital, public health center, diagnostic center, physical
rehabilitation center, assisted living facility, extended-care facility, skilledcare
facility, nursing care facility, nursing home, convalescent home,
intermediate-care facility, chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital,
outpatient clinic, dispensary, home health care agency or personal-care
facility.
Healthcare Services – Establishments primarily engaged in furnishing
medical, surgical or other services to individuals, including the offices of
physicians, radiological centers, dentists and other health practitioners,
medical and dental laboratories, outpatient care facilities, blood banks and
oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services.
Heliport – An area used for helicopters to land and take off, including all
auxiliary, service and maintenance facilities related thereto, whether or not
said heliport is located upon the ground or upon the roof of a building or
structure. This definition does not include the term Helistop.
Helistop - An area on roof or ground to accommodate touchdown and lift-off
of rotor winged aircraft for the purpose of picking up and discharging
32
passengers or cargo. Such area shall have sufficient space to accommodate
all required safety controls and comply in all respects with Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) requirements, but in no case shall such area provide
the service facilities associated with a “Heliport”
Highway Frontage – The lot dimension measured along the right-of-way line
or street or highway abutting a lot. Highway Frontage shall be a continuous
dimension and not the sum of two (2) or more separate dimensions. Also,
Highway Frontage shall be the shortest straight line distance; it shall not be
measured on an arc.
Home Occupation – An accessory use for commercial gain which is clearly
incidental or secondary to the residential use of any dwelling unit and which
is customarily carried on within a dwelling unit, and which does not change
the character thereof, or have any exterior evidence of such secondary use,
except for those allowed by this Ordinance.
Hospital – An institution designed for the diagnosis, treatment and care of
human illness or infirmity and providing health services, primarily for
inpatients, and including as related facilities, laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities and staff offices. (See “Health-Care
Facility”)
Hotel – For purposes of this Ordinance, an establishment providing transient
accommodations, containing a minimum of six (6) rental rooms and having
the following requirements:
A. Access to rooms shall be provided through a lobby and internal
hallways.
B. A private bath shall be provided for each rental room.
C. Building height is two (2) or more stories to a maximum height of
sixty-five (65) feet.
D. The hotel may at its option provide meeting rooms, banquet facilities,
fitness centers for guests and ancillary commercial shops within the
building, with internal hallway access.
E. “Hotel” does not include institutional or educational uses and
buildings where human beings are housed under legal constraint.
Impervious Coverage – Coverage of the site by materials which cannot be
penetrated by water. Included are:
33
A. All principal and accessory buildings.
B. Any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any areas covered by gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious.
C. The percentage of a lot covered by impervious surfaces.
D. All-Weather Surfaces shall be included in Impervious Coverage.
Improved Private Road – A cartway, at least 20 feet in width, which is
improved with a paved surface constructed to the standards for public streets
under the applicable subdivision and land development ordinance or road
ordinance, to provide access to a lot. If parking shall be permitted along an
“improved private road,” the minimum cartway width shall be increased by
eight feet for each side of the “improved private road” where parking is
permitted.
Improvement – Any type of structure or paved section, excluding driveway,
curb, sidewalk, planting strip or a barrier to an un-channeled motor vehicle
entrance or exit.
Improvement Setback Line – A line parallel to and set back from a street
line. No improvements are permitted between the street line and the
improvement setback line.
Incinerator – A facility designed to reduce municipal solid waste by
combustion. This use may or may not include heat exchange equipment for
energy recovery.
Independent Dwelling Unit – A dwelling within a “life-care retirement
community” (as defined) which is designed to permit independent living.
Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen, toilet and bathing facilities
as well as at least one outside window. “Independent dwelling units” may be
detached, semidetached or attached, provided that no more than six units are
joined in common.
Industry – Those fields of economic activity, including forestry,
construction, manufacturing, transportation, communication, extraction,
utility services and wholesale trade.
A. Industry, General – Industrial activities which do not meet the
definition of light industry.
B. Industry, Light – Industrial activities which are carried on entirely
within an enclosed building and involve no outdoor processes or outdoor
34
storage of primary raw materials. Involves mainly the assembly,
packaging, and shipping of products which were not produced “on-site”
via a foundry, sawmill, or similar means.
Industrial Park – A tract of land developed according to an approved Land
Development and/or Subdivision Plan, which provides either fee simple lots
or leased parcels that are configured in such a manner as to be suitable for
either light industrial or general industrial users dependant upon the
underlying zoning classification of the developed tract of land.
Intermediate Care Facility – A facility which provides on a regular basis,
health-related care and services to individuals who do not require the degree
of care and treatment which a hospital or skill-nursing facility is designed to
provide, but who because of their mental or physical condition, require care
and services (above the level of room and board) which can be made
available to them only through institutional facilities such as these.
Industrial Park – A tract of land developed according to an approved Land
Development Plan and/or Subdivision Plan, which provides either fee simple
lots or leased parcels that are configured in such a manner as to be suitable
for either light industrial or general industrial users dependant upon the
underlying zoning classification of the developed tract of land.
Junk – Any discarded materials, articles, or any pieces or portions thereof, is
considered to be junk. This definition shall include, but not be limited to,
scrap metal, scrapped, discarded or junked vehicles or motor vehicles,
machinery, and equipment, paper products, glass, plastic or metal containers,
structures, and any other items which are not ordinarily and customarily
disposed of such as rubbish, refuse, garbage or organic waste.
Junk Vehicle – Includes any vehicle (as defined in this ordinance) that meets
any of the following conditions:
A. Does not display a license plate with a current registration sticker (if
one is required) and does not have a valid state safety inspection
sticker (if one is required and except for licensed antique cars not
required to have an inspection sticker. Licenses or inspection stickers
that expired less than 90 days ago shall be considered current for the
purposes of this subsection.
B. Has been demolished beyond repair:
C. Has been separated from its axles, body or chassis; and/or
D. Includes only the axle, engine, body parts and/or chassis, separated
from the remainder of the vehicle.
35
E. Is otherwise non-road worthy, un-repairable, inoperable and/or
generally deteriorated to a state of dis-functionality.
Junk Yard – Any lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof inclusive buildings or
structures where junk, waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled. This definition
shall include automobile wrecking yards, but shall not include any buildings
or structures used for the storage of used furniture and household appliances
or any lot or building where used cars in operable condition, with current
motor vehicle registrations, are stored.
Kennel – Any property and/or establishment wherein domesticated pets (and
not livestock as defined in this (Ordinance) are kept, transported to,
transported from, or seen by appointment for the purposes of breeding,
boarding, grooming, obedience training, sale or show purposes. For the
purpose of this definition, the production of more than two (2) litters in any
calendar year shall be considered “breeding.”
Land Development – Any of the following activities:
A. The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
B. A group of two or more residential or non-residential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single non-residential
building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or
tenure
C The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features;
D. A subdivision of land.
E. The following shall not be considered a land development:
1. The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling or
single family semi-detached dwelling into not more then three (3)
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium;
2. The addition of an accessory building of less than 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area, exclusive of any farm buildings, on a lot or
lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
36
Landfill – see “ Solid Waste Landfill”
Landowner – A legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or
contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee if he is authorized under the
lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in the land.
Laundry, Self Service – A business that provides home-type washing, drying
and/or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
Library - A building containing books, magazines and other reading related
materials which is open to the public or connected with a permitted
educational use, and is generally not conducted as a private gainful business.
This term shall not include any use defined as a Adult Business by this
Ordinance.
Life Care Retirement Facility – A planned residential community for
persons of fifty-five (55) years of age or older, their spouses or companians,
which shall include “Independent Dwelling Units” (as defined in this
Ordinance), with communal dining, recreation areas, open space, parking and
related facilities, and may include Healthcare Facilities (as defined in this
Ordinance).
Livestock – Equine animals, bovine animals, sheep, goats, swine and poultry
commonly raised upon farms in Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania.
“Livestock” does not include dogs, cats, or any type of animals or birds
which are normally considered to be wild or exotic animals.
Living Accommodations Unit for Caretakers - A dwelling for person(s)
located upon the premises of a business which employs at least one (1) of the
persons for security or maintenance purposes.
Lodge – see “Club”
Lodging House – (See “Boarding House”)
Long-Term Care Facility – An institution or a distinct part of an institution
which is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical
supervision for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours to two (2) or
more patients. A long-term care facility may either be an extended-care
facility or an intermediate-care facility.
37
Lot – A tract or parcel of land which has road frontage, regardless of size,
held in single and/or joint ownership, not necessarily being a tract or parcel
of land shown on a duly recorded subdivision plan or surveyor’s map, which
is occupied, or is capable of being occupied, by buildings, structures, and
accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed, or
required, and having frontage on either a public street or a private street. The
term “lot” shall also mean parcel, plot, site, or any other similar term.
Lot Area – The area contained within the lot lines, excluding space within all
existing public or private road rights-of-way.
Lot, Corner – (see “Corner Lot”)
Lot Depth – The mean average horizontal distance between the front and the
rear lot lines.
Lot Frontage – That portion of a lot which fronts on a single street.
Lot Line – A line forming the front, rear or side boundary of a lot.
Lot of Record – Land which constitutes a separate lot or parcel as recorded in
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania.
Lot Size – The remaining area of a lot after excluding the following features
from the Gross Acreage:
A. Areas within a street or other transportation right-of-way
B Areas comprising a stormwater management improvements eg. Basin,
swales, ditches, etc but not including stormwater management
improvement intended to serve individual lots.
C: In Zoning Districts that require a minimum lot size of two (2) acres;
that portion or portions of the lot in which the following features
individually or cumulatively represent 50% of the gross lot area; areas
within the 100 year flood plain, areas of slope in excess of 25%, and
all areas delineated as Wetlands.
D In Zoning Districts that require a minimum lot size of one (1) acres;
that portion or portions of the lot in which the following features
individually or cumulatively represent 25% of the gross lot area; areas
within the 100 year flood plain, areas of slope in excess of 25%, and
all areas delineated as Wetlands.
Lot Width – The distance between side lot lines, determined by establishing
the shortest straight line distance at both the building setback line and the
street line. The lot width shall be a continuous dimension and not the sum of
two (2) or more separate dimensions. Also, lot width shall be the shortest
straight line distance, it shall not be measured on an arc.
38
Low-Level Radioactive Waste Facility - a site in which engineering
principles are utilized for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste as
defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
Maintenance Guarantee – A guarantee (which is acceptable to the
Township, including corporate bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar
collateral or surety agreements) by the developer or subdivider that dedicated
improvements shall be maintained by the developer or subdivider for a period
of eighteen (18) months after completion of construction and installation of
such improvements.
Manufactured Home – A prefabricated house, of one or more modular units,
which can be placed on a permanent perimeter foundation.
Marker – A metal pipe or pin of at least three-quarters (3/4”) of an inch in
outside diameter and at least thirty (30) inches in length.
Massage Parlor – An establishment that meets all of the following criteria:
A. Massages are conducted involving one person using their hands
and/or a mechanical device on another person below the waist, in
return for monetary compensation, and which does not involve
persons who are related to each other.
B. The use does not involve a person licensed or certified by the state as
a health care professional or a massage therapist certified by a
recognized professional organization that requires substantial
professional training. Massage therapy by a certified professional
shall be considered “personal service.”
C. The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital or nursing
home or an office of a medical doctor or chiropractor or as an
incidental accessory use to a permitted exercise club or high school or
college athletic program.
D. The massages are conducted within private or semi-private rooms.
For purposes of this Ordinance a “Massage Parlor” is considered an “Adult
Business” and is regulated as such.
Massage Therapist – A person licensed or certified by the state as a health
care professional and/or one certified by a recognized professional
organization that requires substantial professional training.
Methadone Treatment Center – As used in this Ordinance, the term
“methadone treatment facility” shall mean a facility licensed by the
39
Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment,
maintenance or detoxification of persons. “Methadone Treatment Center” is
further regulated by this Ordinance.
Mineral Extraction – The extraction of minerals from the earth, from waste
or stockpiles or from pits or banks by activities conducted upon the surface of
the land which require the removal of the overburden, strata or material
overlying, above or between, the minerals, or by otherwise exposing and
retrieving the minerals from the surface. These activities include, but are not
limited to, strip, drift, auger and open pit mining, dredging, quarrying,
leaching, mountaintop removal, box cutting and activities related thereto.
Mining activities carried out beneath the surface by means of shafts, tunnels
or other underground mine openings are not included in this definition. The
term “minerals” includes, but is not limited to, anthracite and bituminous
coal, lignite, limestone and dolomite, sand, gravel, rock, stone, earth, slag,
ore, vermiculite, clay and other mineral resources. The terms “mineral
extraction” and “surface mining” shall have the same meaning.
Mini-Warehouse – Warehouse storage units provided for lease to the general
public for the purpose of storage of articles commonly associated with
residential properties. (Also See “Self-Storage Facilities”)
Mink Farm – A raising or harvesting of mink for retail or wholesale trade.
Mobile Home – A house trailer that can be connected to utilities and can be
parked in one place and used as a dwelling. A mobile home is a transportable
unit (or units designed to be joined together) capable of again being separated
for repeated towing.
Mobile Home Lot – A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with
the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances required for the
placement thereon of a single mobile home. This parcel of land is not a “fee
simple lot” but rather is leased by the record owner of the mobile home park
to the occupants of the mobile home placed upon said mobile home lot.
Mobile Home Park – A parcel of land at least five (5) acres in size, under
single ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement of
mobile homes for non-transient use, and which consists of at least two (2) or
more mobile home lots.
Modular Home – A single family detached dwelling intend for permanent
occupancy, made by assembling one or more factory produced tree
dimensional sections into an integral living uni, whose construction materials
and specifications conform to those of conventionally built family detached
dwelling units.
40
Monument - A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four
inches (4”) in diameter or square and at least 36” in length. It is
recommended that the bottom sides or radius be at least 2” greater than the
top, to minimize movement caused by frost.
Mortuary – (See “Funeral Home”)
Motel – For purposes of this Ordinance, an establishment providing transient
accommodations, containing a minimum of six (6) rental rooms and having
the following requirements:
A. Access to rooms is from directly outside the building
B. A private bath shall be provided for each rental room.
C Building height is a minimum of one (1) story and maximum of 35
feet or two (2) stories.
Motorsports Facility – Any facility for the competitive operation of either
“on-road” or “off-road” automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and any
other motorized vehicles or machinery for recreational or commercial
purpose where fees are usually charged for the use of said facility, to
spectators of events, and for snacks and or beverages, including uses
such as, but not limited to, racing, racing events, practicing, training,
instruction, research and development
Movie Theater – (See “Theater”)
Municipality – Shall refer to the individual five members of the Eastern
Schuylkill Planning Region, which include Rush Township, Schuylkill
Township, , Walker Township, and the Borough of Tamaqua.
Municipal Governing Body – The elected officials of each of the Eastern
Schuylkill Planning Region Municipalities.
Municipal Solid Waste – The un-separated and/or unprocessed combination
of residential and commercial solid waste materials generated in a
municipality.
Municipal Use – A land use owned and maintained by a municipality or a
municipal authority and including such uses as a library, park, playground
and administrative offices, equipment storage building. This includes sites
for sewage treatment, solid waste, and refuse disposal and other public
facilities owned and operated for the good and well being of the municipality
41
and activities regularly conducted by the municipality at such sites and /or
facilities
Museum – A “museum” which is open to the public or connected with a
permitted educational use, and not conducted as a private gainful business.
Net Buildable Area – A calculated area upon which the density, requirements
for the various zoning districts are computed. “Net buildable area” is the area
of a site remaining after subtracting all of the public and private road rightsof-
way, noncontiguous lands, and utility rights-of-way from the site’s gross
area. (See “Area, Gross or Net”)
Net Floor Area – That portion of a building’s gross floor area (See “Gross
Floor Area”) which is designed for human occupancy and/or commercial
use, not to include elevator shafts, stairways, stairwells, or equipment rooms.
Nightclub – A facility where entertainment is the primary use (“Primary Use
Entertainment” as defined in this Ordinance). A nightclub is where food
and/or beer, wine, or liquor may be sold and/or consumed on the premises,
and where there is space for either a floorshow and/or a dance floor.
No-impact Home Based Business – A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to
the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with
residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including
interference, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
E. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference,
including interference with radio or television reception, which is
detectable in a neighborhood.
F. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
G. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
42
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
The permitting of the No-impact Home Based Business shall not supersede
any deed restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the use of land, nor
any master deed, by law or other document applicable to a common interest
ownership community.
Non-Conforming Lot – A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance or is legally established
through the granting of a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reason of such adoption or amendment.
Non-Conforming Structure – A structure which does not conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located, either at the time of
enactment of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto,
but which lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this Zoning Ordinance.
Non-conforming structures include, but are not limited to, non-conforming
signs, non-conforming buildings, and additions to either.
Non-Conforming Use – Any use, whether of a structure or tract of land,
which does not conform to the applicable regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located, and which is legally existing at the time of enactment of
this Ordinance or is legally established by the Zoning Hearing Board through
the granting of a variance.
Nursery – A type of agriculture utilizing land or greenhouses to cultivate
flowers, plants, shrubs, trees, and similar vegetation.
Nursing-Care Facility – A facility which serves two (2) or more individuals
for more than a twenty-four hour period who require continuous,
intermediate, or skilled nursing care.
Nursing Home – (See “Convalescent Home”)
Office – A building or structure, or a particular space in a building in which
the affairs of a for profit or not for profit business, professional person or
government agency are conducted. The primary function of any office
building or office space shall not include wholesale or retail sales activities
unless said activities are approved by one of the 4 ESP Region
municipality’s Zoning Hearing Boards through the approval of the variance.
Office/Commercial Center – A planned development of office and related
uses with some accessory commercial uses intended primarily to serve
employees of the offices.
43
On-Lot Sewage System (Individual) – A sewage disposal system which
collects, treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only one (1)
dwelling, principal use or lot.
On-Lot Water Supply System – A water supply system which transmits water
from a source on the lot to one (1) dwelling, principal use, or lot.
Open Space – The area of a lot unoccupied by principal or accessory
structures, streets, driveways, or parking areas; but includes areas occupied
by walkways, patios, porches without roofs, playgrounds, outdoor recreation
or play apparatus, gardens or trees.
Parking Space – A space within a building or on a lot, used for the parking
of a motor vehicle.
Party Wall – A common wall, floor, or ceiling separating two (2) or more
dwelling units.
Patio – The structure projecting from the side or rear wall from the dwelling
not more than two steps above ground level.
Pawn Shop – A shop where loans are made with personal property as
security.
Person – Means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
Personal Care Facility – A facility in which food, shelter, supervision and
assistance services are provided to residents of a retirement community.
Services may include assistance with dressing, bathing, diet or medication
prescribed for self administration. Hospitalization and skilled care are not
provided in “personal-care facilities.” Each unit shall contain a living and
sleeping area as well as an individual or shared bathroom.
Personal Services – A business which provides a service oriented to personal
needs and not primarily involving retail sales of goods or professional
advisory services. Includes a barber, beauty salon, tailor, dressmaker, shoe
repair, photographer, travel agent, jewelry and watch repair or similar service
uses.
Pet Cemetery – (See “Animal Cemetery”)
Pets, Keeping Of – The keeping of domesticated animals of types that are
normally considered to be kept in conjunction with a dwelling for the
pleasures of the resident family. This shall include dogs, cats, small birds,
gerbils, rabbits and other animals commonly sold in retail pet shops. No
44
more than seven (7) dog, cats, small bird, gerbils, rabbits, and /or any animal
commonly sold by pet shops may be kept upon any property, unless said
property is lawfully established kennel under the terms of this Ordinance
Piggery – For purposes of this Ordinance, any property which contains 1.0
animal units per acre and above, of swine. Piggeries are to be considered an
Intensive Agricultural activity and are only permitted within the EAP and AP
Zoning District on lots that are twenty-five (25) acres or more in size.
Planned Residential Development (PRD) – A unique type of land
development where a particular parcel of land, which is controlled by a single
entity, which is intended to be developed as a single community with a site
specific number of dwelling units per acre, or a combination of residential
and non-residential uses, the development plan for which does not necessarily
correspond in terms of lot size, bulk or type of dwellings, dwelling density,
lot coverage and/or required open space, to the regulations established in any
of the residential zoning districts created, from time to time, under the
provisions of the Eastern Schuylkill Planning (ESP) Area’s Regional Zoning
Ordinance.
Plans (Sketch) – An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale, indicating
salient existing features of the tract and its surroundings and showing
approximate street and lot layout of the development as a basis for informal
consideration by the municipality , prior to preparation of a Preliminary Plan.
These plans shall not be required in the ESP region, but are for informal use
Plan (Preliminary) – A tentative subdivision or land development plan
(including all required supplementary data), generally prepared in lesser
detail than a Final Plan, showing approximate locations of proposed streets
and lot layout and/or site development in the case of land development, as a
basis for consideration prior to the preparation of a Final Plan. These Plans
shall be prepared by a Registered Engineer, Surveyor, Architect or
Landscape Architect. These shall constitute a Formal, Official Submission of
a subdivision or land development request to the municipality
Plan (Final) – A complete and exact subdivision or land development plan
(including all required supplementary data), prepared for formal
consideration by the municipality and/or official recording as required by
statute, to define property rights and proposed street and other improvements,
provided said plan is approved and endorsed by the municipality. Final
Plans shall be prepared by, and shall bear the signature and seal of a
Registered Engineer, Surveyor, Architect or Landscape Architect.
45
Porch – A three sided roofed structure projecting from the front, side, or rear
wall of a building without any enclosing features more than 38 inches above
the floor thereof, save the necessary columns to support the roof. A porch
shall be located within the respective building setback lines for the lot.
Premises – A descriptive word to include all improvements, buildings,
structures and land on or within a lot.
Principal Permitted Building – A building, or structure, the main or
primary purpose for which any land, structure or building is designed,
arranged or intended, and for which they may be occupied or maintained
under the terms of Ordinance.
Principal Permitted Uses – The primary building, use or structure permitted
and intended for a given lot.
Private Surface Parking Facility – privately owned and operated parking
facility with spaces available for short-term and long-term lease.
Professional – A doctor, surgeon, dentist, architect, artist, accountant,
insurance agent, real estate broker, seamstress, web site designer, teacher,
engineer, lawyer, musician, surveyor, landscape architect, land planner or any
other licensed or degreed professional.
Professional Services – The term includes any establishment primarily
engaged in providing a wide variety of services for individual, business and
government establishments and other organizations. The term includes
establishments providing business, health, legal, engineering and other
services. Specifically excluded from this definition are any, and all, types of
Adult Business Entertainment.
Pub – (See “Tavern”)
Public Hearing – A formal meeting held pursuant to the advertisement of
public notice, by either the Municipal Governing Body or the Municipal
Zoning Hearing Board intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior
to either entity taking formal action on an application, plan, request for relief,
or conditional, or special exception use which has been filed in accordance
with this Ordinance.
Public Meeting – A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July 3,
1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84) known as the “Sunshine Act”.
46
Public Notice – Notice published once each week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the public hearing and the particular nature of
matters to be considered at the public hearing. The first publication shall not
be more than thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be less than
seven (7) days from the date of the public hearing.
Public Road – A public thoroughfare, including a street, road, lane, alley,
court or other similar terms, which has been dedicated or deeded to the
Municipality and subsequently accepted by the Governing Body.
Public Sewer age Systems – See “Sewerage Facilities”
Public Utilities – Use of extension thereof which is operated, owned or
maintained by a municipality or municipal authority, or which is privately
owned and requires a “Certificate of Convenience” approved by the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission for the purpose of providing public
sewage disposal and/or treatment; or for the purpose of providing the
transmission of energy or telephone service.
Public Water System – See “Water Supply, Public”
Quarry – (See “Mineral Extraction”)
Rear Lot Line – The lot line which is opposite from the front lot line. The
rear line of any triangularly or irregularly shaped lot shall be at least ten (10)
feet long.
Recreation – The offering of leisure-time activities to unrelated persons.
This term shall not include “Adult Business” or “Adult Establishment” use.
For the purposes of this chapter, recreation facilities shall be permitted by
right as an accessory use clearly limited to residents of a municipality and
their occasional invited guests.
A. Indoor Recreation - A type of recreation use that does not meet the
definition of “outdoor recreation,” and is used principally for active or
passive recreation, such as a bowling alley, roller skating, ice skating,
commercial batting practice use and similar uses.
B. Outdoor Recreation – A type of recreation use that has a total
building coverage of less than 15%, and is used principally for active
or passive recreation, such as golf driving range, miniature golf
course, amusement park and similar uses.
47
Recreational, Active - Any recreational activity not considered passive
Recreational, Passive – Includes picnic pavilions; hiking, biking, and fitness
trails; park benches; picnicking; bird watching; and other similar uses not
considered active
Recreational Use
A. Commercial – Recreational facilities, which are owned and operated
by a private entity as a commercial business and are open to the
general public for a fee
B Public – Recreational facilities operated as not for profit enterprise by
a municipality, or other governmental entity, and which are open to
the general public.
C. Private – Facilities which are only open to members of the private
entity which owns said facility
Commercial, Public and Private Recreational uses are part of the definition of
Indoor or Outdoor Recreation. For the purpose of this ordinance “ Recreation
Use” where listed as permitted use may be further regulated as specified in
this Ordinance
No recreation activity which, in the opinion of the Municipal Governing
Body, constitutes a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the general
public or results in the degradation of the existing environment shall be
permitted .
Recreational Area
A. Private – Recreational facilities, which are owned and operated by a
private entity as a commercial business and are open to the general
public for a fee or are only open to members of the private entity
which owns said facility.
B. Public – Recreational facilities operated as a not for profit enterprise
by a municipality, or other governmental entity, and which is open to
the general public.
Public and Private recreational facilities may include, but not be limited to
land, buildings and structures used for leisure time activities including
amusements, theatre, arcades, athletic events, amphitheatres, clubs, country
clubs, dancing or music halls, studios, swimming clubs, skating clubs, horse
48
and bicycle riding trails, hiking trails, playgrounds, boating, hunting and
fishing.
No recreational area which, in the opinion of the Municipal Governing Body,
constitutes a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public or
results in the degradation of the existing environment shall be permitted.
Recreational areas, both Public and Private, shall not include any or all types
of any adult businesses.
Recreational Vehicle (RV) – A vehicular type camping unit certified by the
manufacturer as complying with ANSI a119.2 or A119.5 and primarily
designed to provide indoor accommodations for persons who wish to go
“camping”. An RV may either have its own mode of power or is mounted
on or towed by another vehicle. The various RV units include camping
trailers, motor homes, park trailers, travel trailers and truck campers.
Recreational Vehicle Park – see Campground/ RV park
Recycling Facility – A business that accumulates material such as paper,
glass, aluminum and/or plastic, but not hazardous material or material that
held hazardous material, that is no longer useful for its intended purpose.
The materials are then sold to another business as a raw material which can
be used to manufacture a new product. (Also see “Resource Recovery
Facility”).
Resource Recovery Facility – A facility or land that is used for any one or a
combination of the following or similar uses: composting, incineration,
material separation, recycling or trash transfer.
Restaurant - A retail food (the term “food” includes non-alcoholic
beverages) service establishment, with or without the sale of beer, wine or
liquor. For purposes of this Ordinance restaurants shall be classified as
follows:
A. Restaurant, Fast Food – An establishment that sells food already
prepared for consumption, on or off the premises packaged in paper,
Styrofoam or similar materials, and may include drive-in, drivethrough,
or drive-up facilities for ordering.
B. Restaurant, General –An establishment that sells food for
consumption primarily on the premises, and which may include the
sale of beer, wine, or liquor. All food and beverages may be served
by waiters or waitresses and are primarily consumed inside the
building while patrons are seated at counters or tables. Food sales
shall account for at least fifty-five percent (55%) of the gross income.
49
C. Restaurant, Take-out – An establishment that sells food only for
consumption off the premises and which may include drive-in, drivethrough,
or drive-up facilities for ordering or pick-up and which may
include take-out beer as part of its operation.
Retail Business – Includes establishments engaged in the sale of goods in
small quantities directly to the consumer for personal or household use and
rendering services incidental to the sales of such goods. Processing of items
in a manner that is incidental or subordinate to the retail sales of said items is
often conducted at retail businesses. Buying of goods for resale to the
consumer is a characteristic of retail trade establishments that particularly
distinguishes them from Profession Services. Specifically excluded from this
definition are Adult Business Establishments.
Retirement Community— A residential development consisting of a
regulated mixture of dwelling units apartments and personal-care, skilledcare
and nursing-care facilities in an environment which cannot be achieved
through the use of conventional residential development. Such housing
facilities serve persons who are a minimum of fifty (50) years old and their
spouse or companion, or handicapped to the extent which requires personal
or skilled care. Housing and health-care services are provided to each
resident of a "retirement community" pursuant to an agreement effective for a
minimum period of one year. Services provided in such facilities may include
health care, intermediate and skilled care, medical facilities, physical therapy,
board, lodging, support services and accessory uses.
Retreat Camp – A type of camp which provides food and / or lodging for
persons wishing to commune with nature while they contemplate various
moral, ethical, team building, intervention and/or ecumenical issues or
problems along with accessory offices, dwellings, and administration uses
devoted solely to operating the retreat camp, all located in a predominately
natural setting
Riding Academy/Riding Stables/Horse Boarding Facilities – An
establishment where at least five (5) horses are boarded and cared for, and
where instruction in riding, jumping and showing is offered, and/or the
general public may, for a fee, hire horses for riding.
Right-of-way - The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a street,
sidewalk, alley, or for other public or semi-public purposes.
Rooming House – A lawful residential use in a building in which room(s)
that do not meet the definition of a lawful dwelling unit are rented for
habitation. The building in which the rooming house is located shall not
50
include cooking facilities used by the residents. A rooming house shall not
include a use that meets the definition of a hotel, dormitory, motel, life care
center, personal care center, bed-and-breakfast inn, group home, nursing
home, or boarding house. A college fraternity or sorority house used as a
residence shall be considered a type of rooming house. A rooming house
may provide meals to residents, but only if said rooming house is part of a
restaurant or tavern open to the public. A rooming house shall primarily
serve persons residing on-site for five or more consecutive days.
SALDO – ESP Region Subdivision And Land Development Ordinance.
Saloon – (See “Tavern”)
Satellite Dish Antenna — A device incorporating a reflective surface which
is solid, open mesh or bar-configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish,
cone or horn, and including its pedestal and other attachments. Such device
shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or other electromagnetic waves
between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to
include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as "satellite earth
stations," "television receivers only" or "TVRO's" and "satellite microwave
antennas."
Satellite Use – A commercial establishment in a shopping center or planned
commercial center, located in a freestanding building independent of other
buildings and frequently near the road frontage of the center. Satellite uses
are generally characterized by the following:
A. A need for nearby parking.
B. Rapid customer turnover.
C. Vehicular service bays or drive-through services.
School – A principal use in which supervised education or instruction is
offered:
A. Public School – An elementary or secondary school supported by
public funds and providing free education for children of a district.
B. Private School – An elementary or secondary school run and
supported by private individuals or a corporation.
C. Parochial School – A primary or secondary school supported by a
religious organization.
D. Day School – A private school for pupils living at home.
51
E. Boarding School – A private school where pupils are provided with
meals and lodging.
F. Business, Trade or Vocational School – A secondary school that
offers instruction in jobs relating to business or in skilled trades.
G. Technical School – A post-secondary school teaching mechanical and
industrial arts and the applied sciences.
H. Commercial School – Schools which are owned and operated
privately for profit and that do not offer a complete educational
curriculum (e.g. beauty school, modeling school, art school).
I. Junior College – An educational institution with residential facilities
offering a two-year course that is generally the equivalent of the first
two years of a four-year undergraduate course, or an associate degree.
J. Community College – A Junior College without residential facilities
that is often funded by the government.
K. College
1. An institution of higher learning that grants a bachelor’s
degree in liberal arts or science, or both.
2. An undergraduate division or school of a university.
3. A school, sometimes but not always a university, offering
special instruction in professional or technical subjects.
L. University – An institution for higher learning, with or without living
quarters, with teaching and research facilities, with graduate and
professional schools that award masters and doctorate degrees, and an
undergraduate division that awards bachelor’s degrees.
M. Hobby School/Hobby Studio – A for-profit facility that is primarily
intended for the learning of, or skill improvements of, a hobby, and
does not provide state-required education to persons under sixteen
(16) years of age. Examples include dancing school, martial arts
school, and studios such as dance, art, ceramics, and music.
Screen – Vegetative material, fencing, and/or other materials which have
been planted or constructed to screen the buildings, structures and uses on the
lot on which the screen is located, from the view of people on adjoining
properties.
52
Self Storage Facilities – A building and/or series of buildings divided into
separate storage units for personal property and/or property associated with
some business or other organization. These units shall be used solely for
non-active storage, and no processing, manufacturing, sales, research and
development, testing, service and repair, or other non-storage activities shall
be permitted.
Sewage – Those usually organic, water soluble solid or liquid waste products
and wastewater generated by residential, industrial, commercial, institutional
or other establishments.
Sewage Facilities – A system of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment
and disposal which will prevent the discharge of untreated or inadequately
treated sewage or other similar waste into water of this commonwealth and
which otherwise provides for the safe and sanitary treatment and disposal of
sewage or other similar waste. The term includes:
A. Sewage System, Individual– A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage
in whole or in part into the soil or into waters of this Commonwealth
or by means of conveyance to another site for final disposal. The
term includes:
1. Individual on-lot sewage system – An individual sewage
system which uses a system of piping, tanks, or other facilities
for collecting, treating and disposing of sewage into a soil
absorption area or spray field or by retention in a retaining
tank.
2. Individual sewerage system – An system which uses a method
of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal,
other than renovation in a soil absorption area, or retention in
a retaining tank.
B Sewage System, Community A privately owned sewage facility, for
the collection of sewage from two (2) or more lots, or two (2)
or more equivalent dwelling units and the treatment or
disposal, or both, of the sewage on one (1) or more of the lots
or at another site.
1. Community on-lot sewage system – A system of piping,
tanks or other facilities serving two (2) or more lots and
collecting, treating and disposing of sewage into a soil
absorption area or retaining tank located on one (1) or more of
the lots or at another site.
53
2. Community sewerage system – A privately owned community
sewage system which uses a method other than renovation in
an on-lot absorption area, or retention tank.
C Sewage Systems, (Public) – A publicly, municipally, owned and
operated system of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment and
disposal which will prevent the discharge of untreated or inadequately
treated sewage or other waste into waters of this Commonwealth or
otherwise provide for the safe and sanitary treatment and disposal of
sewage or other waste
Sewerage –
A. All effluent by sewers, whether it is sanitary sewage, residential,
commercial or individual wastes or stormwater runoff
B. The entire system of sewage collection, conveyance treatment and
disposal
Sexually Oriented Business (See also Adult Business and Adult
Establishment – An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult
video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theatre, adult theatre, escort
agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
Shopping Center – A group of stores, four (4) or more in number, with or
without satellite uses, planned and designed as an integrated unit, with offstreet
parking provided for both customers and employees on the developed
property as an integral part of the unit, with provisions for delivery of goods
separated from the off-street parking areas and from customer access.
“Shopping center” shall also mean a single store or a group of stores fewer
than four (4) in number where the total gross floor area of the store or stores
exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) square feet.
Sight Distance – The required length of roadway visible to the driver of a
motor vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurements shall be made from a
point 4.5’ above centerline of the road surface to a point six inches (6”) above
the centerline of the road surface.
Sign – Any structure, device, display or part thereof, or device attached
thereto, or painted or represented thereon, which shall be used for the purpose
of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public or which displays
or includes any letter, word, motto, banner, pennant, flag, insignia, device or
54
representation which is in the nature of an advertisement, announcement,
direction or attraction, but not including the flag, emblem, or insignia of the
United States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
political subdivision thereof.
A. Types of Signs:
Abandoned – A sign located on a property which is vacant and/or
unoccupied for a period of ninety (90) days; a sign which is damaged,
in disrepair, or vandalized and not repaired within ninety (90) days; a
sign which contains an outdated message for a period exceeding thirty
(30) days.
Advertising – (See “Sign, Off-Premise”)
A-frame – (See “Portable”)
Area of – The area of a sign shall be construed to include all
lettering, wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together
with the background, whether open or closed, on which they are
displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing
which is incidental to the display itself. Where the sign consists of
individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface of a
structure, the area of the sign shall be considered to be the smallest
rectangle which can be drawn to encompass all of the letters and
symbols. In computing the permitted sign area of any sign with two
(2) sides, the permitted total sign area shall be based upon the sign
area of only one (1) side (the larger of the two if they differ). Unless
otherwise specified, all square footages in regards to signs are
maximum sizes.
Awning – A sign with its copy on a shelter made of any non-rigid
material, such as fabric or flexible plastic, that is supported by or
stretched over a frame and attached to an exterior wall of a building or
other structure.
Banner – A sign with its copy on non-rigid material such as cloth,
plastic, fabric or paper with no supporting framework.
Bulletin Board – A particular type of changeable copy sign that
displays copy in a casement made of glass, Plexiglas or other
materials.
Business – (See “On-Premise Business”)
55
Canopy – A sign on a rigid multi-sided structure attached to a
building or on any other freestanding structure that may have a roof
with support but no walls.
Center – A sign located on the premises identifying a shopping center
or the commercial, business, or industrial complex (ex. “plaza”,
“park”, “commons”) housing individual commercial businesses or
industrial businesses. A Center Sign does not include Business Signs
as part of its structure.
Changeable – A sign that is designed so that its characters, letters,
illustrations or other content can be changed, altered or rearranged
without physically altering the permanent physical face or surface of
the sign. This includes manual, electrical, electronic, or other variable
message signs.
Contractor – A temporary sign which carries the name and
information about a contractor, mechanic, artisan, or architect who is
involved in construction work occurring on the premises on which the
sign is located, but only for the duration of the work.
Development – An identification sign at the entrance to a residential
development.
Directional – A sign containing directional information locating
public places owned or operated by federal, state or local
governments or their agencies publicly owned natural phenomena,
historic, cultural, scientific, educational and religious sites; and areas
of natural and scenic beauty or which are naturally suited for outdoor
recreation.
Flashing – Any sign which has intermittent or changing lighting or
illumination of a duration less than thirty (30) seconds shall be
deemed a flashing sign.
Free-Standing – An independently supported sign permanently
affixed to the ground with a foundation, not attached to any building
or structure.
Garage/Yard Sale – A temporary sign which directs attention to the
sale of personal goods on the premises of a residential property on
which the sign is located.
Identification – Signs for public and private schools, churches,
lodges, or similar institutions identifying the subject use.
56
Incidental – An informational sign, no more than two square feet in
size and not including any commercial message or logo, which carries
a message such as “enter”, “telephone”, “rest rooms”, “no parking”,
and on-site direction or anything similar. It does not include Security
and Warning Signs.
Illegal – A sign which does not meet the requirements of this
ordinance or which is not a legally nonconforming sign. This
specifically includes a sign that remains standing when the time limits
set by the permit are exceeded and any sign not removed after
notification from the zoning officer to remove the sign.
Illuminated – A sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light
source, whether internally or externally lit, including but not limited
to neon signs and any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outlines illuminated by artificial lighting.
Marquee – Any sign attached to a covered structure projecting from
and supported by a building with independent roof and drainage
provisions and which is erected over a doorway or doorways as
protection against the weather.
Monument – A freestanding sign with a base affixed to the ground,
where the length of the base is at least two-thirds the horizontal length
of the monument.
Nonconforming – A sign that met all legal requirements when
constructed but is not in compliance with current sign regulations. A
registered nonconforming sign is not an illegal sign.
Nonprofit Organization – An off-premises sign displaying
information about a church, service club or other nonprofit
organization.
Off-Premise – A sign which directs attention to an object, product,
service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business
that is primarily offered or located at a location other than the lot upon
which the sign is located. This includes signs commonly called
“billboards”, and “advertising signs”.
On-Premise Business – A sign which directs attention to a business,
profession or industry conducted on the premise or to products sold,
manufactured or assembled upon the same premises upon which it is
displayed.
57
Personal Expression – A sign which displays an individual’s
political, religious or personal belief.
Plaza – A one or two-sided structure displaying smaller signs, each of
equal size.
Political – A temporary sign identifying, either single or combined, a
political candidate, slate of candidates, ballot issue, or party. These
signs are used or intended to be used for the display of any
announcement, advertisement or notice of any individual candidate or
slate of candidates for any public office or similar political purposes
and shall be non-illuminated. These signs shall be limited to a display
no longer than sixty (60) days prior to a primary or general election
and shall be removed within five (5) days after said election.
Portable – A freestanding sign that is attached to a chassis that allows
it to be towed from one location to another or that can be transported
on a flat-bed truck and that is not permanently attached to a building
or the ground.
Private Drive – On premises private drive signs are limited to one (1)
per driveway entrance, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, with
language limited to the words “private drive” and the addresses of any
residences using the private driveway.
Public Use, Official, Governmental – Safety signs, signs indicating
points of interest, historical plaques, public parks or recreation
facilities, utilities, signs identifying official governmental buildings or
facilities.
Real Estate - A temporary sign which provides information about a
real estate activity on the premises on which the sign is located, such
as a sale, rental, open house or property available for, or in the
process of, development.
Residential Identification – A sign, bearing only the property
number, street address, and/or names of the occupants of the
residence, or the name of the dwelling,
Roof – A sign which is erected, constructed, and maintained on or
above the roof of a building. For purposes of this Ordinance, Roof
Signs are considered On-Premise Business Signs and are regulated as
such.
Sandwich – A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground
58
Security and Warning – On-premises signs regulating the use of the
premises, such as “no trespassing”, “no hunting” and “no soliciting”
signs, as well as signs provided by home security firms, that do not
exceed one (1) sign two (2) square feet in area in residential areas and
one (1) sign five (5) square feet in area in commercial and industrial
zones. These limitations shall not apply to the posting of
conventional “no trespassing” signs in accordance with state law.
Special Event – A temporary sign which carries information about a
special event such as an auction, flea market, festival, carnival, meal
or fundraising event..
Street – Official highway sign, streets name, directional, or other
traffic sign erected in accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code.
Temporary – A sign which advertises community or civic projects,
political events/candidates, real estate for sale/lease, contractor signs,
or other special events on a temporary basis, and which are intended
and/or required to be removed after the temporary purpose has been
served.
Vehicular - A vehicle to which a sign is affixed or painted and which
is used or parked in such manner that the display of such sign
becomes the vehicles primary purpose
Wall – A sign primarily painted on a wall of a building; a sign
supported on a wall and which is either mounted parallel with the wall
or perpendicular to the wall.
A. Parallel Sign – A sign mounted parallel to a wall or
other vertical building surface, byt not extending beyond the
edge of the wall, roof lines or other surface to which it is
mounted and not projecting more than twelve (12) inches
from the surface to which it is mounted.
B. Projecting Sign – Any sign mounted perpendicular to
a wall or other vertical surface.
Wheeled – (See “Portable”)
Window – A sign which is readily visible and can be at least partially
read from an exterior lot line and which is attached to a window or
transparent door or that can be read through a window or transparent
door.
59
Skilled-Care Facility – A facility which serves two (2) or more individuals
for more than a twenty-four hour period who require continuous,
intermediate, or skilled nursing care.
Slaughterhouse, Commercial – A principal use which involves the
purchasing and butchering of animals for commercial purposes. This
definition does not include custom butcher shops which are licensed by the
state.
Social Club (PLCB Licensed) – A club or lodge or any organization not
conducted for profit, which has a membership defined by its charter bylaws,
and is a licensee of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
Social Club or Association (Non-PLCB Licensed) – a club or lodge or any
organization, not conducted for profit, which has a membership defined by its
charter bylaws, and is not a licensee of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board. No alcoholic beverages to be sold, stored or consumed on premises.
Solid Waste Disposal Facility – A properly sited and legally permitted
facility, including but not limited to a sanitary landfill where garbage, trash or
junk is disposed of or is processed or recycled for disposal or reuse. This
term shall not include facilities where the disposal or processing of hazardous
waste or highly radioactive materials takes place.
Solid Waste Landfill – A properly sited and legally permitted facility where
engineering principles are utilized to bury deposits of solid waste without
creating public health or safety hazards, nuisances, pollution, or
environmental degradation.
Special Exception Use – A type of land use which if it is permitted by the
Zoning Hearing Board, would allow the use and occupancy of land and/or a
building for specific purposes in accordance with terms of this Ordinance
when such use is not permitted by right.
Special Antenna – Private residence mounted television or amateur radio
equipment including ham or citizen band radio antennas.
Standard Antenna – Private residence mounted television or amateur radio
equipment including ham or citizen band radio antennas.
Street – A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, (i.e. not limited to
the cartway), either public or private, intended for use as a means of vehicular
and pedestrian circulation and which provides a means of access to abutting
property. The word “street” includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court,
drive, expressway, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and
any other similar terms.
60
Arterial Road – Streets designed primarily to carry medium to heavy
volumes of traffic at moderately high speeds, and which generally do
not provide access to land which would interfere with the primary
traffic moving functions of such a street.
Collector Road – Streets designed to carry a moderate volume of
traffic between Local streets and Arterial streets at moderate speeds,
and which provide only limited vehicular access to abutting
properties.
Local Road – Streets designed to provide direct access from abutting
properties to any Collector and/or Arterial Streets.
Service Road – Streets (often called “alleys”) designed to provide
vehicular access to the rear or side of properties which abut a local or
collector road
Structure – Any man-made object having an ascertainable, stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. The term
structure shall include: buildings, signs, fences, walls, towers, swimming
pools, porches, garages, sheds, gazebos, pavilions, and any other similar
structures. “Structure” shall be interpreted as including the words “or part
thereof”.
Structural Alteration – Any changes made to the structural members of any
structure (such as walls, columns, beams, girders, floors, roof or ceiling) or to
any addition to any structure; or the moving of a structure from one location
to another. The term “Structural Alteration” shall not include work
associated with normal maintenance, minor repairs, or interior alterations.
Subdivision - The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any
means into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels or other divisions of land
including or, for the purpose of annexation, changes in existing lot lines for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, or lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs and devisees, transfer of ownership of building or lot
development: Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any
new street or easement of access, or any residential dwelling, shall be
exempted. The term subdivision shall refer to, as appropriate in this
Ordinance, to the process of subdividing land or to the land proposed to be
subdivided.
Subdivider – Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision
61
or land development. Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, the term
subdivider shall be deemed, also, to refer to developer.
Supermarket – A store occupying in excess of 12,500 square feet of gross
floor area which has a primary purpose of selling fresh and prepackaged
food, groceries, house wares and toiletries, but not clothing except as
incidental items, and is designed to provide sustenance for a household. A
supermarket may provide for the dispensing of gasoline or other motor fuels
if the appropriate approvals have been obtained from the local, state or
federal regulatory agencies having such jurisdiction.
Surface Mining – (See “Mineral Extraction”)
Swimming Pool – A pool used for swimming or bathing which has a depth in
any part of twenty-four (24) inches or more.
A. Household or Private – A man-made area with walls of
man-made materials intended to enclose water for bathing or
swimming and that is intended to serve the residents of only one
dwelling unit and their occasional guests.
B. Non-household – A man-made area with walls of manmade
materials intended to enclose water for bathing or swimming
and that does not meet the definition of a household swimming pool.
Taproom – (See “Tavern”)
Target Range – A place where firearms and other projectile-type weapons
(eg. Guns, rifles, shotguns, pistols, air guns, archery crossbows, etc.) can be
shot for recreation, competition, skill development, training, or any
combination thereof. Nothing within this definition shall be construed to
include hunting when conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations
of the Commonwealth. Any, and all, target ranges shall be safely and
appropriately sited upon the land, shall include a backstop of either, earthen
materials or, other impact absorbing materials, and shall not constitute a
threat to any person or personal property located within the ESP Region.
Tavern - A Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board licensed establishment
primarily engaged in the retail sale and the on-site consumption of alcoholic
beverages and where food sales account for less than fifty-five percent (55%)
of the gross income. This definition includes, but is not limited to, beer
gardens, bars, barroom, pubs, cocktail lounges, saloons, and taprooms.
“Restaurants” (as defined in this Ordinance) that serve alcoholic beverages
but are primarily engaged in the retail sale of prepared food are not included
in this definition.
62
Telecommunications Antenna – Any device used for the transmission or
reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile
radio service or any other wireless telecommunications signals, including
without limitation omni-directional or whip antennas and directional or panel
antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by the FCC to
operate such device. This definition shall not include private residence
mounted satellite dishes or television antennas or amateur radio equipment
including without limitation ham or citizen band radio antennas.
Telecommunications Facility - A tract or parcel of land that contains a
telecommunication antenna as the principal use, its support structure,
accessory building(s), equipment cabinet, and parking, and may include other
uses associated with and ancillary to telecommunication signal transmission
or processing at the tract
Theater – An enclosed building used for the presentation of live
performances or motion pictures where entertainment is the primary use (See
“Primary Use Entertainment”). Included in this definition are cinemas,
other venues for the projection of film, dinner theaters, and theaters with
stages for live theatrical, musical performances, as well as circuses and
ceremonies, such as graduation and awards. “Theater” does not include
outdoor drive-in theater or Adult Business.
Topsoil – Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
Topsoil is usually found in the upper most soil layer called the “A horizon”.
Transfer Station – A facility where municipal solid waste is delivered for the
purpose of transferring the material into another container or vehicles for
transport to a final disposal site or processing facility. (A transfer station
may include the separation and collection of material for the purpose of
recycling).
Travel Trailer – A vehicular portable structure built or designed to be
mounted on a chassis or wheels or constructed as in integral part of a selfpropelled
vehicle for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and/or
vacation purposes.
Treatment Center – A use (other than a prison or hospital) providing housing
for persons who need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling
because of:
A. Criminal rehabilitation, such as a halfway house.
B. Current addiction to alcohol or a controlled substance that was used in
an illegal manner.
63
C. A type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person to be a
threat to the physical safety to others.
D. “Treatment Centers” are further regulated within this Ordinance.
A “Methadone Treatment Facility” is as defined in this Ordinance and is
further regulated in this Ordinance and PA Act 247 The PA MPC.
Truck and/or Heavy Equipment Establishment – Any use of the land
whereon the primary occupation is the sale, rental or service of trucks, buses
and heavy equipment in operating condition, including earth-moving, well
drilling and all construction equipment. For the purpose of the ordinance
truck and heavy equipment sales, rental and service, shall not include RVs
but may include farm equipment. This may include diagnostic centers,
equipment parts and accessory shops where installation is an ancillary
business.
Truck Stop – A commercial use that primarily involves providing fuel to
tractor-trailer trucks owned by numerous different companies. Such use may
also include retail sales and repair services
Truck Terminal – The building plus contiguous space to which freight is
brought for transfer, assembly and sorting for shipment by truck, in addition
to truck parking.
Use – The specific purpose for which a tract of land, a sign, structure,
building, or group of buildings is designed, arranged, and/or intended for, and
which may be occupied or maintained, or any activity, occupation, business
or operation may be conducted upon, thereon or therein. The term “permitted
use” or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any non-conforming use.
Utility Building – An accessory use which does not include the storage of
vehicle(s), but which does include the storage of good and materials
associated with the principal permitted use of the lot.
Vacation Farm – A farm, still engaged in agricultural production, whether
principally or incidentally thereto, which provides accommodations and
services consisting of, but not limited to, sleeping quarters, eating and
recreation facilities and general social activities on the premises, used or
intended to be used for temporary or seasonal occupancy by vacationers.
Variance – A waiver, granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, from the terms
and conditions of this Ordinance where literal enforcement would create
unnecessary hardship and when granting of the waiver would not be contrary
to the public interest.
64
Vehicle –
A. A self-propelled conveyance that runs on tires, or wheels, such as a
motor vehicle.
B. A device or structure not necessarily self propelled for transporting
persons or things, including the term “trailer” which is a transport
vehicle designed to be hauled by a truck or other motor vehicle, and
the term “boat” which is a vessel propelled by oars, paddles, sail, or
motorized device.
Veterinary Clinic – (See “Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic”)
Video Arcade - (See “Game Room”)
Warehouse – A building or group of buildings primarily used for the indoor
storage, transfer and distribution of products and materials, but not including
retail uses or a truck terminal
Warehousing – The indoor storage, as well as the transfer and distribution of
products and materials where it is the primary use and activity of the lot.
Water Supply, Individual On-Site – A system for supply and distributing
water to a single dwelling or other building from a source located on the
same lot.
Water Supply, Community– A of privately owned system, for supplying and
distributing water from a common source to two (2) or more dwellings and/or
other buildings within a single neighborhood.
Water Supply, Public – A publicly owned and operated system for supplying
and distributing potable water from a common source to dwellings and other
buildings
Water Extraction – The permanent removal of water as a commodity from a
lot or parcel of land for any type of business or commercial purpose.
Wetlands – An area of ground identified by existing natural conditions which
cause same to be identified as wetlands as defined in applicable State and
Federal laws and regulations setting forth criteria for establishment of
wetlands.
Wholesale Business Establishment – An establishment that is primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; industrial, commercial,
institutional or professional business users ; or other wholesalers. Such an
establishment may also act as agents or brokers or buy merchandise for, or
sell merchandise to, such businesses.
65
Wildlife Sanctuary – Includes nature center, outdoor education laboratory,
woodland preserve, arboretum or a place of refuge for native animals
indigenous to Pennsylvania.
Yard – An open space, as may be required by this Ordinance, of uniform
width or depth on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, where
open space lies between the principal building or group of buildings and the
nearest lot line. This area of open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward.
Yard, Front – An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward with no buildings or structures erected upon it except as may be
specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.
Yard, Side – An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between a building and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward with no buildings or structures erected upon it
except as may be specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.
Yard, Rear – An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward with no buildings or structures erected upon it except as may be
specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.
Zoning District – A portion of the territory of the Eastern Schuylkill
Planning Area within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or
various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of the ESP Area
Regional Zoning Ordinance.
66
ARTICLE III – ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT
SECTION 301. FEES
A. The governing body shall establish by resolution a Schedule of
fees and collection procedure to be paid by the subdivider at
the time of filing a Preliminary Plan in the case of a Major
Subdivision, and prior to Final Plan in the case of a Minor
Subdivision. The Schedule of Fees may be modified
periodically by the governing body.
B. The schedule of fees shall be obtained from the governing
body office, and shall be posted therein and in such other
places as the governing body may designate.
C. The applicant is also required to pay any review fees required
by the County Planning Commission, the County
Conservation District and any other reviewing agency.
D. Plans shall not be considered filed until all fees are paid and
the applications are properly signed as required.
E. If the governing body’s expenses associated with reviewing a
subdivision or land development exceed the total fees that
have been paid by an applicant, the applicant shall pay such
excess expenses prior to approval of the Final Plans by the
governing body.
F. There shall be no refund or credit of any portion of the fee
should the subdivider or land developer fail to apply for final
approval within the required period of time or if the Final Plan
covers only a section of the subdivision or land development
for which the Preliminary approval has been obtained.
G. If the Applicant disputes the fees, the applicant can appeal in
accordance with Section 503 and Section 510 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
SECTION 302. MODIFICATIONS
A. The provisions of this Ordinance are intended as minimum
standards for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare. The governing body may modify or extend said
provisions conditionally in individual cases as may be deemed
necessary in the public interest, provided however, that such
67
variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of this Ordinance. The list of such modifications and
the reasons therefore shall be entered in the minutes of the
meeting of the governing body pertaining thereto, and shall be
clearly defined and entered on the Final Plan.
B. The governing body, after receiving a written request for a
modification, including the grounds for such modification, and
after providing the Planning Commission with an opportunity
to provide a recommendation, shall have the power to pass a
written resolution to grant a waiver or modifications to the
specific requirements if this Ordinance, where the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the governing body that, owing to
special conditions, a waiver or modification is needed to:
1. avoid an undue hardship that was not self-created and that
would result because of the peculiar and uncommon
conditions pertaining to the land in question, or
2. avoid the imposition of a clearly unreasonable requirement
that would not serve any valid public purpose, or
3. allow an alternative standard that is clearly proven by the
applicant to provide equal or better results, or
4. allow a layout or improvements that would clearly be more
in the public interest than what would occur if the
modifications were not granted.
C. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made
in any plan of a subdivision after approval has been made by
the governing body and endorsed on the plan, unless the said
plan is resubmitted to and approved by the governing body.
SECTION 303. CHALLENGES. A landowner desiring to challenge the
validity of any provision of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereof, shall make
such challenge in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII of the Act of the
General Assembly No. 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988.
SECTION 304 RECONSIDERATION APPEAL
A. Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding, decision or
recommendation of the governing body’s Planning
Commission may request and shall receive an opportunity to
appear before the governing body’s Planning Commission to
present additional relevant information and request, in writing,
68
reconsideration of the original finding, decision or
recommendation.
B. Any person aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation
of the governing body’s Planning Commission may present to
the governing body any relevant information at the time the
governing body considers action on the subject plans.
C. Affirmative action by the governing body shall authorize the
subdivider to continue the application process from the point at
which it was interrupted.
D. Any person aggrieved by action of the governing body may
appeal within thirty (30) days of the Court of Common Pleas of
Schuylkill County, as provided in Section 512 of Article V of
the Act of the General Assembly No. 247 of 1968, as amended
by act 170 of 1988.
SECTION 305. PENALTIES
A. Preventive Remedies
1. In addition to other remedies, the governing bodies
may institute and maintain appropriate actions by law
or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to
prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and
to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the
process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the
seller or transformer from such penalties or the
remedies herein provided. This authority to deny such
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following
applicants:
2. The owner of record at the time of such violation.
3. The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time
of such violation without regard as to whether such
vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge
of the violation.
4. The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
69
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
5. The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record
who acquired the property subsequent to the time of
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or
lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the
violation.
As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the
granting of an approval to any such owner, current owner,
vendee or lessee for the development of any such real property,
the governing body may require compliance with the conditions
that would have been applicable to the property at the time the
applicant had an interest in such real property.
B. ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which
has violated of this Ordinance shall, upon being found
liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the governing body, pay a judgment of
not more than $600.00 plus all court costs, including
attorney fees incurred by the governing body as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the governing body may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the district
justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating the
Ordinance to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event, there shall be deemed to
have been only one violation by the district justice and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate violation.
2. The Court of Common Pleas, under petition, may grant
an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per
diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the
violation and judgment.
70
3. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or
interpreted to grant any person or entity other than the
ESP Region governing body
C. In addition to the penalties above, the governing body may
initiate and maintain civil action:
1. To obtain a writ of injunction against the owner or
agent who attempt the improper sale or conveyance of
land.
2. To set aside and invalidate any conveyances of land
made prior to Final Plan approval of any subdivision.
D. Nothing herein shall prevent the governing body from taking
such other action necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
SECTION 306. KEEPING OF RECORD. The governing body’s Planning
Commission and the governing body’s Board shall keep a record of their findings,
decisions and recommendations relative to all subdivision plans filed for review.
Such records shall be made available to the public for review.
SECTION 307. RESPONSIBILITY. The subdivider shall be responsible
for observing the procedures established in this Ordinance and for submitting all
plans and documents as may be required.
SECTION 308 CONFLICTS
A. Whenever there is a difference between the minimum
standards specified herein and those included on other official
regulations of the governing body, the most stringent
requirements shall apply.
B. All existing ordinances or parts of ordinances which are
contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full
force and effect.
B. Any revisions, modifications or amendments to these
regulations shall be made in accordance with the procedures
established by Section 505 of Article V of the General
Assembly No. 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988,
after a public hearing on the proposed revisions, modifications
or amendments.
71
SECTION 310. SEVERABILITY. It is hereby declared to be the
legislative intent that:
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this
Ordinance to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of
such decisions shall be limited to those provisions which are
expressly stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all
other provisions of this Ordinance shall continue to be separately and
fully effective.
B. The governing body hereby declare that they would have passed this
Ordinance and each section or part thereof irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections or parts thereof be declared invalid.
SECTION 311. STATE PLANNING CODE AMENDMENTS. The
provisions of this Ordinance that only repeat, summarize or reference provisions of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall be deemed to be automatically
superseded and replaced by any applicable amendments to the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
SECTION 312. ENACTMENT. Enacted and ordained by the Eastern
Schuylkill Planning Region (, Rush Township, Walker Township, Schuylkill
Township, Borough of Tamaqua), Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania,
ARTICLE IV – APPLICATION PROCEDURES
SECTION 401. GENERAL PROCEDURES
A. This Article provides an overview of the general procedures
for the application, submission, review and the approval of
proposed subdivision plans or land development plans within
the ESP Region.
B. All subdivision and land development plans within the ESP
Region shall be reviewed by the respective municipality’s
Planning Commission, the Schuylkill County Planning
Commission and other municipal, State or County officials as
deemed necessary, and shall be approved or disapproved by
the respective municipality’s governing body in accordance
with the procedures specified within this Article and within
other Sections of this Ordinance.
C. For all proposed subdivision and land development plans,
except those that qualify as Minor Subdivisions or Revised
72
Plans of Record, a Preliminary Plan and a Final Plan must be
submitted to the Township for review and approval. Those
plans exempted from this standard procedure shall comply
with the procedures identified under Sections 404 or 407 of
this Ordinance.
SECTION 402. JURISDICTION
A. The respective municipality’s governing body shall have
jurisdiction over subdivision and land development within the
municipality’s limits. In order to assist the governing body in
its consideration of subdivisions and land developments, the
governing body hereby decrees that the ESP Region
municipality’s Planning Commissions shall serve the
following functions:
1. All plans proposing subdivision or land development,
upon submission to the municipality shall be referred
to the Planning Commission for review.
2. The Planning Commission shall make
recommendations to the governing body concerning
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of such
plans.
3. The Planning Commission shall also make
recommendations to the governing body concerning
the interpretation of this Ordinance and the ESP
Regional Zoning Ordinance.
B. The municipality’s governing body shall consider the
recommendations offered by the Planning Commission prior
to taking action on any proposed subdivision or land
development plan.
SECTION 403. SKETCH PLAN APPLICATION AND REVIEW
A. Pre-plan Consultation
1. Prior submission of a Sketch Plan, applicants for larger
developments are encouraged to discus their intent
with the Zoning Officer and/or Municipal Planning
Commission.
2. The Municipality shall make available to developers
copies of this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, street
73
maps, and other related ordinances, maps and
information which may affect the development of the
property under question, provided that the developer
pay the customary charges for all requested
documents.
B. Sketch Plan Submission
1. Prior to the submission of a Preliminary Plan (or a
Final Plan where a Preliminary Plan is not required),
applicants are very strongly encouraged to submit a
Sketch Plan. A Sketch Plan review allows an applicant
to save substantial time and engineering costs by
resolving issues concerning layout and Municipal
regulations prior to detailed engineering.
2. A Sketch Plan shall be considered as an official
submission to the Township for the purposes of
informal review and discussion between the applicant
and the Township If a sketch plan is submitted, an
extra copy will be kept by the Planning Commission
for reference.
3. For maximum usefulness, Sketch Plans should contain
the information specified in Section 5:011.
C. Sketch Plan Review
1. The governing body’s Planning Commission shall
meet with the applicant and informally discuss the
conceptual suitability of the proposed development, its
relationship to existing streets and utilities, the
proposed arrangement and density of the development,
and the compatibility of the proposed Plan with the
Comprehensive Plan.
2. Based upon this meeting, the Planning Commission
shall inform the applicant of apparent deficiencies in
the plan, offer recommendations regarding changes or
modifications or recommend the submission of a
Preliminary Plan (or a Final Plan where a Preliminary
Plan is not required). The Planning Commission shall
take no formal action to either approve or disapprove a
Sketch Plan.
74
3. Due to the informal nature of a Sketch Plan
application, the recommendation of the Planning
Commission to submit a Preliminary Plan (or a Final
Plan) shall not be deemed to constitute an approval.
4. Neither the Planning Commission nor the governing
body shall be required to take any action with respect
to a Sketch Plan Review.
SECTION 404. MINOR SUBDIVISION
A. Classification
1. The proposed division of a parcel of land which
adjoins an existing public street and does not involve
the opening, widening, extension or improvement of
any street or the installation of any public utility
outside the frontage road, and includes all the
contiguous land under one ownership, shall be
considered a Minor Subdivision.
2. A Minor Subdivision shall result in no more than two
(2) residential lots; commercial or industrial uses shall
not qualify as Minor Subdivisions.
3. Where the sole purpose of the proposed plan is to
annex a lot or parcel to an adjacent lot or parcel, the
plan shall qualify as a Minor Subdivision.
B. Application
1. A Final Plan complying with the submission
requirements of Section 4:061 and the plan
requirements of Section 5:03 shall be prepared for a
Minor Subdivision.
2. All submissions shall be accompanied by the proper
application forms and review fees as determined by the
Municipality.
C. Review and Approval
The review and approval of a Final Plan for a Minor
Subdivision shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 4:062 and 4:063.
75
SECTION 405. PRELIMINARY PLAN APPLICATION AND
REVIEW
A. Preliminary Plan Submission
1. The applicant shall submit then (10) complete copies
of the proposed Preliminary Plan and ten (10) copies
reduced to 11” x 17” to the Planning Commission.
Plans must be submitted for review on or before the
15th of the month prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting of the Planning Commission. In no event
shall plans be submitted less than ten (10) business
days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning Commission.
2. All submissions shall be accompanied by the proper
application forms and review fees as determined by the
Township.
3. When required, the applicant shall be responsible for
submitting the plan to the Schuylkill County
Conservation District, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and all pertinent reviewing
bodies, as specified by this Ordinance or required by
law.
4. No applications shall be deemed filed and accepted for
review until all supplementary data, reports, and
studies as may be required under Articles IV and V
have been received, application fees have been fully
paid, and any other requirements for submission
specified herein have been met.
B. Preliminary Plan Review
1. The Municipal Engineer shall review the Preliminary
Plan to determine its conformance to the ESP Region
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. The Municipal Engineer
may recommend changes, alterations or modifications,
as he may deem necessary. The report of the
Municipal Engineer shall be in writing and shall be
submitted to the Municipal Planning Commission prior
to the regularly scheduled or special meeting at which
the Preliminary Plan is to be considered by the
Municipal Planning Commissions.
76
2. When a Preliminary Plan has been officially accepted
for review by the Municipality, the Municipality shall
forward two (2) complete copies of the proposed Plan
to the Schuylkill County Planning Commission for
their review and comment. Failure of the Schuylkill
County Planning Commission to act within the time
allowed by law shall constitute a waiver of their right
to review the Plan as submitted and the Municipality
may officially act on the basis of such a waiver.
3. When a Preliminary Plan has been officially accepted
for review by the Municipality, such Plan shall be
reviewed by the Municipal Planning Commission at its
next regularly scheduled meeting, or at the discretion
of the Planning Commission, at a special meeting.
During the review of the Preliminary Plan, the
Municipal Planning Commission shall consider any
written reports of the Municipal Engineer, Municipal
Solicitor, Municipal Zoning Officer, Municipal Code
Enforcement Officer, the Schuylkill County Planning
Commission, and other designated agencies or
authorities, before rendering its decision on the
proposed Preliminary Plan.
4. Upon completion of its review, the Planning
Commission shall promptly submit its
recommendations to the governing body for their
consideration. This recommendation shall be
forwarded to the governing body within ninety (90)
days from the date of the Preliminary Plan was
officially accepted for review by the Township.
5. During the course of the Planning Commission review
of the Preliminary Plan and prior to any action by the
governing body within the required ninety (90) day
period, the proposed Preliminary Plan may be revised
by the applicant. Upon the submission of a revised
Plan the applicant shall sign a statement withdrawing
any previously submitted Plans from consideration and
a new ninety (90) day time period for formal review
and notification shall commence from the date of
submission of the revised Plan. The revised Plans
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission in
accordance with Section 4:051.
77
C. Preliminary Plan Approval
1. Following the review of the Preliminary Plan and any
accompanying data by the Municipal Engineer,
Municipal Solicitor, Municipal Zoning Officer,
Municipal Code Enforcement Officer, Municipal
Planning Commission, Schuylkill County Planning
Commission, the Municipal governing body shall
approve, approve with conditions, or reject the
proposed Preliminary Plan. Conditions for approval
must be clearly stated in writing. If rejected, the
Municipal governing body shall specify the reasons for
rejection, including citation of or reference to the
pertinent sections of this and/or other ESP Region
Ordinances.
2. The governing body shall notify the subdivider or his
agent of the action taken by the governing body within
ninety (90) days of the Planning Commission
accepting a Preliminary Plan for review. This review
period may be extended by mutual agreement of the
applicant and the Municipality.
3. Approval or approval with conditions of a Preliminary
Plan shall not constitute approval of the Final Plan.
Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval of
the layout shown on the Preliminary Plan as a guide to
the preparation of the Final Plan. The Final Plan must
also be reviewed and approved by the Municipality as
outlined under Section 4:06 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 406. FINAL PLAN APPLICATION AND REVIEW
A. Final Plan Submission
1. Within one (1) year of receiving approval or approval
with conditions of a Preliminary Plan, the applicant
shall submit to the Municipal Planning Commission
ten (10) complete copies of the Final Plan, ten (10)
copies reduced to 11” x 17” and all supplementary data
as required within this Ordinance. Plans must be
submitted for review on or before the 15th of the month
prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Municipal
Planning Commission. In no event shall plans be
submitted less than ten (10) business days prior to a
78
regularly scheduled meeting of the Municipal Planning
Commission.
2. All submissions shall be accompanied by the proper
application forms and review fees as determined by the
Municipality.
3. When required, the applicant shall be responsible for
submitting the plan to the Schuylkill County
Conservation District, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and all pertinent reviewing
body or bodies, as specified by this Ordinance or
required by law.
4. No application shall be deemed filed and accepted for
review until any supplementary data, reports, and
studies as may be required under Article IV through
VII (including revisions required during the
Preliminary Plan review) have been received,
application fees have been fully paid, and any other
requirements for submission specified herein have
been met.
5. At the discretion of the Township, additional copies of
the proposed Final Plan may be requested from the
applicant for review and comment.
B. Final Plan Review
1. The Municipal Engineer shall review the proposed
Final Plan to determine its conformity to the ESP
Region Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. The Municipal Engineer
may recommend changes, alterations or modifications,
as he may deem necessary. The report of the
Municipal Engineer shall be in writing and shall be
submitted to the Municipal Planning Commission prior
to the regularly scheduled or special meeting at which
the Final Plan is to be considered by the Municipal
Planning Commission.
2. If required, the Municipality shall forward two (2)
complete copies of the proposed Final Plan to the
Schuylkill County Planning Commission for their
review and comment. Failure of the Schuylkill County
Planning Commission to act within the time allowed
79
by law constitute a waiver of their right to review the
Plan as submitted and the Municipality may officially
act on the basis of such a waiver.
3. When a Final Plan has been officially accepted for
review by the Municipality, such Plan shall be
reviewed by the Municipal Planning Commission at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. During the review
of the Final Plan, the Municipal Planning Commission
shall consider any written reports of the Municipal
Engineer, Municipal Solicitor, Municipal Zoning
Officer, Municipal Code Enforcement Officer,
Schuylkill County Planning Commissions, and other
designated agencies or authorities, before rendering its
final decision on the proposed Final Plan.
4. Upon completion of its review, the Planning
Commission shall promptly submit its
recommendations to the Municipal governing body
within the required ninety (90) days from the date the
Final Plan was officially accepted for review by the
Municipality.
5. During the course of the Planning Commission review
of the Final Plan and prior to any action by the
governing body within the required 90 day period, the
proposed Final Plan may be revised by the applicant as
directed by the Municipal Planning Commission.
Upon submission of a revised plan the applicant shall
sign a statement withdrawing and previously submitted
plans from consideration and a new ninety (90) day
time period for normal review and notification shall
commence from the date of submission of the revised
plan. The revised Plans shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission in accordance with Section
406(A).
C. Final Plan Approval
1. Following review of the proposed Final Plan and the
accompanying data by the Municipal Engineer,
Municipal Solicitor, Schuylkill County Planning
Commission, Municipal Planning Commission, and
governing body shall approve, approve with
conditions, or reject the Final Plan.
80
2. Any conditions for approval must be clearly stated in
writing. If the plan is rejected, the governing body
shall specify the reasons for rejection, including
citation of or reference to the pertinent Sections of this
and other Municipal Ordinances. Copies of the
statement shall be forwarded to the applicant and all
concerned parties no more than fifteen (15) days
following the decision.
3. The governing body shall notify the subdivider or his
agent of the action taken by the Supervisors within
ninety (90) days of the Planning Commission
accepting a Final Plan for review. This review period
may be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant
and the Municipality.
4. All pertinent agreements, contracts, fees, deeds of
dedication and contributions shall be satisfactorily
completed and/or executed by the applicant prior to
municipal approval.
SECTION 407. REVISED PLAN OF RECORD
A. Any revision, replotting or re-subdivision of land which
includes changes to a Recorded Plan shall be considered a
subdivision and shall comply with al regulations within this
Ordinance, except that:
1. Lot lines may be changed from those on a Recorded
Plan, provided that in making such changes:
i. No lot or tract of land shall be created or sold that is
smaller than the minimum dimensions required by the
ESP Region Zoning Ordinance.
ii. Easements of rights-of-way shall not be changed.
iii. Street locations and block sizes shall not be changed.
iv. No lot shall be created which does not abut an existing
or proposed public street.
v. Open space and recreational areas shall not be reduced.
B. In every case wherein lot lines are changed as permitted
above, the applicant shall:
1. Prepare and submit a Revised Plan of Record to the
Township for review and approval. The Revised Plan
of Record shall be submitted and prepared in
81
accordance with the Final Plan requirements of
Sections 4:061 and 5:03 of this Ordinance.
2. The Revised Plan of Record shall specifically identify
the previous Plan of Record superceded and shall also
contain the record references.
3. The review and approval of a Revised Plan of Record
shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section
406(B) and 406(C).
4. After the Revised Plan of Record has been approved
by the Municipality, the applicant shall then record the
new plan in accordance with this Ordinance.
SECTION 408. LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS
A. A “Land Development Plan” shall comply with the standard
review procedures of this Ordinance.
B. Occasionally situations involving only one lot may arise
whereby it is unclear whether or not a Land-Development Plan
is required by the Ordinance. In this event the developer may
present information regarding the development to the Planning
Commission. The information shall be sufficient to illustrate
the type and extent of the development and the potential
impact of the proposal upon traffic, stormwater management,
sewage disposal, water supply, and similar concerns. The
Planning Commission shall review the information and make
a recommendation to the governing body as to whether or not
the Land Development procedures of this Ordinance should be
followed. The Planning Commission may wish to consult the
Municipal Engineer and Solicitor prior to making its
recommendation. The governing body shall, after
consideration of the Planning Commission’s recommendation,
make the final decision as to whether or not a Land
Development Plan will be required.
SECTION 409. APPROVAL AND RECORDING OF PLANS
A. After completion of the procedures required within this
Ordinance the Municipal Planning Commission shall place
their endorsements on at least eight (8) copies of the Plan
which is to be recorded. The Plans shall be dated and signed
by at least a majority of the members on the Planning
Commission.
82
B. After the completion of the procedures required within the
Ordinance the Municipality’s governing body shall place their
endorsements on at least eight (8) copies of the Plan which is
to be recorded. The Plans shall be dated, sealed and signed by
at least a majority of the governing body.
C. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made
to any Subdivision or Land Development Plan after the Plan
has been approved by the Municipality, unless the Plan has
been resubmitted to the Municipality for review as required
within this Ordinance. Any such changes, erasures,
modifications or revisions shall render any prior approval of
the Plan null and void.
D. After the Plan has been properly endorsed by the
Municipality, the applicant shall submit the Plans to the
Schuylkill County Planning Commission for their
endorsement. No Plan may be legally recorded unless it has
been properly endorsed by the Municipality, the Schuylkill
County Planning Commission and complies with all the
recording requirements of the Schuylkill County Recorder of
Deeds Office.
E. After the Plan has been properly endorsed by the Municipality
and the Schuylkill County Planning Commission, the
applicant shall record the Plans with the Schuylkill County
Recorder of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date the Plan
was endorsed by the Municipality. If the applicant fails to
record the Plan within the ninety (90) day time period, the
action of the Municipality will become null and void.
F. After the Plan has been recorded, the applicant shall provide
the Municipality with one (1) certified copy of the Recorded
Plan.
ARTICLE V – PLAN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 501. SKETCH PLANS
A. The scale and sheet size of the Sketch Plan of a subdivision
shall be as required in Section 502 for Preliminary Plans. The
Sketch Plan shall contain at least the following data, legibly
drawn to scale but necessarily showing precise dimensions.
1. Tract boundaries.
2. North Point.
83
3. Written and graphic scales.
4. Significant topographical and physical features (i.e.,
water bodies, quarries, steep slopes, etc.)
5. Proposed general street and lot layout.
6. A location map with sufficient information to enable
the Planning Commission to locate the property.
7. General site data including acres of entire tract and
number of proposed lots.
8. Tax map identification PIN number.
SECTION 502. PRELIMINARY PLANS. A Preliminary Plan application
shall not be considered complete unless all provisions specified under Section
405(A) have been completed and all information required below has been
provided.
A. The Preliminary Plan of a proposed Major Subdivision shall
be clearly and legibly drawn to a minimum scale of one (1)
inch equals fifty (50) feet with all dimensions shown in feet
and hundredths of a foot except that:
1. If the average size of the proposed lots in the
subdivision is five (5) acres or larger, the plan shall be
drawn to minimum scale of one (1) inch equals one
hundred (100) feet, or
2. if the subdivision proposes lots with an average
frontage of less than fifty (50) feet, the plan shall be
drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20)
feet.
B. The original drawing, and all submitted copies thereof, shall
be made on sheets twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36)
inches.
C. If the Preliminary Plan requires more than one sheet, a key
diagram showing relative locations of the several sections
shall be drawn on each sheet.
D. The Preliminary Plan shall show:
1. Name of proposed subdivision, or otherwise
identifying title, and of the Township,
2. north point, graphic scale, written scale, and date,
including month, day and year that the original
drawing was revised, for each revision,
84
3. name and address of record owner (and subdivider),
4. name, address, license number and seal of the
Professional Land Surveyor responsible for the
subdivision plan, or any part thereof,
5. names of all abutting subdivisions, if any, with the plan
book and page numbers where recorded, and the names
of owners of all adjacent unplatted land, if any, and the
deed book and page numbers where recorded,
6. a key map for the purpose of locating the property
being subdivided, drawn to a scale of one (1) inch
equals eight hundred (800) feet and showing the
relation of the property, differentiated by tone or
pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads,
municipal and zoning district boundaries and
watercourses within one thousand (1,000) feet of the
subdivisions. In addition, a scale and a north pointer
shall be indicated,
7. total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided,
showing bearings, distances, and a statement of total
acreage of the property.
8. Zoning data, including the following:
9. applicable lot area, width, lot coverage, height
regulations and minimum yard requirements,
10. existing and proposed zoning district boundary lines,
11. countour lines at vertical intervals of no more than two
(2) feet for land with an average natural slope of four
(4) percent or less, and at intervals of no more than
five (5) feet for land with an average natural slope
exceeding four (4) percent. The countours shall be
based upon a field or photogrametric procedure at a
scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or
larger,
12. location and elevation of the datum to which contour
elevations refer; where reasonably practicable, datum
used shall be known, established benchmark,
85
13. identification of any areas with slopes between fifteen
(15) percent and twenty five (25) percent and slopes
greater than twenty five (25) percent,
14. the complete parcel identification number (from the
Schuylkill County Tax Maps) for the tract being
subdivided,
15. all existing sewer lines, water lines, wells, fire
hydrants, utility transmission lines, easements and
rights of way, culverts, bridges, railroads,
watercourses, flood plain areas based on one hundred
(100) year storm and other significant manmade or
natural features within the proposed subdivision and
within one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries of the
proposed subdivision.
16. approximate locations and names of soil types,
17. areas of hydric soils, or soils with hydric components
(see Schuylkill County Soil Survey) and wetlands
located on the tract being subdivided along with
notations regarding restrictions upon their use as well
as the appropriate buffer zone as required under
Section 610,
18. all existing buildings or other structures, and the
approximate location of all existing tree masses and/or
individual trees over eight (8) inches in diameter
within the proposed subdivision,
19. all existing streets, including streets of record
(recorded but no constructed), on or abutting the tract,
including names, right-of-way widths, cartway
(pavement) widths and approximate grades.
20. All recording information if the property was
previously subdivided,
21. The full plan of the proposed development including:
22. location and width of all streets and rights-of-way with
a statement of any conditions governing their use,
23. clear sight triangles at all intersections
86
24. suggested street names and all public utility and
private easement locations,
25. building reserve (setback) lines along each street,
and/or the proposed placement of each building,
26. lot lines with approximate dimensions,
27. approximate net and gross lot areas,
28. a statement of intended use of all lots and parcels,
29. lot numbers and a statement of the total number of lots
and parcels,
30. sanitary and/or storm sewers (and other drainage
facilities), with the location, size, elevation and
material of each indicated, and any proposed
connections with existing facilities,
31. underground natural gas, electrical, telephone, cable tv
and any other proposed utility lines and easements for
such utilities,
32. well locations, including test wells required under
Section 6:074, along with the following notation: “Any
well intended to be utilized for an individual on-lot
water supply for any lot shown on this plan shall be
installed at the location indicated. Any deviation from
this location must have prior approval of the
Municipality.”
33. parks, playgrounds and other areas dedicated or
reserved for public use, with any conditions governing
such use.
34. location of soil percolation test holes as may be
required by Section 5:04,
35. a list of waivers or modifications requested to the
requirements of this Ordinance and any variances or
special exceptions granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
36. Street addresses for each lot shall be shown on the
plan. Addresses shall conform to the requirements of
87
the 911 emergency system and otherwise be consistent
with the existing street address system in the
Municipality.
E. The Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by the following
supplementary data as applicable:
1. Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed
streets,
2. Tentative profiles along centerline of each proposed
street shown on the Preliminary Plan. Such profiles
shall show natural and finished grades drawn at a ten
(10) to one (1) exaggeration following the scale of the
original subdivision plan.
3. Profiles shall show all vertical curve data including
length, elevations and minimum sight distance as
required by Section 603(F). Profiles shall also show
all existing and proposed utilities located within the
road right-of-way including but not limited to water
mains, storm sewer and sanitary sewer lines, with
stationing, elevations (inverts and tops), lengths,
slopes, material, sizes etc., and all line crossings of
other utilities,
4. Detail drawings and/or construction notations for the
following, where applicable:
i. Drainage swale cross-sections and construction
materials,
ii. Pipe bedding materials,
iii. Storm drainage structures, including any
detention basin outlet structure and emergency
spillway,
iv. Sanitary sewer structures,
v. Curb and sidewalk details,
vi. Landscaping details,
5. If the submitted plans do not include all undeveloped
adjacent or abutting lands owned by the same
landowner or under the control of the same developer,
then the Planning Commission may require that a
Sketch Plan be submitted at an appropriate scale
covering all holdings. The Sketch Plan should include
a reasonable future street system to demonstrate that
88
the proposed subdivision provides for the orderly
development of any residual lands and/or does not
adversely affect their potential development,
6. Where deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer, a
plan for grading and stormwater management on the
tract being subdivided. The plan shall show all
information required under Section 502(F) and shall
meet all design requirements of Section 608,
7. Where deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer,
an Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan for the
proposed development. The plan shall provide all
information required under Section 502(G) and shall
meet all design requirements of Section 609,
8. Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which
may be required. Such designs shall meet all
applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania
Departments of Transportation and Environmental
Protection.
9. A traffic Impact Study when required by Section
502(H).
10. A Hydrogeologic Study when required by Section
502(I).
11. When required, six (6) completed copies of the
appropriate Planning Modules for Land Development
for submittal to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. The Planning Modules
must be reviewed and approved by DEP prior to
municipal approval of the Final Plan.
F. Stormwater Management Plan
1. Stormwater Management Plans shall be prepared in
accordance with design requirements of Section 6:08.
2. The following information shall be provided either on
the plans or in the calculations:
i. existing and proposed storm drainage facilities
or structures, including detention basins (with
89
depth and capacity), swales, pipes (with
sizes), culverts and inlets,
ii. watershed areas for each drainage structure or
swale,
iii. locations and widths of any proposed or
existing stormwater easements,
iv. intended design year standards for culverts,
bridges, structures and other stormwater
facilities,
v. locations of all underground utilities,
vi. entity responsible to maintain/own any
detention basin or other facilities to be located
outside of public road rights-of-way,
vii. existing contour lines,
viii. proposed contour lines for lots, roads and
drainage facilities,
ix. stationing of any storm sewers, corresponding
to profile stationing,
x. any other information required to be provided
by Section.
G. Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control Plans
1. Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control Plans
shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section
609.
2. All proposed facilities and procedures shall comply
with the regulations and standards of the County
Conservation District and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
3. The plan shall consist of drawings showing locations
and types of all proposed measures along with a
narrative describing their function, construction,
maintenance and sequence of installation.
H. Traffic Impact Study
1. The submittal of a Traffic Impact Study will allow the
Municipality to determine the safety and congestion
impacts of proposed major traffic generating uses.
2. Applicants will be required to respond with reasonable
proposals to resolve the negative traffic impacts that
their proposed uses will cause on the public.
90
3. The submittal of a Preliminary Plan for any of the
following uses may require the completion of a Traffic
Impact Study and the submittal of the findings in a
written report when deemed necessary by the
Municipal Planning Commission:
i. Residential: 10 or more dwelling units,
ii. Non-Residential 20,000 square feet or more of
total floor area,
iii. Wherever the Municipality determines that a
proposed use will generate volumes or types of
traffic that could negatively impact upon the
existing street system within the Municipality,
v. Wherever the Municipality determines that
there is a clear, existing, substantial traffic
problem within close proximity of the proposed
project which would likely be significantly
worsened by the proposal.
4. The costs of completing the study and of review by the
Municipality shall be borne by the applicant.
5. The Traffic Impact Study shall be prepared by a
qualified professional traffic engineer or traffic planner
designated or approved by the Municipality with
verifiable experience in preparing such studies.
6. The Traffic Impact Study shall address the following
elements:
i. Study Area. The study area for the Traffic
Impact Study shall be based on engineering
judgment and an understanding of existing
traffic conditions at the site and shall represent
the area which is likely to be affected by the
development. Prior to initiation of the study,
the traffic engineer or planner shall meet with
the Municipal Engineer to establish the limits
of the area to be studied.
ii. Project Description. Any study shall include a
description of the proposed development, its
proposed access and the surrounding street
system. If a development is proposed to occur
91
in stages, all stages shall be described and taken
into account in the study.
iii. Existing Traffic Conditions. The traffic
volumes and service levels during the three
peak hour conditions (A.M., P.M. and site
generated) shall be presented for all streets and
intersections in the study area that can
reasonably be expected to be significantly
impacted. Traffic volumes shall be based upon
actual counts that occurred within the prior two
years, and not upon state estimates. Schematic
diagrams depicting peak hour(s) traffic
volumes and turning movements shall be
presented for roadways within the study are.
Assessments of the relative balance between
roadway volumes and capacities are to be
described. The analysis shall be performed for
existing conditions (roadway geometry and
traffic signal control) for the appropriate peak
hours. The locations of all accidents reported
to the Police within the study area during the
most recent two year period shall be noted.
iv. Expected Traffic Generation. The study shall
include an estimate of the traffic volumes
expected to be generated by the use and any
future stages during the three peak hour
conditions. Such estimates shall be based upon
the latest published estimates of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, or its successor
entities. The study preparer shall clearly
indicate the methods and assumptions used to
forecast future traffic volumes. Schematic
diagrams, similar to those required for existing
conditions, shall depict future traffic volumes.
v. Projected Effects. The ability of the existing
roadway system to accommodate the future
traffic shall be described. The study shall take
into account not only the proposed use by the
applicant, but also other uses and developments
that have received building permits or
preliminary subdivision or land development
92
approval from a municipality. Future levels of
service shall be determined for all affected
streets and intersections in the study area. The
study shall include the projected directions of
generated traffic. Assessments of the relative
balance between roadway volumes and
capacities shall be performed for future
conditions.
vi. Levels of Service. The study shall use the
description of the levels of service (A,B,C,D,E
and F), for streets and intersections established
by the US Department of Transportation.
Included shall be a description of typical
operating conditions at each service level.
vii. Signal Warrants. Heavily traveled intersections
at entrances to the development and other
major unsignalized intersections in the study
area shall be studied to determine whether a
traffic signal is warranted by Penn DOT
criteria.
viii. Needed Improvements. The study shall include
suggestions on how each congested or
hazardous intersection in the study area should
be improved to reduce the hazard or
congestion, and a rough estimate of the costs of
that improvement.
ix. Applicants Proposal. The applicant shall
respond to the traffic study with proposals on
what traffic improvements, right-of-way
dedications or commitments of financing for
specific projects the applicant proposes to
commit to resolve the negative traffic impacts
of the proposed development. Such
improvements or financing may be staged in
relation to the stages of the development.
x. Completion of Improvements. Any traffic
improvements, including but not limited to
traffic signals, that are required as a condition
of any approval under this Ordinance shall be
93
in place or sufficient funds committed by the
developer in escrow acceptable to the
Municipality prior to the issuance of any
needed occupancy permit, or within a staged
process agreed upon at the time of approval.
I. Hydrogeologic Impact Study
1. Based upon the recommendation of the Municipal
Engineer, the Planning Commission may require an
applicant to provide a study to determine whether a
proposed project would have significant negative
impact upon groundwater quality or quantity.
2. A Hydrogeologic Study may be required for any of the
following uses:
i. Residential: 6 or more dwelling units,
ii. Whenever the Municipality determines that a
proposed use could negatively impact upon
groundwater quality or quantity.
3. The study shall be completed by a qualified engineer
or hydrogeologist.
4. The study shall include the following:
i. a map showing the location of the site and
proposed on-site sewage disposal systems and
wells. Narrative descriptions of the types of
these systems shall also be furnished,
ii. a description of the geologic conditions on and
around the site, including factors which would
affect the groundwater recharge rate and the
degree of groundwater renovation. Site
geology, including sratigraphy, structure and
soils shall be analyzed. Hydrogeology,
including aquifer characteristics, groundwater
movement, local water use, aquifer yield and
water quality shall be analyzed. Groundwater
impacts, including impact from on-lot septic
systems, availability of groundwater, well
interference, water quality, and yield
availability shall be analyzed,
94
iii. results of any test wells required under Section
607(D), including quality of water and flow
rate,
iv. a map and narrative description of the area that
will be affected by the proposed use of on-lot
wells and sewage disposal systems determined
from the surface topography and known
geologic conditions. The analysis shall
describe anticipated water quality/quantity
impacts upon areas located downgradient
and/or among any geologic strike or fault.
These anticipated impacts shall also consider
existing and potential land uses located within
the affected area,
v. should it be determined that the proposed use(s)
would result in a degradation of groundwater
quality, or eliminate the potential groundwater
use at nearby properties, the study shall present
measures that will-be employed to prevent this.
SECTION 503. FINAL PLANS
A. The scale and sheet size of the Final Plan of a subdivision
shall be as required in Sections 502(A) and 502(B) for
Preliminary Plans.
B. If the Final Plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram
showing relative locations of the several sections shall be
drawn on each sheet.
C. The Final Plan shall show all information required to be
shown on Preliminary Plans as listed under Section 502 and
shall show the following:
1. Name and address of the record owner (and
Subdivider) of the tract, and the source(s) of title to the
land being subdivided, including the date and name of
the grantor(s), as shown on the records of the County
Recorder of Deeds.
2. Name, address, original signature and impression seal
of the Professional Land Surveyor responsible for the
plan, or any part thereof.
3. A key map for the purpose of locating the property
being subdivided, drawn to scale of one (1) inch equals
95
eight hundred (800) feet and showing the relation of
the property, differentiated by tone or pattern, to
adjoining property and to all streets, roads and
municipal and zoning district boundaries and
watercourses within one thousand (1,000) feet of the
subdivision. In addition, a scale and north point shall
be indicated,
4. The total tract boundaries of the area being subdivided
with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of
foot and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.
These boundaries shall be determined by accurate
survey in the field, which shall be balanced and closed
with an error of closure not to exceed one (1) foot in
ten thousand (10,000) feet; provided, however, that the
boundaries of adjoining additional unplatted land in
excess of ten (10) acres are not required to be based
upon field survey with a positional closure of a “Class
1” survey as established by the Pennsylvania Society
of Land Surveyors, and may be shown from deed
information. The location and elevation, if established,
of all boundary line (perimeter) monuments shall be
indicated, along with a statement of the total area of
the property being subdivided,
5. The name, number, cartway width, existing and
proposed right-of-way widths for all existing and
proposed streets,
6. The following data for the cartway edges (curb lines)
and right-of-way lines of all proposed streets, and for
the ultimate right-of-way lines of all existing streets
within the property,
i. the lengths of all straight lines in feet and
hundredths of a foot,
ii. all curve data (central angle, radius, arc length)
in degrees, minutes and seconds or feet and
hundredths of a foot,
7. All straight lot lines with dimensions in feet and
hundredths of a foot and bearings in degrees, minutes
and seconds. Curved lot lines shall have central
angles, radii and arc lengths in degrees, minutes and
seconds or feet and hundredths of a foot. Each lot
96
shall be balanced to an accuracy of one (1) foot in
twenty-five thousand (25,000) feet.
8. Lot numbers (numbered consecutively), street address
numbers as assigned by the Municipal governing body
and total number of lots (parcels).
9. A statement of the intended use of all non residential
lots, with reference to restrictions of any type which
exist or will exist as covenants in the deed for the lots
contained in the Subdivision and, if recorded,
including the book and page number in the County
Deed Book.
10. The proposed building setback line for each lot, or the
placement of each building in other than single family
lot developments, in accordance with Zoning
ordinance requirements.
11. The location (and elevation, if established) of all
existing and proposed street monuments as required by
Section 703(H),
12. All easements or rights-of-way where provided for or
owned by public services and any limitations on such
easements or rights-of-way. Such easements and
rights-of-way shall be accurately identified and shown
on the plan with sufficient information to accurately
and complete reproduce on the ground,
13. A list of any waivers or modifications requested to the
requirements of this Ordinance and any variances or
special exceptions granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board.,
14. If the subdivision proposes new street or driveway
intersections with a State Route, or proposes
improvements within the right-of-way of a State
Route, the Highway Occupancy Permit number(s) shall
be indicated on the plan. The Municipality should be
provided with a copy of all such permits.
15. Where appropriate, a statement requiring that
individual lot owners obtain approval for erosion and
sedimentation pollution control prior to obtaining any
97
building permits or performing any earth-moving on
the site,
16. A certification of ownership, acknowledgement of plan
and offer of dedication shall lettered on the plan, using
the form specified in the Appendix and shall be duly
acknowledged and signed by the owner(s) of the
property before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgement of deeds,
17. Certificates of approval of the plan by the Municipal
Governing Body and the Municipal Planning
Commission.
18. A blank space measuring three and one-half by five (3-
1/2 x 5) inches square shall be left, preferably adjacent
to the Municipal certification, in which the appropriate
stamp of the County Planning Commission may be
applied,
19. A blank space measuring three (3) inches square shall
be left along the lower edge of the sheet, in order that
the Recorder of Deeds may acknowledge receipt and
recording of the plan when it is presented.
20. All information in the format required by the
Schuylkill County Recorded of Deeds. This
information is available from that office and office of
the Schuylkill County Planning Commission.
D. The Final Plan shall be accompanied by the following
Supplementary data, where applicable:
1. Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed
streets,
2. Profiles along centerlines and cross sections of each
proposed street shown on the Final Plan. The profiles
shall show all information required for Preliminary
Plans under Section 502(E)(2) and shall be drawn to
the scale specified in that Section. Both profiles and
cross sections shall show natural and finished grades
along both cartway edges of each street,
3. All offers of dedication, and covenants governing the
reservation and maintenance of undedicated open
98
space, which shall be reviewed by the Municipal
Solicitor.
4. Such private deed restrictions, including building
setback lines, as may be imposed upon the property as
a condition of sale, together with a statement of any
restrictions previously imposed which may affect the
title to the land being subdivided,
5. Letter of adequacy from the County Conservation
District for the proposed erosion and sedimentation
control plan, and a copy of the NPDES permit, where
required,
6. Copies of all required permits from the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, including but
not limited to wetland and flood plain encroachments,
watercourse obstructions and dam permits,
7. Landscape plan, when required by the Municipality,
showing the number, location, size and species of all
shrubbery and vegetation that will be planted.
8. Final designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required. Such designs shall meet all applicable
requirements of this ordinance, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. All such
designs shall be approved by the appropriate agency
prior to municipal approval,
9. Development Agreement and Performance Guarantee
in accordance with the requirements of Article VII,
SECTION 504. SOIL PERCOLATION TEST REQUIREMENTS
A. Soil probes and percolation tests shall be performed for both a
primary and an alternate sewage disposal system site on each
lot of all subdivisions wherein buildings at the time of
construction will not be connected to an active public or active
community sanitary sewer disposal system.
B. Soil descriptions and percolation tests shall be performed in
accordance with the procedures and requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, as
amended.
99
C. The results of the test shall be recorded on the appropriate
DEP form and shall be submitted with the Preliminary Plan.
D. The soil percolation tests must be performed at the exact
location of the proposed drain field. The test holes must be
spaced evenly throughout the area of the drainfield.
ARTICLE VI – DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION 601. APPLICATION
A. The standards and requirements contained in Articles VI and
VII are intended as the minimum for the promotion of the
public health, safety and welfare, and shall be applied as such
by the Municipal Planning Commission and the Municipal
governing body in reviewing all subdivision plans.
B. Whenever other Municipal regulations impose more restrictive
standards and requirements than those contained herein, such
other regulations shall prevail; otherwise, the standards and
requirements of these regulations shall apply.
SECTION 602. GENERAL STANDARDS
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is intended to
be subdivided or developed, as determined by Municipal
ordinances, Municipal governing body, or any other applicable
regulatory agencies.
B. Land subject to hazards to life, health or property (such as
open quarries, limestone solution channels, unconsolidated
fill, floods, vacant buildings, trash, miscellaneous debris,
buildings within rights-of-way, excessive erosion, unsafe
water supply, or other causes) shall not be subdivided for
building purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or
unless the subdivision plan shall show adequate safeguards
against them, which shall be approved by the appropriate
regulatory agency and the Municipal Planning Commission.
C. The subdivision or land development shall be designed in
consideration of any applicable provisions of the Municipal
Comprehensive Plan.
100
D. All aspects of the proposed subdivision or land development
shall conform to the ESP Regional Zoning Ordinance and all
other regional and municipal ordinances and specifications.
E. No subdivision or land development shall occur in such a way
that would significantly threaten the public health and safety,
including hazards of toxic substances, traffic hazards,
explosive hazards and fire hazards. The Municipality may
require that structures, material, or other features that are fire
or safety hazards be removed or made safe, at the discretion of
the Municipality, prior to Final approval of a plan.
F. Land with non-conforming uses shall not be subdivided.
nd for
G. Approval of plans and specifications provided within this
Ordinance shall be of equal force and effect. In the case of
any discrepancy between the plans and these specifications,
the decision of the Municipality, or its authorized
representative shall be final and conclusive as to which is
preferred.
SECTION 603. STREETS
A. General Standards
1. All proposed subdivisions and land developments shall
have adequate and safe access to the public street
system.
2. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the
land to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable
gradient.
3. The location and width of all streets shall conform to
the “official plans” or to such parts thereof as may
have been adopted by the Municipality.
4. As subdivision or land development and its street
pattern shall be coordinated with existing or proposed
nearby developments or neighborhoods or help
develop the area harmoniously and to help prevent
conflicts between neighboring development. The
proposed street system shall extend existing or
recorded streets at the same width, but in no case less
than the required minimum width.
101
5. Where, in opinion of the Municipal Planning
Commission, it is desirable to provide street access to
adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended
to the boundary line of the tract being subdivided to
eventually provide for normal circulation of traffic
within the vicinity.
6. Where a subdivision abuts an existing street of
improper width or alignment, the Municipality may
require the dedication of land sufficient to widen the
street or correct the alignment.
7. Private streets (streets not offered for dedication) are
prohibited.
8. Where a proposed subdivision or land development is
of sufficient size to warrant an interior circulation
system, a clear hierarchy of streets shall be designed
and established.
9. Proposed streets shall be laid out to avoid
environmentally sensitive areas such as flood plains,
wetlands, sinkholes and steep slopes.
10. New half or partial streets shall be prohibited.
11. When internal streets or roads serve a lot in a
subdivision, access to that lot must be from the internal
street or road, unless approved by the Planning
Commission.
B. Loop Roads
1. Where practical, minor streets shall be designed as
“loop roads” so that all abutting lots shall have two
directions of access.
2. In areas where site topography and/or tract
configuration hinder the design of “loop minor
streets”, the Municipality may allow the use of cul-desac
streets. The number of such cul-de-sac streets
within a subdivision shall be limited to that necessary
to serve the areas having the topographic or tract
restrictions. All cul-de-sac streets shall meet the
design requirements of Section 603(I).
C. Street Widths
102
1. Street right of way and cartway (pavement) widths
shall be shown on the “official plans” of
Comprehensive Plan, or if not shown on such plans,
shall be as follows:
Right of Way Cartway
Street Type: width (in feet) width (in feet)
Local Street 50 20
Minor Collector Street 60 30
Major Collector Street see note 1 see note 1
Cul-de-sac Street (note 4) 50 20
NOTES:
i. As specified in the “official plans”, or Comprehensive Plan, or
as determined by the Municipality.
ii. When a tract to be subdivided or developed abuts the legal
right of way of a state highway, additional right of way may
be required as determined by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
iii. Additional right of way and cartway widths may be required
by the Municipality for the purpose of promoting the public
safety and convenience, or to provide parking in commercial
and industrial areas an in areas of high density residential.
iv. Cul-de-sac streets shall have a paved turn-around with a radius
of fifty (50) feet.
D. Street Grades
1. There shall be a minimum centerline grade of one (1)
percent.
2. Centerline grades shall not exceed the following:
i. Local streets: ten (10) percent.
ii. Minor Collector Streets: six (6) percent
iii. Major Collector Streets: five (5) percent
iv. Cul-de-sac Streets: eight (8) percent
E. Horizontal Curves
103
1. Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of two (2)
degrees, connection shall be made by horizontal
curves.
2. To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum centerline
radii for horizontal curves shall be as follow:
i. Local and Cul-de-sac Streets: one-hundred
fifty (150) feet;
ii. Minor Collector Streets: three-hundred (300)
feet;
iii. Major Collector Streets: five-hundred (500)
feet
3. A tangent of at least one-hundred (100) feet shall be
introduced between all horizontal curves on minor
collector and major collector streets.
4. To the greatest extent possible, combinations of the
minimum radius and the maximum grade shall be
avoided.
5. A tangent of at least one-hundred (100) feet, measured
from edge of cartway, shall be required between a
horizontal curve and a street intersection where one of
the intersecting streets is a arterial, minor collector, or
a major collector street.
F. Vertical Curves
1. Vertical curves shall be designed to the following
minimum sight distances:
i. Local and Cul-de-sac Streets: two-hundred
(200) q feet;
ii. Minor Collector Streets: three-hundred (300)
feet;
iii. Major Collector Streets: four-hundred (400)
feet;
2. Sight distance shall be measured from a point 3.5 feet
above the road surface to a point 6 inches above the
road surface, and shall be based upon standards of the
American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
104
3. Vertical curves shall be used at all changes in grade
exceeding one (1) percent.
G. Intersections
1. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles, and no street shall intersect another at an angle
of less than seventy-five (75) degrees or more than
one-hundred five (105) degrees.
2. No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at the same
point and no driveway may intersect a street or road
within eighty (80) feet of an intersection with another
street or road.
3. Streets intersecting another street shall either intersect
directly opposite each other, or shall be separated by at
least one-hundred fifty (150) feet between centerline,
measured along the centerline of the street being
intersected.
4. Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a
straight leveling areas, the grade of which shall not
exceed five (5) percent within fifty (50) feet of the
intersection of the nearest right of way lines. The five
(5) percent grade shall be provided on the cartway
surface, not the tangent line of a vertical curve.
5. Intersections with arterial and major collector streets
shall be located not less than one-thousand (1000) feet
apart, measured between centerline, along the
centerline of the arterial or major collector streets.
6. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a
tangential arc having a minimum radius of:
i. twenty (20) feet for all intersections involving
only local streets.
ii. thirty (30) feet for all intersections involving a
minor collector street;
iii. forty (40) feet for all intersections involving a
major collector street.
v. Street right-of-way lines shall be parallel to
(concentric with) curb arcs at intersections.
H. Sight Distances at Intersections
105
1. New street intersections of a subdivision or land
development shall be designed to meet to meet
PennDOT standards for sight distance (appendix B)
2. Wherever a portion of the line of such triangles occurs
behind (i.e., from the street) the building setback line,
such portion shall be shown on the Final Plan of the
subdivision, and shall be considered a building setback
line.
3. Clear sight triangles shall be located so that they do not
extend onto adjoining property not owned by the
subdivider, unless the written approval of the property
has been demonstrated.
I. Cul-De-Sac Streets
1. Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as culde-
sac streets or designed for future access to adjoining
properties.
2. Any street dead-end for access to an adjoining property
or because of authorized stage development shall be
provided with a permanent, fully-paved turnaround,
within the subdivision, and the use of such turnaround
shall be guaranteed to the public.
3. The length of the cul-de-sac street shall be measured
from the edge of the cartway of an intersecting street to
the center of the turnaround of the cul-de-sac. The
minimum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be twohundred
fifty (250) feet.
4. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be
eight hundred (800) feet.
5. Unless further extension is clearly impractical or
undesirable, the turnaround right of way shall be
placed adjacent to the tract boundary with sufficient
additional width provided along the boundary line to
permit extension of the street at full width.
6. All cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed
end with a fully paved turnaround with a radius to the
pavement edge or curb line of fifty (50) feet, and the
106
radius of the right of way line shall be sixty (60) feet.
The sidewalk area within the right of way shall
conform to both the straight and curved edges of the
cartway.
7. The centerline grade of a cul-de-sac street shall not
exceed eight (8) percent and the grade across the
turnaround shall not exceed five (5) percent.
8. A maximum of ten (10) residential lots shall be
permitted on any cul-de-sac street.
9. Cul-De-Sac streets shall not be intersected by other
streets at the open end and shall not intersect another
cul-de-sac street.
10. Cul-De-Sacs shall be centered on the access street or
offset to the left. Right offsets shall only be used with
approval of the Municipal Planning Commission.
J. Street Names
1. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with
others already existing and named, shall bear the
names of the existing streets.
2. In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate
an existing street name in the Municipality and in the
postal district, irrespective of the use of the suffix
street, road, avenue, boulevard, drive, way, place,
court, lane, etc.
3. All street names shall be subject to the approval of the
Municipality and the Postmaster having jurisdiction.
SECTION 604. BLOCKS
A. Layout
1. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be
determined with due regard to:
i. Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the
type proposed,
ii. zoning requirements,
iii. topography,
107
iv. requirements for safe and convenient vehicular
and pedestrian circulation, including the
reduction of intersections with major streets.
B. Length
1. Blocks shall have a maximum length of two thousand
six-hundred (2,600) feet and minimum length of fivehundred
(500) feet, provided, however, that the
Municipal Planning Commission or Governing Body
may increase the maximum and/or decrease the
minimum length of the blocks if in the opinion of
either body, topography of the land in question and/or
surface drainage conditions warrant such a change.
2. In the design of blocks longer than one thousand
(1,000) feet, special consideration shall be given to the
requirements of satisfactory fire protection and will be
subject to approval by the regional fire department and
Municipal Planning Commission.
C. Crosswalks
1. Crosswalks may be required wherever necessary to
facilitate pedestrian circulation and to give access to
community facilities, as well as within blocks.
2. Such crosswalks shall have a width not less than ten
(10) feet and a paved walk with a width not less than
four (4) feet.
D. Depth
1. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to
accumulate two tiers of lots, except;
2. where reverse frontage lots are required along major
streets, or property, in which case the Municipality
may approve a single tier of lots.
E. Commercial and Industrial Blocks.
Blocks in commercial and industrial areas may vary from the
elements of design detailed above if required by the nature of
the use. In all cases, however, adequate provisions shall be
108
made for off-street parking and loading areas as well as for
traffic circulation and parking for employees and customers.
SECTION 605. LOTS AND PARCELS
A. General Standards
1. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be
appropriate for the type of development and use
intended, and in accordance with the Municipal Zoning
Ordinance.
2. Side lot lines shall abut and be approximately at right
angles to straight streets and on radial lines to curved
streets, unless otherwise approved by the Municipality.
Pointed or very irregularly shaped lots shall be
avoided.
3. Lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather than
cross them, in order to avoid jurisdictional problems.
4. The depth of residential lots shall be not more than two
and one-half (2 ½) times their widths nor less than one
(1) times their width.
5. The depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential
uses shall be adequate for the use proposed
and sufficient to provide adequate space for on-site
parking, loading and unloading, setbacks, landscaping,
etc.
6. If, after subdividing, there exists remnants of land, they
shall be either:
i. incorporated into existing or proposed lots, or
ii. legally dedicated to public use, if acceptable to
the Municipality.
7. Where extra width has been offered to be dedicated for
widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at such
extra width lines, and all setbacks shall be measured
from such lines.
B. Lot Frontage
109
1. All lots shall front on an existing or proposed public
street.
2. Double or reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except
where needed to avoid direct vehicular access onto
major streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography or orientation.
3. All residential reverse frontage lots shall have rear
yards with a minimum depth of seventy-five (75) feet,
measured in the shortest distance from the proposed
dwelling unit to the ultimate right of way line and
shall, within such rear yard and immediately adjacent
to the right of way, having a planting screen easement
of at least ten (10) feet in width, across which there
shall be no right of way access. The planting screen
within this easement shall be included in the plan and
subject to approval by the Planning Commission.
C. Driveways and Off-Street Parking
1. Each proposed dwelling unit within a subdivision shall
be provided with at least three (3) off-street parking
spaces, over-night on-street parking shall be
prohibited.
i. In the case of single family or two family
dwellings, such off-street parking spaces shall
be provided behind the street right of way line
and may be as an attached or separate
garage(s), carport(s) or driveways.
ii. In the case of multiple family dwellings, such
off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
the form of parking compounds or lot(s)
located adjacent to or near the multi-family
structure, providing at least three (3) off-street
parking spaces per dwelling unit.
iii. Each off-street parking space shall provide a
useable parking area having minimum
dimensions of nine (9) feet by eighteen (18)
feet, and, where access to such an area is from
a collector or major street, adequate turnaround
space shall be provided behind the right of way
line.
v. The grade of any proposed parking area shall
not exceed five percent (5%).
110
2. Non-residential subdivisions shall provide off-street
parking in accordance with the requirements of the
Municipal Zoning Ordinance.
3. Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at
least eighty (80) feet from the point of the intersection
of the nearest street curb lines or edge of cartway.
4. In order to provide a safe an convenient means of
access, grades on private driveways shall not exceed
fourteen (14) percent. The grade of the private
driveway shall not exceed five (5) percent within
twenty (20) feet of the edge of cartway of the existing
or proposed public street.
5. Private driveways shall be paved within twenty (20)
feet of the existing or proposed public street and at any
location within one-hundred (100) feet of the existing
or proposed public street where the driveway grade is
equal to or greater than ten (10) percent.
6. In order to provide safe and convenient ingress and
egress, private driveway entrances should be rounded
at a minimum radius of five (5) feet, or should have a
flare constructed that is equivalent to this radius, at the
point of intersection with the cartway edge (curb line).
7. Common driveways serving more than one single
family detached dwelling shall be prohibited.
8. Driveways providing access to lots within a
subdivision shall gain access from proposed “internal”
streets rather than existing public streets along the
outer boundary of the subdivision. Where lots front on
the existing public street but gain access internally, the
driveways shall be located within a strip of land with a
minimum width of twenty (20) feet held in simple
ownership by the owner of the lot gaining access.
Access shall not be provided be an easement or right of
way across property of another party.
9. Driveways shall meet all requirements of all
ordinances and design standards used by the
Municipality.
111
10. Driveways entering onto a Municipal street shall meet
PennDOT standards for sight distance and no driveway
may intersect a street or road within eighty (80) feet of
an intersection with another street or road.
11. A Municipal Driveway Permit is required when access
is proposed onto a Municipal road or when
encroachment is proposed within a Municipal right of
way.
SECTION 606 SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL
A. General Standards
1. All subdivisions and land developments within the
ESP Region shall be served with an adequate sewage
disposal system (either community or on-lot) that
conforms to the standards and requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(Penn. DEP).
2. The developer shall provide the most desirable method
of sanitary sewage disposal utilizing the best available
technology to achieve the maximum level of treatment
resulting in the most pollution free and
environmentally safe discharge standards. The
selected method shall conform to the existing physical
site conditions.
3. The installation of all public or community sewage
disposal systems shall be the responsibility of the
developer.
4. The installation of all on-lot sanitary sewage disposal
systems shall be the responsibility of the lot owner.
The Municipality shall require location of a suitable
alternate on-lot sewage disposal system on each lot.
B. Public Sewage Disposal System
1. Any building or use within a subdivision or land
development that generates wastewater and that in
determination of the Governing Body-could reasonably
connect into a public sewage disposal system shall be
required to connect into the system. The applicant
112
shall be responsible to pay all expenses that are
necessary for such connection.
2. Where public sewer services are accessible, the
developer shall construct a sanitary sewage collection
and conveyance system in order to provide adequate
sanitary sewer service to each lot or dwelling unit
within the subdivision or land development.
3. The entire system shall be designed in accordance with
all applicable standards and specifications established
by the governing body and/or the appropriate
municipal entity.
4. The applicant shall comply with all procedural permit
requirements established by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). The
applicant shall complete and submit to the
Municipality the necessary components of the DEP
Planning Module(s) for Land Development.
5. If public sewage service is not accessible to an
approved subdivision or land development, but is
planned to be accessible within five (5) years of final
approval, the developer shall install approved capped
sewer collection lines within the limits of the
subdivisions or land development, in addition to
approved on-lot sewage facilities. Such sewer lines
shall be capped at the limits of the subdivision or land
development and the lateral shall be capped at the
street right of way.
6. The developer shall warrant the sewage system for a
period of five (5) years from the date of final
inspection approval, covering both materials and
workmanship. If repairs are required during the
warrantee period, the developer will have the option to
perform the corrective action or reimburse the
Municipality for corrections done by the Municipality.
C. Private Sewage Disposal Systems (Community or On-Lot)
1. Where public sewage services are either unavailable or
inaccessible, the developer shall provide a sanitary
sewage disposal system on either an individual or
community basis in accordance with the standards and
113
provisions established by the Municipality and/or
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP).
2. Permits are required for the design, construction,
installation, alteration, replacement, repair and/or
extension of any community sewage disposal system
or individual on-lot sewage disposal system. All such
permits for private sewage disposal systems shall be
subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection and/or the Municipal
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
3. The permit for a community sewage disposal system or
an individual sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
4. The use of an on-lot sewage disposal system will
require the submittal of soil percolation test results at
the Preliminary Plan stage as required by Section 504.
5. In the case of a community sewage disposal system,
the applicant shall provide a proposal for financially
securing the operations and maintenance of the subject
facility. The time period and the amount shall be as
determined by the Municipality, based upon the
recommendations of the Municipal Engineer, but shall
be no less than a period of ten (10) years worth of
anticipated maintenance and operation costs. Such
security shall be posted by the applicant prior to
issuance of the permit and operation or use of the
subject facility.
6. The use of an on-lot sewage disposal system shall
require the location of a suitable alternate sewage
disposal system on each lot.
SECTION 607. WATER SUPPLY
A. General Standards
1. All subdivisions and land developments shall be served
with an adequate water supply system (either
community or on-lot) that will meet the standards and
114
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
2. When no public water supply is either available or
accessible, adequate water supply shall be furnished by
the landowner on either an individual lot basis or a
community well supply system.
3. All subdivisions or land developments providing
public or community water supplies shall be required
to provide fire protection as deemed necessary by the
Municipality. All distribution systems for community
or public water systems shall be equipped with
adequately sized mains and the appurtenances required
to provide fire protection.
4. Planned residential developments, single family cluster
developments, mobile home parks and developments
containing multifamily dwelling units, single family
semidetached dwelling units or two-family detached
dwelling units shall be provided with a public or
community water system.
B. General Standards
1. All subdivisions and land developments shall be served
with an adequate water supply system (either
community or on-lot) that will meet the standards and
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
2. When no public water supply is either available or
accessible, adequate water supply shall be furnished by
the landowner on either an individual lot basis or a
community well supply system.
3. All subdivisions or land developments providing
public or community water supplies shall be required
to provide fire protection as deemed necessary by the
Municipality. All distribution systems for community
or public water systems shall be equipped with
adequately sized mains and the appurtenances required
to provide fire protection.
4. Planned residential developments, single family cluster
developments, mobile home parks and developments
115
containing multifamily dwelling units, single family
semidetached dwelling units or two-family detached
dwelling units shall be provided with a public or
community water system.
C. Public Water Supply
1. Any building or use within a subdivision or land
development that will require a water supply and that
in the determination of the Governing Body could
reasonably connect into a public water supply system
shall be required to connect into that system. The
applicant shall be responsible to pay all expenses that
are necessary for such connection.
2. Subdivisions and land developments to be served by
existing public water supplies shall be provided with
water distribution facilities designed in accordance
with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the standards and
specifications of the public water supplier.
3. The distribution facilities shall be designed to provide
fire protection at a minimum flow rate of 1,000 gpm
with a minimum residual pressure at 40 psi.
4. The subdivider or developer shall provide the
Municipality with a copy of a letter of intent from the
public water supplier prior to Preliminary Plan
approval and with a copy of an approved Water
Service Agreement prior to Final approval.
D. Community Water Supply
1. Community water systems shall be developed and
maintained so as to meet the established standards and
specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the Environmental
Protection Agency, the Delaware River Basin
Commission and/or the Public Utility Commission
(P.U.C.). At a minimum the community water supply
shall be designed in accordance with the DEP
(Division of Water Supplies) Public Water Supply
Manual latest revision. All community water supply
systems shall be organized in such a manner as to fall
116
within the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public
Water Commission.
2. Whenever a community on-site water supply system is
proposed, the developer shall engage the services of a
hydrogeologist to make a determination as to the
feasibility and location of such groundwater
withdrawals), the availability of the groundwater
supply through geological study and the submission of
his report of findings to the Municipality for review.
The Municipality shall further determine whether a
review and/or approval of the proposed groundwater
withdrawals) will be required by any of the agencies
listed under Section A above.
3. Where a community water supply system is proposed
to serve a subdivision or land development, a feasible
water supply and distribution system shall be proposed
before preliminary approval of the subdivision or land
development. Detailed plans, specifications, supply
and demand shall be submitted to and approved by the
municipal engineer before finals approval. A permit
for the system must be granted by DEP and any other
agency having jurisdiction over the work before final
approval.
4. The water source shall be capable of supplying 150
percent of the average daily demand based upon eighty
(80) gallons per day per person (GPCD) and/or three
hundred (300) GPD per dwelling unit, for the design
population of the development or the service area.
5. In the case of water service to nonresidential
developments, the applicant shall demonstrate the
adequacy to meet the projected demand from the
specific project.
6. The quality of the source shall conform to the water
quality requirements of the DEP (Division of Water
Supplies) Public Water Supply Manual. Treatment of
the water supply shall be done in accordance with
requirements set forth in the Public Water Supply
Manual.
E. On-Lot Water Supply
117
1. When no public water supply is either available or
accessible, adequate water supply shall be furnished by
the developer on an individual lot basis.
2. Where on-lot water supply systems are proposed, the
developer shall either install such facilities or shall
require (by deed restriction or otherwise) as a
condition of the sale of each lot or parcel, that the
facilities shall be installed by the purchaser of such lot
or parcel at the time that a principal building is
constructed. A Municipal well drilling permit is
required for each well.
3. Where a community water supply system is proposed
to serve a subdivision or land development, a feasible
water supply system and distribution system shall be
proposed before preliminary approval of the
subdivision or land development.
4. The applicant shall provide at least one test well for
each ten (10) proposed dwelling units. The yield of
each test shall be no less than eight (8) gallons per
minute per dwelling unit. A sample shall be obtained
from each test well and tested to ensure that the well is
free of bacteriological contaminations; and each shall
comply with all DEP and EPA restrictions for minerals
and metals. The Planning Commission shall be
provided with documentation from a licensed well
driller verifying the yield of each test well and from a
state certified laboratory verifying that the sample(s)
are potable.
5. The applicant may be required to submit a study
prepared by a professional Hydrogeologist certifying
that the proposed individual wells will be able to
supply each lot with a dependable water supply and
that the proposed wells will not adversely affect the
groundwater table or existing wells near the project
site. The study shall examine the possibility of
contamination to the proposed wells due to existing
environmental factors.
6. The installation of a well to be utilized for an
individual on-lot water supply system be at the
location shown on the approved subdivision or land
118
development plan. Any deviation from this location
must have prior approval of the Municipality.
F. Fire Hydrants
1. All subdivisions and land developments that are to be
serviced by a public or community water supply
system shall provide fire hydrants.
2. Fire hydrants shall be located no further than six
hundred (600) feet apart, as measured along the
centerline of each road. All residential dwelling units
and non-residential principal buildings shall be located
no farther than four hundred (400) feet from an active
fire hydrant.
3. Fire hydrants shall be located in a manner to provide
complete accessibility and so that possibility of
damage from vehicles or injury to pedestrians will be
minimized.
4. The type and location of all required fire hydrants are
subject to the review and approval of the Municipality,
the public water supply company and the regional fire
company.
5. All subdivisions and land developments that contain
seven (7) or more lots without public or community
water supplies shall provide fire-fighting cisterns
approved by the Fire Department with a minimum
storage capacity of 10,000 gallons. The actual storage
capacity will be determined by the Fire Department
and other Municipal authorities as required. Access to
the cistern for repair and maintenance shall be
guaranteed by easement. Cisterns should be placed to
take advantage of any natural conditions which would
maintain the necessary water levels.
SECTION 608. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
A. The management of stormwater on the site, both during and
upon completion of the disturbances associates with the
proposed subdivision or land development, shall be
accomplished in accordance with the standards and criteria of
this section.
119
B. General. The developer shall construct and/or install such
drainage structures as necessary to:
1. Prevent erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off
or detain and control the rate of release of surface
waters.
2. Carry surface water to the nearest adequate street,
storm drain, detention basin, natural watercourse or
drainage facility without causing storm water run-off
to flow onto Municipal roads.
3. Maintain the adequacy of the natural stream channels
and protect the natural character of the watercourse.
Accelerated bank erosion shall be prevented by
controlling the rate and velocity of runoff discharge to
these waters courses, so as to avoid increasing
occurrence of stream bank overflow and to protect
down stream property owners.
4. To insure adequate drainage of all low points alone the
line of streets.
5. To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at
intervals reasonably related to the extent and grade of
the area drained and to prevent substantial flow of
water across intersections.
6. Control the anticipated peak discharge from the
property being subdivided or developed and the
existing runoff contributed from all land at higher
elevation in the same watershed, to an amount equal to
or below pre development rates.
7. Preserve the adequacy of existing culverts and bridges
by suppressing the new flood peaks created by new
land development.
8. All stormwater detention/retention facilities and
erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be in
place and functioning prior to any other earth-moving
activities.
C. All storm water management plans and calculations shall
include a detailed, site specific narrative which contains as a
minimum the following information:
120
1. A general description of the project.
2. A description of any storm drainage problems within,
adjacent to or downstream of the project site.
3. A description of the overall storm water management
system.
4. A description of all design assumptions, calculation
methods, computer models, etc.
5. A summary of the pre-development versus postdevelopment
runoff at all points of discharge from the
site.
D. All subdivision and land development activities involving the
increase in impervious cover shall be conducted in
conformance with the following performance standards:
1. All plans and designs for stormwater management
facilities shall be reviewed by the Municipal Engineer.
Plans for the facilities other than storm sewers shall
determine storm water peak discharge and runoff by
the use of the Soil Cover Complex Method as set forth
in Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical
Release No. 55 with specific attention given, to
antecedent moisture conditions, flood routing and peak
discharge specifications included therein, and
Hydrology National Engineering Handbook Section 4,
both by the Soil Conservation Service. The Rational
Method, in accordance with the provisions of Section
6:084.F, may be used for the design of detention
facilities with drainage areas of twenty-five (25) acres
or less.
2. After installation of impervious cover, peak discharges
from the site shall not exceed the before construction
peak discharge rate from a 2-year, 24-hour storm of 3.1
inches of rainfall for all storms up to a 10-year, 24-
hour storm of 4.9 inches of rainfall. Peak discharges
for any storms of greater than 10-year frequency up to
and including a 100-year storm shall not exceed the
peak discharges from the site of such storms before
development including:
121
i. a 25-year, 24-hour storm of 5.5 inches of rainfall,
ii. a 50-year, 24-hour storm of 6.1 inches of rainfall,
and
iii. a 100-year, 24-hour storm of 6.9 inches of
rainfall.
3. In establishing the antecedent conditions or calculating
runoff prior to development, the following assumptions
shall apply:
4. Woodland shall be used as the prior condition for those
portions of the watershed with trees of greater than six
inches DBH or where such trees existed within
eighteen (18) months of application.
i. Meadow shall be used for all other areas,
including areas which are presently covered by
impervious surfaces.
ii. Average antecedent moisture conditions.
iii. A type II distribution system.
5. Post-development runoff hydrographs shall be routed
through the proposed detention and retention basin(s)
using storage indication procedures to ensure that the
basin discharge does not exceed the allowable
discharge. Allowable basin discharge shall be
determined by subtracting the flows bypassing the
basin from the pre-development runoff flow.
6. Where applicable, post-development time of
concentration to a detention or retention basin shall be
the time of concentration in the storm sewer to its point
of discharge into the basin. Overland flow from the
discharge point to the outlet structure shall not be
included in the time of concentration.
7. Time of concentration calculations shall be submitted
based upon current design methods outlined in SCS
Technical Release No. 55, latest edition. The time of
concentration flow paths (pre- and post-development)
shall be shown on the grading plan, and shall be
representative of the drainage area. The predevelopment
sheet flow length shall be one hundred
fifty (150) feet, unless a shorter length is justified. The
maximum post-development sheet flow length for
unpaved surfaces shall be one hundred (100) feet for
122
most situations (150 feet for areas which will remain
undisturbed). Use of maximum flow lengths shall be
justified, and all flow lengths are subject to approval
by the Municipality.
8. The Rational Method may be used in lieu of the Soil
Cover Complex Method to compute design flows for
the sizing of storm sewers, inlets and swales.
i. The following runoff coefficients shall be used
for calculating runoff using the Rational
Method:
Runoff Coefficients For The Rational Method*
Hydrologic Soil Group And Slope Range
A B C D
Land Use 0-6% 6%+ 0-6% 6%+ 0-6% 6%+ 0-6% 6%+
Cultivated 0.25† 0.35 0.30 0.40 0.35 0.45 0.40 0.50
Land 0.30‡ 0.40 0.35 0.45 0.40 0.50 0.50 0.60
Meadow 0.10 0.13 0.13 0.19 0.16 0.23 0.19 0.26
0.14 0.16 0.16 0.22 0.20 0.26 0.23 0.30
Forest 0.08 0.11 0.11 0.14 0.13 0.16 0.16 0.20
0.11 0.14 0.14 0.18 0.16 0.20 0.20 0.25
Open Space 0.10 0.14 0.15 0.19 0.20 0.24 0.25 0.28
(Lawn) 0.16 0.20 0.20 0.25 0.25 0.30 0.30 0.35
Impervious 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95
Surfaces
E. Storm sewers, culverts, bridges and related installations shall
be provided:
1. To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
Such flow may be redirected as required, subject to the
approval of DEP.
* Higher coefficients may be required by the Municipality due to its local soil conditions
† Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals of less than 25 years
‡ Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals of 25 years or more
123
2. To insure adequate drainage of all low points along the
line of streets.
3. To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at
intervals reasonably related to the extent and grade of
the area drained, and to prevent substantial flow of
water across intersections or flooded intersections
during the design storm required by Section 608(F).
4. To insure adequate and unimpeded flow of stormwater
under driveways in, near or across natural
watercourses or drainage swales. Suitable pipes or
other waterway openings shall be provided as
necessary.
F. Design of storm sewers and related installations:
1. Storm sewers within the street right-of-way, as
required, shall be placed outside of the street cartway
when parallel to the street. When located in
undedicated land, they shall be placed within an
easement not less than twenty (20) feet wide as
approved by the Municipal Engineer.
Properly designed, graded and turfed drainage swales
shall be permitted in lieu of storm sewers, where
approved by the Municipal Engineer. Swales shall be
located within an easement not less than twenty (20)
feet wide, but of sufficient width to allow access for
maintenance.
Such swales shall be designed not only to carry the
required discharge without excessive erosion, but also
to increase the time of concentration, reduce the peak
discharge and velocity and permit the water to
percolate into the soil. The minimum grassed swale
grade shall be 1% and all swales shall be designed with
a minimum 6” of freeboard.
For grass swales the designs shall meet the following
standards:
i. Maximum capacity – 10 cfs.
ii. Maximum velocity – 4 fps.
iii. Minimum velocity – 2 fps.
iv. Minimum slope – 5%.
124
v. Maximum sideslope – 3:1
Erosion resistant swale linings approved by the
Municipality are required when velocities exceed 4
fps.
Capacities greater than 10 cfs and slopes greater than
5% must be carried by storm sewer pipes.
2. Storm sewers shall be installed in accordance with the
following requirements:
i. All storm sewers shall be constructed per
PennDOT Form 40 Specifications and Design
manual, Part 2, Highway Design and Standards
for Roadway Construction, unless otherwise
directed by the Municipality.
ii. Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter
of eighteen (18) inches and a minimum slope of
one-half (1/2%) percent.
iii. Reinforced concrete and corrugated
polyethylene pipe is generally acceptable for all
storm sewer construction. All headwalls and
end sections must be reinforced concrete. Pipe
materials shall be subject to approval by the
Municipal Engineer.
iv. All storm sewer pipe within street cartways or
other paved areas shall be bedded and
backfilled with 2RC stone placed in six (6) inch
lifts and compacted to the satisfaction of the
Municipal Engineer.
v. In carbonate areas the Municipality may
determine during construction that watertight
connections are required.
3. Storm sewers shall be designed based upon the
following criteria:
i. Any changes in alignment shall be
accomplished utilizing straight connections
connected by inlets or manholes.
ii. When there is a change in pipe size through a
structure, the top inside elevation of the outlet
pipe shall be at or below the elevations of all
incoming pipes.
125
iii. Storm sewer sizes shall be determined based
upon the following design storm frequencies:
(a) ten (10) years in all residential
subdivisions or land developments with
an average gross density of less than six
(6) units per acre, and
(b) twenty five (25) years in all other
subdivisions or land developments,
unless otherwise specified by the
Municipality.
(c) Storm sewer design shall be based upon
PennDOT design methods. Inlet
efficiency and bypass flow shall be
determined for all inlets, and the gutter
flow spread shall not exceed one-half
(1/2) the travel lane width.
(d) Where necessary, storm sewers and
culverts shall be evaluated for inlet and
outlet control restrictions.
(e) Rainfall intensity curves and other
hydraulic design data, provided by the
manufacturers of storm drainage
structures shall be used for design
purposes.
iv. Inlets shall conform to PennDOT standards.
(a) Inlets shall generally be located at the
lowest point of street intersections to
intercept the storm water before it
reaches pedestrian crossings or at sag
points of vertical curves in the street
alignment which provides a natural
point of ponding of surface storm water.
(b) At street intersections, inlets shall be
placed in the tangent and not the curved
portion of the curbing.
(c) Where the Governing Body deems it
necessary because of special land
requirements, they may approve special
inlets.
(d) The interval between inlets serving
stormwater runoff flow along the curb
shall not exceed a maximum of 1,000
126
feet when located along any one
continuous curb line. More frequent
spacing shall be required when the
entrance capacity of any individual inlet
warrants closer spacing as determined
by calculations which incorporate
consideration of the area drained,
intensity of rainfall, slope or grade,
runoff coefficient of imperviousness
and cross-sectional are of the gutter.
(e) When inlets are used in a storm system within
the right-of-way limits of a street in lieu of
manholes, the spacing of such inlets shall not
exceed the maximum distance of three hundred
(300) feet along any one continuous line.
v. Manholes shall be installed in accordance with
the following requirements:
(a) The construction locations of manholes
shall be as indicated on the subdivision
drainage plan or area drainage plan
approved by the governing Municipal
authorities.
(b) Manholes shall be located on a
continuous storm sewer system at all
abrupt changes of grade, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe
sizing is required, at all angle points and
at all points of convergence of two or
more influent storm sewer mains.
(c) Manhole shall not be more than three
hundred (300) feet apart on sizes up to
twenty-four inches (24”) and not more
than four hundred and fifty (450) feet
apart on larger sizes. Inlets may be
substituted for manholes on approval by
the Municipality.
vi. The construction of endwalls shall be required
at ends of all storm water conveyance
structures.
(a) Generally, these structures will be built
of 3,000 psi concrete, except in special
cases 3500 psi may be required by the
127
Municipal Engineer. Special care shall
be used by the design engineer to select
the proper endwall to fit the condition.
(b) The Design Engineer shall provide
energy dissipaters at endwalls where the
discharge velocity with pipe flowing
full is more than 1 f.p.s.
vii. Storm water roof drains shall not discharge
water directly over a sidewalk or into any
sanitary sewer line.
G. Bridges and culverts shall have ample waterway to carry
expected flows, based on a minimum storm frequency of
twenty-five (25) years. Bridge and/or culvert construction
shall be in accordance with the PennDOT specifications and
shall meet the requirements of DEP.
1. Culverts shall be provided with wing walls and
constructed for the full width of the right-of-way. The
cartway area over the bridge shall be twenty-four (24)
inches wider, on either side, than the road connecting
with the bridge, or if the character of the road is
expected to change for future planning, the cartway of
the bridge shall be made to anticipate this condition.
On either side of the bridge cartway, the bridge railing
must be set back from the edge of the final cartway and
this area may be used to place sidewalks, present or
future.
H. All existing and proposed one hundred (100) year floodplain
shall be delineated on the plans for drainageways having
watershed areas greater than one hundred (100) acres. The
floodplain delineations shall be based upon the following
criteria.
1. Where available, the floodplain shall be as mapped by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
as part of the National Flood Insurance Program.
2. If the drainage course has not been mapped by FEMA,
the horizontal and vertical limits of the floodplain shall
be determined by the Standard Step Method (i.e.,
HEC-2 or similar approved computer model). If the
HEC-2 model is used, the applicant shall submit a
128
computer disc containing all input files for the
calculations.
3. Where approved by the Municipal Engineer, the
Manning Equation may be used for relatively small
drainage areas.
4. An average of three (3) of the methods below may be
used to compute the design flow(s) upon prior
approval by the Municipality:
i. The graphical and tabular hydrograph methods
in Technical Release No. 55, “Urban
Hydrology for Small Watershed”, latest edition,
by the United States Department of Agriculture
Soil Conservation Service. The graphical
method may be used for streams whose
drainage area at the point of interest is no larger
than 2,000 acres, and the tabular hydrograph
method may be used for drainage areas up to
twenty (20) square miles.
ii. The Rational Method may be used for streams
whose drainage area at the point of interest is
no larger than 320 acres.
iii. The method in Water Protection Bulletin
Number 13, Floods in Pennsylvania, issued by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, may be used for streams whose
drainage areas at the point of interest is larger
than two (2) square miles.
iv. The Procedure PSU-IV for Estimating Design
Flood Peaks on Ungaged Pennsylvania
Watersheds”.
v. The Penn State Runoff Model.
I. Detention or retention basins for the control of stormwater
peak discharges shall meet the following requirements:
1. Basins shall be installed prior to any earth-moving or
land disturbances which they will serve. The phasing
of their construction shall be noted in the narrative and
on the plan.
2. Whenever a basin will be located in an area of
underlain by limestone, a geological evaluation of the
proposed location will be conducted to determine
129
susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of all
facilities over limestone formations shall include
measures to prevent groundwater contamination and,
where necessary, sinkhole formation. Soils used for
the construction of basins shall have low erodibility
factors (“K” factors). The Municipality may require an
impermeable liner to be installed up to the 100-year
design water surface elevation.
3. Energy dissipaters and/or lever spreaders shall be
installed at points where pipes or drainageways
discharge to or from basins. Generally, outlet pipes
designed to carry the pre-development, 2 year storm
flow will be permitted to discharge to a stream with
only an energy dissipater. Storms of a 10 year or
greater intensity should be spread across floodplain by
level spreaders; rock material found on the site is
suggested for their construction.
4. The following slope restrictions shall apply to basins:
i. Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not
exceed one (1) foot vertical for three (3) feet
horizontal, and may be further reduced if the
soil has unstable characteristics.
ii. Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed one
(1) foot vertical in 2.5 feet horizontal except
with approval of the Municipality.
(a) Where maximum water depth will not
exceed three (3) feet; or
(b) When a two (2) inch rainfall in one (1)
hour will not fill the basin in one (1)
hour; or
(c) Where concrete, stone or brick walls are
used with side slopes proposed to be
steeper than one (1) foot vertical in
three (3) feet horizontal, in which case
the basins shall be fenced by a
permanent wire fence forty-eight (48)
inches in height and a ramp of durable,
non-slip materials for maintenance
vehicles shall be provided for access
into the basin.
130
iii. The minimum bottom slope shall be two
percent (2%) for grass, and 0.75% for concrete
paving. One percent (1%) may be used for
grass if an underdrain system is provided. A
concrete low flow channel shall be required for
all basins where the distance from the inlet pipe
to the outlet structure exceeds one hundred
(100) feet. The minimum channel width shall
be four (4) feet and the design must be
approved by the Municipality.
5. Detention and retention basins shall also be designed
to meet the following requirements:
i. The minimum top of berm width shall be eight
(8) feet.
ii. Outlet pipes shall have, a minimum diameter of
twelve (12) inches. For pipe lengths exceeding
one hundred (100) feet the minimum diameter
shall be fifteen (15) inches.
iii. Properly spaced anti-seep collars shall be
installed on all basin outlet pipes. Design
calculations shall be provided.
iv. All basins shall be constructed with a
compacted, relatively impervious (Unified Soil
Classification CL-ML or ML) key trench and
core. The key trench shall extend at least two
)2_ feet into undisturbed subsoil (below topsoil
layer). The minimum bottom width of the
trench shall be six (6) feet and the minimum
top width of the core shall be four (4) feet. The
side slopes of the compacted core and trench
shall not exceed one (1) horizontal to one (1)
vertical, and the top elevation of the core shall
be set at or above the twenty-five (25) year
design water elevation.
6. Outlet structures within basins which will control peak
discharge flows and distribute the flows by pipes to
discharge areas shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete, and shall have childproof, non-clogging trash
racks over all design openings exceeding twelve (12)
inches in diameter, except those openings designed to
carry perennial stream flows. Emergency spillways
shall be designed to safely convey the 100-year basin
inflow hydrograph through the basin assuming the
131
principal outlet is completely blocked, and a minimum
six (6) inch freeboard shall be provided. The spillway
shall be lined with suitable erosion resistant material.
7. Inlet and outlet structures shall be located at maximum
distances from one another. The Municipality may
require a rock filter berm or rock-filled gabions
between inlet and outlet areas when the distance is
deemed insufficient for sediment trappings.
8. Permanent grasses or stabilization measures shall be
established on the sides of all earthen basins by
hydroseeding within five (5) days of initial
construction. The Municipality may require jute or
erosion control matting to be installed inside the basin
or on the basin embankment.
9 If the basin will not discharge to a suitable natural
drainage course, the Municipality may require the
Developer to provide facilities to safely and efficiently
convey the discharge to a suitable drainage course.
Securing of necessary drainage easements for this
purpose shall be the sole responsibility of the
Developer.
10. When PA DEP requires facilities to have a State
permit, the designer shall submit all information to PA
DEP and obtain all necessary approval and permits.
No stormwater facility shall create health or sanitation
problems. Consideration shall be given to safety
standards.
J. All calculations shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer
on computation sheets for approval. If, in the opinion of the
Municipal Engineer, the size of pipes or holding pond is
insufficient, the Governing Body may require the developer to
increase the size of pipes or capacity of holding pond. If the
storm drainage system design is completed on a computer
installation, sufficient supporting data shall be provided to
allow comprehensive review by Municipal officials.
K. Intercepting underdrains shall be required at all locations in
which subsurface water is encountered which may permeate or
endanger the subgrade of the street. Underdrains may be
required in cuts three (3) feet deep and greater, and in all other
132
locations stipulated by the Municipal Engineer. Pipe
foundation underdrain shall consist of a trench excavated to a
minimum depth of twenty-four (24) inches below the
underneath elevation of the special subgrade and to the
minimum width of eighteen (18) inches in which a six (6) inch
pipe underdrain shall be laid. The trench shall be backfilled
with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation 2B
Aggregate to its full depth around and above the laid pipe.
1. If the length of pipe underdrain exceeds 600 feet in one
run, the minimum diameter of six (6) inches shall be
increased to eight (8) beyond that point. Pipe shall
meet Penn DOT, Form 408 Specifications.
L. Within all subdivisions in which off street storm or sanitary
sewers are to be constructed, or are anticipated for future
construction, a twenty (20) foot maintenance easement shall
be provided for such easement shown in the subdivision plans
which are submitted to the governing Municipal authorities for
their approval. Existing watercourses which are under the
jurisdiction of the PA DEP into which stormwater is permitted
to be deposited shall require an easement within or adjacent to
its banks equal to the 100 year floodplain.
1. All storm sewers, if placed to feed into the said
existing watercourses, shall require the stipulated
maintenance easement. Sanitary sewers which parallel
or are adjacent to such watercourses shall be provided
with the stipulated easement.
2 Any developer shall be responsible for the control of
surface water from his property to a point of natural
disposal. Downstream easements may be required, as
well as the construction of improvements necessary to
control runoff and prevent property damage.
Whenever practical, the maintenance easement shall be
parallel with and conjunctive to property lines of the
subdivision.
M. All streets shall be so designed as to provide for the discharge
of surface water from their rights-of-way.
N. The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall not be less
than 1/8” per foot and not more than 1/3” per foot.
133
O. Maintenance and repair of detention basins shall be the
responsibility of the property owner(s) and shall be deed
restricted and indicated on the approved plans unless
otherwise assumed by the Municipality and/or others. The
Municipality may perform necessary maintenance and repairs
to detention basins if the owner(s) fail to do so after receiving
notice from the Municipality. The Municipality may recover
the cost of such necessary maintenance and repairs from the
property owner. The Municipality shall require the property
owner(s) to enter into an Agreement with the Municipality
setting forth such maintenance standards.
SECTION 609. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION POLLUTION
CONTROL
A. Land proposed for subdivision shall not be developed or
changed by grading, excavating, or by the removal or
destruction of the natural topsoil, trees or other vegetative
cover unless adequate provisions for minimizing erosion and
sedimentation are provided on the Subdivision Plan.
B. Prior to commencement of any of the above mentioned
activities the developer must obtain a Letter of Adequacy from
the Schuylkill County Conservation District (or other
appropriate agency) for the Erosion and Sedimentation
Pollution Control Plan.
C. The plan for erosion and sedimentation control shall be in
accordance with all provisions of the “Erosion and
Sedimentation Pollution Control Program Manual” published
by PA DEP, Bureau of Soil and Water Conservation.
D. Where state or federal law requires additional permits or
approvals for erosion and sedimentation control, those permits
or approvals shall be obtained prior to commencement of the
earth disturbance activities.
E. Installation of the erosion and sedimentation control facilities
specified by the plan shall be made by the developer as a
required improvement.
SECTION 610. WETLANDS
A. The US Army Corps of Engineers in conjunction with the
United States Environmental Protection Agency have defined
the term “wetlands” as follows:
134
Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes,
bogs and similar areas.
The three major characteristics of wetlands include vegetation,
soil and hydrology.
B. All land designated as “wetlands” within the ESP Region are
subject to restrictions and/or permits by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and Unites States
Army Corps of Engineers.
C. For all subdivisions and land development applications, the
Municipal Engineer shall determine whether a wetlands
delineation will be required by a qualified professional.
Wetland delineation’s shall be accompanied by a technical
report and data forms as well as the credentials of the person
or persons performing the delineation.
D. Within all subdivisions, a buffer zone shall be applied to all
areas delineated as wetlands. Within this buffer, no removal
of existing, natural vegetation or installation of sewage
disposal systems will be permitted. The minimum width of
the buffer zone shall be fifty (50) feet.
E. If the applicant disputes any provision specified under this
Section, the applicant shall be responsible for an Army Corps
of Engineers and/or Environmental Protection Agency
Jurisdictional Determination. All pertinent costs incurred
shall be the responsibility of the applicant and not the
Township.
SECTION 611. SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
A. To insure incorporation of adequate provision for solid waste
management practices in the design of land developments and
subdivisions, the following minimum requirements shall be
contained on development plans.
1. The location, size, and type of bulk storage containers
shall be shown and be adequate to contain all wastes
generated between collections.
135
2. All bulk containers shall be located to permit efficient
use of collection equipment and to permit
maneuverability of such equipment.
3. All bulk storage containers shall be appropriately
screened from view.
4. A statement of the method and frequency of refuse
collection to be used shall be included in the plan.
B. Where no bulk storage is proposed and individual households
are expected to individually establish appropriate collection
service, a statement shall be shown on the plan which advises
that solid waste storage and collection is an individual
household responsibility.
C. In a subdivision or land development located in an area
presently served by municipal collection or municipal contract
collection system, and for which no bulk storage methods are
proposed, a statement indicating the availability of an existing
solid waste system may be shown on the plan in lieu of
information required in Section 611(A) or Section 611(B) of
this ordinance.
ARTICLE VII – IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION 701 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Physical improvements to the property being subdivided shall
be provided, constructed and installed as shown on the Record
and Supplemental Plans and in accordance with the
requirements of the ESP Region.
B. As a condition of approval of a Final Plan by the municipal
governing bodies, the subdivider shall enter into a
Development Agreement covering the improvements shown
on the Plan and required by these regulations. The
Development Agreement shall conform to the requirement of
Article VIII – Improvement Guarentees.
C. All improvements installed by the subdivider shall be
constructed in accordance with the applicable design
specifications of the Municipality or, where none apply, as
136
prepared by the Municipal Engineer. Were required, the
specifications of the applicable State agency shall be used.
SECTION 702. GENERAL PROCEDURES
A. The Municipal Governing Bodies or duly assigned
representative shall be notified prior to the start of any
construction and/or excavation, including removal of topsoil,
or the performance of any work in a street, right-of-way,
utility easement, storm drainage easement, waterway and
approved subdivision or land development in the ESP Region.
B. A preconstruction conference will be required for all
subdivision and land developments where there is a
Development Agreement covering improvement costs, or for
any other construction or earth-moving activities when
deemed necessary by the Municipal Governing Body or the
Municipal Engineer. The developer or his representative and
the contractor or contractors who will perform the work are to
attend along with the Municipal Engineer and Municipal
representatives.
C. Proof of all required permits, certifications and approvals shall
be provided at the preconstruction meeting as well as
compliance with the utility notification requirement of Act No.
172/287. Construction may not commence until all permits
and approvals are obtained.
D. Work being performed on any and all existing public
highways, streets, rights-of-way and easements, shall require a
Street Occupancy Permit from the proper authority, and all
required safety protection, including flag persons, signing,
barricades, flashing warning devices and other required
devices. All safety protection methods and devices and
procedures shall be in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 203, Work Zone
Traffic Control, and will be furnished and maintained solely
by the applicant.
E. Inspections Required
1. Inspections shall be performed by the Municipality to
guarantee the proper procedures and methods of
installation of all approved structures and approved
materials required to be installed. The cost of all
137
inspections shall be the responsibility of the
developer/owner.
2. Inspections shall be required prior to construction,
during the installation of materials and structures, and
upon completion of all improvements. All
improvements shall be installed in accordance with all
required approved regulations and specifications.
3. Any and all unsatisfactory work, faulty procedures and
methods, and defective materials that have been
installed shall be rejected and noted for the record on
the inspection report, and shall be corrected before
final acceptance.
4. The placement of all improvements shall be in
accordance with the controls set by a Professional
Land Surveyor, to ensure installation of improvements
to proper location, elevation, alignment and profile.
5. Scheduling of required inspections shall be the
responsibility of the Owner, or his contractor and shall
be in accordance with the procedures described at the
preconstruction conference.
SECTION 703. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
The following improvements, as shown on the approved plans, shall be
provided by the subdivider:
A. Streets
1. In General. The construction of streets in the ESP
Region shall be done in conformity with the
specifications, regulations and provisions set forth in
this Ordinance, together with any other appropriate
ordinance.
2. Street Grading. All streets shall be graded at their full
right-of-way width, unless otherwise specified by the
Municipality.
3. Cartway Paving. All streets shall be paved to full
cartway width (as shown on the Final Plan), in
accordance with Municipal and ESP Region
requirements.
138
4. Existing Streets. Improvements to existing Municipal
roads shall be made when deemed necessary by the
governing body for safety, drainage and other
purposes. These improvements may include, but are
not limited to, clearing and grading of right-of-way,
shoulder construction, installation of drainage
facilities, road widening, resurfacing, reconstruction
and sealing.
B. Curbs
1. Curbs, if required by the Municipality, shall be
installed along both sides of all streets.
2. Curbs shall be the standard straight (vertical) type.
3. Standard straight curb (machine slip form) shall be a
minimum (18”) structure height, installed on a
minimum 4-inch layer of (#2B) crushed aggregate
stone bed. Expansion joints shall be every sixty (60)
feet, at structures, and ten (10) feet away from each
side of a structure. Contraction joints shall be saw cut
every 10 feet, a minimum of two (2) inches in depth.
Concrete shall be minimum 3,000 psi compressive
strength.
4. Standard straight curb (type hand form) shall be a
minimum (18”) structure height and as a minimum
installed on compacted subgrade. Expansion joints
shall be every ten (10) feet, at structures, and ten (10)
feet away from each side of a structure. Concrete shall
be a minimum 3,000 psi compressive strength.
5. A depressed curb for driveway entrances is permitted
rather than a horizontal radius. The curb shall be
depressed by rounding the edge from the top of the
curb to a lip two (2) inches above the gutter line. The
bottom line of the curb shall be maintained.
6. Where curbs are not required, a graded and stabilized
shoulder of at least ten (10) feet in width may be
required on both sides of the street. The stabilized
shoulder shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the Municipal and ESP Region
ordinances, as amended.
139
7. All areas adjacent to curbs shall be sealed with AC-20.
C. Sidewalks
1. Sidewalks, if required by the Municipality, shall be
installed along both sides of all streets.
2. Wherever sidewalks are required, curbs shall also be
required, in accordance with the specifications of
Section 7:032.
3. Sidewalk shall be four (4) feet wide, four (4) inches
thick and placed upon a minimum four (4) inch layer
of (#2B) crushed aggregate stone bedding. Expansion
joints shall be every twenty (20) feet with contraction
joints cut every four (4) feet a minimum of one (1)
inch in depth. Additional expansion materials shall be
placed between any curb and driveway aprons and in
the sidewalk at the driveway limits.
4. Driveways over sidewalks shall be at least six (6)
inches think and welded wire fabric, 6” x 6” by 10
gauge, shall be installed in all driveway
apron/sidewalk areas. Concrete shall be minimum
3,500 psi compressive strength. The sloped portion of
the driveway on all new construction shall terminate at
the closest edge of sidewalk and at the two (2) inch
curb lip above the gutter line.
D. Storm Sewers
Storm sewers and related facilities shall be installed consistent
with acceptable design principles and the requirements
contained in Section 608 of these regulations.
E. Sanitary Sewage Disposal
1. Sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be provided
consistent with the design standards and requirements
contained in Section 606 of these regulations.
2. Whenever a subdivider proposes that individual on-site
sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be utilized
within the subdivision, the subdivider shall either
install sich facilities or shall require (by deed
140
restriction or otherwise), as a condition of the sale of
each lot or parcel within the subdivision, that such
facilities shall be installed by the purchaser of such lot
or parcel at the time that a principal building is
constructed and in accordance with these regulations.
3. In all other cases, the subdivider shall provide a
complete community or public sanitary sewage
disposal system. The design and installation shall be
subject to the approval of the Municipal Engineer. The
design and installation of such community distribution
system shall be subject to the approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
and such system shall be further subject to satisfactory
provision for the maintenance thereof.
F. Water Supply
1. Water supply system(s) shall be provided consistent
with the standards and recommendations contained in
Section 607 of these regulations.
2. Where the subdivider proposes that on-site water
supply systems shall be utilized within the subdivision,
the subdivider shall either install such facilities or shall
require (by deed restriction or otherwise), as a
condition of the sale of each lot or parcel within the
subdivision, that the facilities shall be installed by the
purchaser of such lot or parcel at the time that a
principal building is constructed, and in accordance
with these regulations.
3. Wherever economically feasible, the subdivision shall
be provided with a complete public or community
water distribution system. The design and installation
of such public system shall be subject to the approval
of the engineer of the appropriate water utility
company or the Municipal Engineer; the design and
installation of such community distribution system
shall be subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and such
system shall be further subject to satisfactory provision
of the maintenance thereof.
G. Fire Hydrants All subdivisions and land developments that
will be served by a public water system shall be provided with
141
fire hydrants as needed with appropriate water pressure so that
all dwelling units and principal buildings are within four
hundred (400) feet of an active fire hydrant. Fire hydrant
locations are subject to review by the Water Company.
H. Monuments
1. Permanent reference monuments shall be located along
street right-of-way lines at the following locations:
i. At least one (1) monument at each street
intersection;
ii. At changes in direction of street lines,
excluding arcs at intersections;
iii. At each end of each curved street line,
excluding arcs at intersections;
iv. An intermediate monument wherever
topographical or other conditions make it
impossible to sight between two (2) otherwise
requirement monuments.
v. At such other places along the line of streets as
may be determined by the Municipal Engineer
to be necessary so that any street may be
readily defined in the future.
2. With the approval of the Municipal Engineer the
subdivider may install monuments on only one (1) side
of the street provided that enough monuments are set
to permit a surveyor to stakeout accurately any
building lot shown on the plan.
3. For all subdivisions of five (5) lots or less, at least two
(2) monuments shall be required. For all subdivisions
greater than five (5) lots, an additional one (1)
monument shall be required for each two (2) additional
lots.
4. All monuments shall be placed by a Professional Land
Surveyor so that the center of the monument shall
coincide exactly with the point of intersection of the
lines being monumented.
5. Reference monuments shall be placed so that the top of
the monument is flush with the surrounding grade.
142
I. Lot Pins All lot corner markers shall be permanently located
and shall be at least ¾” inch metal pin with a minimum length
of twenty-four (24) inches, located in the ground to existing
grade. Lot corner markers shall e placed prior to Final Plan
approval, unless an appropriate escrow amount is established
and set aside with the Municipality.
J. Signs Street name signs shall be installed at all street
intersections. Other advisory signs may be required by the
Municipality. The design and placement of such signs shall be
subject to approval by the Municipality.
K. Street Lights
1. Street lights shall be placed along streets within and
abutting a proposed subdivision or land development
where the Governing Body deems them necessary to
provide safe traffic or pedestrian circulation. When
required, street lights shall be provided, at a minimum,
at all street intersections, curves in the streets and the
more isolated areas of a development.
2. Such lights shall meet the design standards established
by the public utility. The location and number of street
lights shall meet the approval of the Municipality and
the public utilty.
L. Shade Trees
1. Shade trees shall be planted by the developer, outside
the street right-of-way and not closer than twenty-five
(25) feet from the street pavement edge nor closer than
fifteen (15) feet from the sidewalk pavement edge,
where sidewalks are present, in no event shall trees be
planted closer than five (5) feet to the street right-ofway
line. Tress shall be spaced not less than forty (40)
feet nor more than sixty (60) feet apart, staggered
along both sides of all streets. These shade trees shall
conform to all of the following:
i. two (2) inch or greater caliper measured six (6)
inches above the roof flair
ii. eight (8) feet or greater in total height above
finish grade
iii. clear trunk height of at least five (5) feet
iv. a single straight trunk of at least seven (7) feet
143
v. when planted, the top of the root ball will be
slightly above finish grade
vi. The tree shall be an indigenous and noninvasive
species.
An approved list of tree species is on file in the Municipal Office.
M. Utilities and Utility Easements
1. All utilities including, but not limited to electric, gas,
cable, television, and telephone shall be placed
underground. Installation of all utilities shall be in
strict accordance with the engineering standards and
specifications of the public utility concerned.
2. In accordance with the provisions of Act 178, all
developers, contractors etc… shall contact all
applicable agencies and accurately determine locations
and depth of all underground utilities within the lot
boundaries prior to excavation.
3. An easement ten (10) feet in width shall be provided
abutting all side and rear property lines of all lots in a
subdivision that abut another lot in the subdivision.
An easement twenty (20) feet in width shall be
provided abutting all side and rear property lines of all
lots in a subdivision that do not abut another lot in the
subdivision. Such easements shall be provided for
wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas and
water mains, and other utilities.
4. There shall be a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet,
measured at the closest point between any proposed
dwelling unit and any petroleum products or natural
gas transmission right-of-way which abuts or
transverses the subdivision or land development.
ARTICLE VII – MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION 801. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
All mobile home parks shall comply with the plan requirements, design
standards, and improvement specifications of this Ordinance and the applicable
provisions of ESP Region Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
144
SECTION 802. STREET LAYOUT AND CONSTRUCTION
A. There shall be at least one (1) street in the park which is
circumferential and from which lesser streets shall turn out so
as to provide direct access to each lot and each common space
area of the tract.
B. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length
and shall terminate in a turnaround having a fifty (50) foot
radius to the outer edge of the cartway.
C. There shall be at least two (2) entrances from a public street
into the park. Additional entrances may be approved by the
Municipality if traffic conditions would warrant them.
D. Street design shall meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
E. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with Municipal
specifications.
F. Every mobile home lot shall abut and have access to an
approved street.
SECTION 803 ENTRANCE TO MOBILE HOME PARK
A. The main park entrance shall conform to the standards of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) when
the entrance is from a state road. A PennDOT Highway
Occupancy Permit shall be obtained to the specifications of
this Ordinance.
B. The entrance shall take into account the traffic on the public
street and that to be generated by the park residents.
Acceleration and deceleration lanes may be required as well as
two-lane entrances and two-lane exits.
SECTION 804 PARKING STANDARDS
A. Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home
parks for the use of park residents and guests.
B. Each mobile home lot within a mobile home park shall contain
at least two (2) off-street parking spaces. No on-street parking
shall be permitted within the park.
C. Off-street common parking areas may be provided in lieu of
the required two (2) parking spaces on each mobile home lot,
145
in which case parking shall be provided at the minimum rate
of two (2) spaces for each mobile home lot not equipped with
on-lot parking spaces. Such off-site common parking area
shall be located as to provide convenient access to the mobile
homes, but shall not exceed a distance of two hundred (200)
feet from the mobile homes that it is intended to serve.
D. Additional parking spaces for vehicles of non-residents shall
be provded as off-street common parking at the minimum rate
of one (1) space for each mobile home lot.
E. Design and construction of off-street common parking areas
shall comply with the design standards and specifications of
this Ordinance.
SECTION 805. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
A. Stormwater management shall be in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Section 6:08 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 806. UTILITIES
A. Sewage Disposal
1. All mobile home parks shall be served by a public or
community sewage disposal system, approved by the
appropriate local and state agencies, and shall be
constructed and certified by the appropriate authorities
before occupancy permits are issued.
2 Individual lateral connections to the sewage collection
system shall conform to the BOCA National Plumbing
Code and/or applicable Municipal and state
regulations.
B. Water Supply
1. All mobile home parks shall be served by a public or
community water supply system. The system shall
conform to Section 502.1 “Standards For Mobile
Home Parks” publication of the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) and any other
applicable codes. The system shall be approved by the
appropriate local and state agencies, and shall be
constructed and certified by the appropriate local and
146
state agencies, and shall be constructed and certified by
the appropriate authorities before occupancy permits
are issued.
2. Individual connections to the water supply system shall
conform to the BOCA National Plumbing Code and/or
applicable Municipal and state regulations.
3. The water supply system shall provide for fire
protection in mobile home parks of ten (10) or more
units.
C. Electrical Distribution System
The electrical distribution system shall be underground and
shall conform to the NFPA standards for mobile home parks
and any other applicable codes. Each mobile home shall have
not less than one hundred (100) amp service.
D. Gas Service
If the mobile home park is to have gas service to the homes,
the same shall conform to the applicable NFPA regulations
and any other applicable codes.
E. Telephone and Television Service
Telephone and television lines shall be underground. No
outside antenna shall be permitted on a mobile home. If cable
television service is not available, a central antenna system
with underground service to each mobile home shall be
provided.
F. Lighting Standards
All streets and common walkways shall be illuminated at a
maximum level of 0.6 foot-candles. Service to all lighting
fixtures and standards shall be underground.
SECTION 807. PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS
All mobile home parks shall provide and maintain safe, durable, convenient,
all-season pedestrian walkways of adequate width for their intended uses,
between the park streets and all common facilities provided for park
residents.
147
SECTION 808. REFUSE DISPOSAL
Exterior storage areas for refuse stations shall be properly screened. All
containers shall airtight, vermin-proof and have adequate storage capacity to
accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. The park shall have a
solid waste management plan in accordance with all applicable Municipal
regulations and standards.
SECTION 809. LANDSCAPING
A. Shade Trees
Shade trees shall be provided on all streets within a mobile
home park in accordance with Section 703(L) of this
Ordinance.
B. Ground Cover
Except for paved areas, areas beneath mobile homes, and
cultivated areas, all ground shall be planted, maintained, and
grassed. The grass shall be cut regularly. No weeds or wild
growth, except for native trees, shall be permitted anywhere in
the park.
C. Park Screening
The mobile home park shall have an evergreen planting screen
along the property lines at the periphery of the development to
protect the privacy anywhere in the park.
D. Park Buffer
The mobile home park shall provide a twenty-five (25) foot
wide buffer yard along the property line at the periphery of the
development. The buffer yard shall be planted with an all
season ground cover and no structures shall be permitted in
the buffer yard.
SECTION 810. MOBILE HOME UNIT SIZE
All mobile homes located in the mobile home park shall have a
minimum building area of eight-hundred (800) square feet.
SECTION 811. ADMINISTRATION
148
A. Mobile home parks of twenty-five (25) or more units shall
employ the services of a qualified manager. The manager
shall reside in the mobile home park and shall be responsible
for the operation and maintenance of the park.
B. The developer of the park shall make arrangements,
provisions, and/or agreements to insure that the common open
spaces shall be adequately managed and maintained. The
Municipal Solicitor prior to municipal approval shall review
this.
C. It shall be unlawful to operate a mobile home park within the
Municipality unless the Governing Body has issued a license
and unless the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection has issued a certificate of registration. Such
licenses and certificates shall be issued annually.
D. Licenses are not transferable. Notice in writing shall be given
to the Governing Body within ten (10) days after a mobile
home park has been sold, transferred, given away, leased, or
the controlling interest otherwise disposed of. A transfer
certificate by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection shall be required and a new application to the
Municipality shall be made for an operating license.
E. The park shall furnish the Municipality a list of tenants of the
park. Any change in tenancy shall be reported to the
Municipality within one (1) week. The Governing Body shall
have the power to inspect the park register containing a record
of all residents of the mobile home park at any reasonable
time.
F. All applications to the Municipality for a mobile home park
shall be subject to all applicable review procedures for
subdivision and land development and shall be subject to the
appropriate fees established by resolution by the Municipal
Governing Body.
ARTICLE IX – IMPROVEMENT GUARENTEES
SECTION 901. GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENT INSTALLATION
REQUIRED
A. Before approving any subdivision or land development plan
for recording, the Governing Body shall require that the
149
Municipality be assured (by means of a proper Development
Agreement and Performance Guarantee) that the
improvements required by this Ordinance and the
improvements appearing on the plan will be installed in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of this
Ordinance.
B. Purpose of Bond. The bond and other surety agreements shall
stand as security for compliance with all Municipal
ordinances, other laws, covenants, stipulations, conditions and
rules applicable to the subdivision for which it is filed.
C. No construction of buildings or paving or sales of any
individual lot or condominium unit within a subdivision shall
take place in any subdivision unless there is on file, with the
Municipality, a current duly executed performance bond (and
security escrow agreement if necessary), or unless all rough
grading is complete and all required public improvements,
utilities, streets, drainage facilities, sewer, street lights,
monuments, and lot pins have been completed and accepted
by the Municipal Governing Body.
D. If a developer chooses to install all required improvements
prior to construction of any building in place of using
performance guarantees, the Municipality shall as deemed
necessary require the developer to have adequate insurance,
hold harmless agreements and an escrow account to cover the
costs of inspection.
E. The developer shall provide a deed of dedication together with
8-1/2” x 11” plan(s) of such improvements.
SECTION 902. IMPROVEMENTS TO BE PROVIDED BY THE
APPLICANT
A. In all cases, the subdivider or land developer shall be
responsible for the installation of all improvements required
by this Ordinance.
1. The Municipal Engineer or the Municipality’s
designee shall make such inspections of the required
improvements at such intervals as may be reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with this Ordinance.
150
2. The costs of such inspection shall be borne by the
subdivider or land developer, and held in an escrow
account.
SECTION 903. DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
A. Improvements Agreement Required.
1. All applicants proposing any subdivision or land
development which provides for the installation of
improvements required by this Ordinance or any
improvements or amenities which appear on the plan
shall be required to enter into a legally binding
Improvements Agreement complete with Performance
Guarantee with the Municipality prior to Final Plan
approval.
2. The Improvements Agreement shall guarantee the
installation of said improvements in strict accordance
with all Municipal requirements.
B. Terms of Improvements Agreement. The Improvements
Agreement shall be in the manner and form by the Municipal
Solicitor and it shall consist of the following terms, where
applicable:
,a
1. The construction depicted upon the approved plans in
itemized format.
i. Construction of streets with related curbs, street
designs, drainage facilities and related
improvements.
ii. Installation of utility lines.
2. A work schedule setting forth the beginning and
ending dates and such other details as the Municipality
deems fit and appropriate for the improvements
covered by the Improvements Agreement, and
i. An inspection schedule approved by the
Municipal Engineer.
3. The provision of a Performance Guarantee for
completion of required improvements which complies
with Section 903.
i. The estimated cost of the improvements,
including a detailed breakdown in a form
151
acceptable to the Governing Body, and amount
of the Performance Guarantee.
ii. All improvements subject to the Improvements
Agreement shall be approved according to the
approved inspection schedule and Section 903.
4. Developer’s responsibilities for damage to other
property.
i. Developer shall secure or maintain public
liability insurance and workers’ compensation
insurance for the duration of improvements
construction. A copy (or other evidence of
coverage) shall be submitted to the
Municipality.
ii. A save harmless clause to protect the
Municipality from liability.
iii. Prevention of erosion, sedimentation and water
damage to the subject and adjacent properties.
5. Dedication of streets, transfer of water and sewer lines
and easements.
6. After completion of all required improvements, the
developer shall provide the Municipality with a set of
reproducible completed improvement plans prepared
and certified by a Professional Engineer or Land
Surveyor showing all streets, storm and sanitary
sewers, water distribution facilities and street
monuments complete with elevations, as constructed.
The scale of these plans shall be one (1) inch equals
fifty (50) feet.
7. The developer shall be responsible for all engineering
and legal costs and expenses for review, inspection,
consultations and preparation of agreements.
8. Provisions for violation of the Improvements
Agreement .
9. Any other lawful terms which the Governing Body
may require to carry out the provisions of this
Ordinance.
10. Signatures. The development agreement shall be
signed by all landowners and/or developers.
152
C. Ownership of Land and Guarantee
1. A certificate of ownership in the form in the Appendix
shall be executed in the exact name in which the title is
held. If the developers (of a subdivision if someone
other than the landowners) of the subdivision, the
developer shall also excuse the affidavit mentioned
above, along with a performance bond and security
agreements.
SECTION 904. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
The Performance Guarantee for completion of required improvements shall
meet the following requirements:
A. Security
1. The Guarantee shall be secured by the credit of any of
the following:
i. An irrevocable and unconditional letter of
credit of a Federal or State chartered lending
institution,
ii. A restrictive or escrow account in a Federal or
State chartered lending institution, or
iii. Such other financial security approved by the
Governing Body (which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld).
2. Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and
secure to the public, the completion of any
improvements which may be required within one year
of the date fixed in the Development Schedule for the
completion of such improvements.
3. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding
company or Federally insured or State chartered
lending institution chosen by the party posting the
financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such
business within the State.
i. The Governing Body may require that evidence be
provided that such institution or company has
sufficiently adequate and secure assets to cover
the security.
153
ii.The Municipality shall be an authorized signatory on
any account in which the escrow funds are held
and all escrow funds from sales of lots shall be
paid directly to such fund, and a monthly
statement shall be furnished to the
Municipality.
B. Amount
1. The amount of financial security to be posted for the
completion of the required improvements shall be
equal to 110 percent of the cost of completion
estimated as of ninety (90) days following the date
scheduled for completion by the developer in the
official development schedule, and within the process
for increases to cover inflation as permitted by the
State Planning Code.
2. The cost of the improvements shall be established by
an estimate prepared by a PA. Registered Professional
Engineer, (pursuant to the applicable revisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code).
3. If the party posting the financial security requires more
than one (1) year from the date of posting of the
financial security to complete the required
improvements, the amount of financial security shall
be increased an additional ten (10) percent for each
one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from
posting of financial security or to an amount not
exceeding 110 percent of the cost of completing the
required improvements as reestablished on or about
the expiration of the preceding one-year period by
using the above bidding procedure.
C. Multi-Year or Multi-Stage Development. In the case where
development is projected over a period of years, the
Governing Body may authorize submission of final plans by
sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the
protection of any finally approved section of the development.
SECTION 905. APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS
A. In General. As the work of installing the required
improvements proceeds, the party pasting the financial
security may request the Governing Body to release, from
154
time to time, such portions of the financial security necessary
for payment to the contractors performing the work.
B. Notice of Completion When the developer has completed an
improvement, the developer shall notify the Governing Body
in writing by certified or registered mail of such completion
and request for release and shall send a copy thereof to the
Municipal Engineer.
C. Engineer’s Report.
1. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such request,
the
Municipal Engineer shall submit a written report
certifying which improvements have been completed
in accordance with the approved plan to the Governing
Body.
2. This report shall be based on the inspections made
according to the approved inspection schedule
included in the Improvements Agreement and shall
recommend approval or rejection of the improvements,
either in whole or in part.
3. If the Engineer finds any or all of the improvements to
be not as required, they shall include a statement of the
reasons for recommending their rejection in the report.
D. Release of Funds. See Section 510 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
E. Completion of Unapproved Improvements. The Developer
shall proceed to complete any improvements not approved by
the Governing Body and, upon completion, request approval
in conformance with the procedures specified in this section.
F. Final Release.
1. When the developer has completed all of the necessary
and appropriate improvements, the developer shall
request Final Release in conformance with the
procedures specified in this Section. See time
limitations and procedures in Section 510 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.
155
2. A maintenance agreement must be in place before final
release.
G. Appeal. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in
limitation of the developer’s right to contest or question by
legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the
Governing Body or the Municipal Engineer.
SECTION 906. REMEDIES TO EFFECT COMPLETION OF
IMPROVEMENTS
A. Enforcement of Security.
1. In the event that any improvements which may be
required have not been installed as provided in this
Ordinance or in accord with the approval Final Plan, or
in the event of the bankruptcy of the owner or
developer, the Governing Body is hereby granted the
power to elect to enforce any corporate bond (or other
security) by appropriate legal and equitable remedies.
2. This may include taking all actions necessary to obtain
moneys under said bond, including but not limited to
seizure of undeveloped lots, confession of judgment,
suit on the bond, seizure of escrow funds, renovation
of building permits and prosecution under this
Ordinance.
3. Rate of Construction. Failure of a developer to
construct streets and other public improvements
reasonably at the same time or prior to the construction
of the buildings served by those streets or public
improvements, and at the same rate in time at which
buildings are completed, shall be a violation of this
Ordinance and a cause for default.
B. Completion by Municipality. If the proceeds of such bond or
other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or
making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered
by said security, the Governing Body may, as its option, install
part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or
land development and may institute appropriate legal or
equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete
the remainder of the improvements.
156
C. Proceeds for Installation of Improvements. All of the
proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any
legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both
shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by security, and not for any other Municipal purpose.
SECTION 907. MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
A. Maintenance Agreement Required
1. All applications proposing any subdivision or land
development which provides for the dedication of
improvements required by this Ordinance or any
improvements or amenities which appear on the Plan
shall be required to enter into a legally binding
Maintenance Agreement with the Municipality prior to
acceptance of dedication by the Municipality.
2. The dedication of any improvement shall no be
accepted by the Municipality prior to the execution of
a Maintenance Agreement and the delivery of the
Maintenance Guarantee.
B. Terms of Maintenance Agreement
1. The Maintenance Agreement shall be in a manner and
form approved by the Municipal Solicitor.
2. The Maintenance Agreement shall require the
Applicant to make any repair or reconstruction of any
improvement stipulated in the Maintenance Agreement
which is specified by the Governing Body as necessary
by reason to faulty construction, workmanship, or
materials prior to acceptance of such improvement by
the Municipality.
3. The Maintenance Agreement shall require the
Applicant to maintain at her/his cost all improvements
stipulated in the Maintenance Agreement. This period
shall not exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of
acceptance or dedication by the Municipality, except
for any special purpose escrow or maintenance
agreements required by the Municipality.
4. The Maintenance Agreement shall require the posting
of financial security to secure structural integrity of
157
said improvements as well as the functioning of said
improvements in accordance with the design and
specifications as depicted on the final plan for a term
not exceeding eighteen (18) months from the date of
acceptance of dedication.
5. Snow Plowing. It shall be the responsibility of the
developer to plow snow and maintain all streets until
such time as the Municipality may accept such streets.
C. Public Utilities and Authorities. If water mains or sanitary
sewer lines or both, along with apparatus or facilities related
thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant
to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distant form the Municipality, financial
security to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof
shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the
controlling public utility or municipal authority and shall not
be included within the financial security as otherwise required
by this Section.
SECTION 908. MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE
A. Security. The Maintenance Guarantee shall be secured by the
credit of any of the following:
1. An irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit of a
Federal or State chartered lending institution.
2. A restrictive or escrow account in a Federal or State
chartered institution, or
3. Such other financial security approved by the
Governing Body (which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld).
B. Terms. Such Maintenance Guarantee shall be in the form
approved by the Municipal Solicitor and Governing Body,
payable to the Municipality, to guarantee the maintenance and
repair of the streets and other public improvements in the
subdivision for five (5) years from the date of acceptance
thereof by the Municipality. The applicant shall prove to the
satisfaction of the Governing Body that there will be an
acceptable system for the long-term maintenance of any storm
water detention basins.
158
C. Amount. The amount of the Maintenance Guarantee shall be
determined by the Municipality, but shall not exceed fifteen
(15) percent of the actual cost of installation of such
improvements.
D. Release. After the expiration of eighteen (18) months from
the date of acceptance of said improvements, the Municipality
shall release said Maintenance Guarantee to the developer (or
party posting said Maintenance Guarantee) if all
improvements are in satisfactory condition.
159
160
161
162
163