Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 474]
§ 1-1. Adoption of the Code of the Township of Upper Allen.
That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of
the Secretary of Upper Allen Township at the Municipal Building, 100
Gettysburg Pike, Mechanicsburg, Upper Allen Township, Pennsylvania,
being marked and designated "The Code of the Township of Upper Allen,"
and additionally a proposed copy of which has been and is on file at the
law library located at the Cumberland County Courthouse, One Courthouse
Square, Carlisle, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, and at the offices of
The Sentinel, located at 457 East North Street, Carlisle, Cumberland
County, Pennsylvania, be and it hereby is adopted pursuant to Section 1502,
Clause I, II (53 P.S. § 56502) of the First Class Township Code, as the
Code of the Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania
(hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "Code of Upper Allen" or "Code");
embodying the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Upper Allen as revised, codified and consolidated into titles,
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corporation, consisting
of the Charter and Chapters 1 through 245, together with Appendix. Each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Code are hereby referred to, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single
ordinance of the Township of Upper Allen.
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Allen, and it
is the intention of said Board of Commissioners that each such provision
contained within the code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted
from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions
of this ordinance, and only new or changed provisions, as described in this
ordinance, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this
Code, as provided below.
§ 1-3. Incorporation of Code adoption documents.
Various ordinances and parts of ordinances that are repealed and/or saved
and previously enacted ordinances are identified and set forth in the
document attached hereto and made a part hereof entitled "Adoption of
Code," pages 1 through 68 inclusive.1
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-4. Date of effect.
This ordinance shall take effect on the first day of the month after its date
of enactment.
1. Editor's Note: Said document is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 1-4
1:4
Chapter 6
AUDITOR
§ 6-1. Township accounts to be audited by independent body.2
The accounts of the Township of Upper Allen shall be audited by an
independent auditor who shall be a certified public accountant registered
in Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public accountants so registered or a
competent public accountant or a competent firm of public accountants.
§ 6-2. Annual appointment.
An independent auditor shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, annually,
by resolution before the close of the fiscal year, to make an independent
examination of all accounts and accounting records of the township for the
fiscal year then closing. Said appointment shall be made at least thirty (30)
days prior to the close of the fiscal year.
§ 6-3. Powers and duties.
Such independent auditor shall have and possess all the powers and
perform all the duties provided in the First Class Township Code3 for elected
Auditors.
§ 6-4. Abolishment of office of elected Auditor.
Upon appointment of an independent auditor by the Board of
Commissioners of Upper Allen Township, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, the office of elected Auditor is hereby abolished.
Chapter 9
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 1-4 AUDITOR § 6-4
6:5

ARTICLE I
Upper Allen Township Authority
[Adopted 8-20-1969 as Ord. No. 137]
§ 9-1. Legislative intent.
The Board of Commissioners of this township signifies its intention and
desire to organize an Authority under provisions of the Act of Assembly
approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945," as amended and supplemented (the "Authorities Act").4
§ 9-2. Authorization to execute Articles of Incorporation.
The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners and the
Secretary or Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this township are
authorized and directed to execute, in behalf of this township, Articles of
Incorporation for such Authority in substantially the following form.5
§ 9-3. Authorization to cause notice of adoption.
The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners and the
Secretary or Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this township are
authorized and directed to cause notice of the substance of this Article,
including the substance of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and of
the proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation to be published as
required by the Authorities Act.
§ 9-4. Authorization to file Articles of Incorporation and to pay fees.
The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners and the
Secretary or Assistant Secretary, respectively, of this township are
authorized and directed to cause such Articles of Incorporation, together
with necessary proofs of publication, to be filed with the Secretary of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Authority,
including payment of any fees necessary in connection therewith.
§ 9-5. Initial members.
The following named persons shall be and they are appointed as first
members of the Board of the Authority for the following terms of office.6
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: Said Articles of Incorporation are on file in the office of the Township
Secretary.
6. Editor's Note: The list of original members, their addresses and their terms of office is
currently on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 9-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 9-6
9:7
§ 9-6. Purpose.
The enactment of this Article is deemed necessary for the benefit of and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of and
will increase the prosperity of citizens of this township.7
7. Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation, which immediately followed this section, are
currently on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 9-6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 9-6
9:8
Chapter 22
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer — See
Ch. Ch. 26
Ambulance services — See Ch. 86.
Public safety radio system amplifiers — See
Ch. 192.
§ 22-1. Establishment.
A local emergency management agency is hereby established and shall be
known as the "Upper Allen Township Emergency Management Agency."
§ 22-2. Authority.
The Upper Allen Township Emergency Management Agency is established
pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management
Services Code (35 Pa. C.S.A. § 7501 et seq.).
§ 22-3. General duties and responsibilities.
The Upper Allen Township Emergency Management Agency shall have
the responsibilities for emergency management and disaster response and
recovery within the Township of Upper Allen. The Upper Allen Township
Emergency Management Agency shall also provide emergency
management and disaster response and recovery services outside the
Township of Upper Allen as required by the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 22-4. Declaration of local disaster emergency.
A. A local disaster emergency may be declared by the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Upper Allen upon a finding that such
a disaster has occurred or is imminent. In addition, the Emergency
Management Coordinator, Township Manager and Police Chief are
hereby authorized to declare a local disaster emergency subject to
ratification by the Board of Commissioners within seven days of such
declaration.
B. The declaration of a local disaster emergency shall not be continued or
renewed for a period in excess of seven days unless approved by the
Board of Commissioners.
C. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local
disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity, and a
copy of any such order or proclamation shall be filed promptly with the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
§ 9-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 22-4
22:9
§ 22-5. Temporary suspension of formal requirements.
Upon declaration of a disaster emergency, the Township of Upper Allen,
pursuant to 7301(c) of the Emergency Management Services Code, shall be
authorized to exercise the powers granted in this chapter, without regard
to time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law (excepting
mandatory constitutional requirements) pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the
employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase
of supplies and materials, the levying of taxes and the appropriation and
expenditure of public funds. In addition, upon the declaration of a disaster
emergency, the Township of Upper Allen is authorized to avail itself of the
provisions of Act of August 5, 1941, (P.L. 752, No. 286), known as the
"Civil Defense Act," in connection with the employment of personnel in local
organizations established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 22-6. Local Coordinator of Emergency Management.
D. Upon declaration of a local disaster emergency, the applicable response
and recovery aspects of the Upper Allen Township local emergency
management plan shall be activated, and all provisions for aid and
assistance thereunder shall be authorized.
A. The Upper Allen Township Emergency Management Agency shall have
a Coordinator who shall be responsible for the planning, administration
and operation of the agency subject to the direction and control of the
Board of Commissioners.
B. The Coordinator of the Upper Allen Township Emergency Management
Agency shall be appointed by the Governor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania upon recommendation of the Board of Commissioners.
The Board of Commissioners may, upon agreement by resolution with
adjoining municipalities, recommend to the Governor a candidate for
Coordinator for emergency management activities in the said political
subdivisions. The Upper Allen Township Emergency Management
Coordinator shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners.
C. The Coordinator of the Upper Allen Township Emergency Management
Agency shall:
(1) Be professionally competent and capable of planning, effecting and
coordinating operations among agencies of government and
controlling coordinated operations by local emergency
preparedness forces.
(2) Attend and successfully complete the first phase of the career
development program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency within one year after
appointment.
§ 22-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 22-6
22:10
§ 22-7. Powers and duties of the Emergency Management Agency.
The Upper Allen Township Emergency Management Agency is hereby
directed to:
(3) Attend and successfully complete the second phase of the career
development program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency within three years after
appointment.
(4) Attend basic and advanced seminars, workshops and training
conferences called by the Director of the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency and/or its Director of Training and Education.
(5) Failure to attend and successfully complete the career
development program phases, as described above, or failure to
attend a prescribed training program for two consecutive years
shall be cause for replacement of the Coordinator of the Upper
Allen Township Emergency Management Agency.
(6) Responsibility for the professional in-service training of the
Coordinator of the Upper Allen Township Emergency Management
Agency shall rest with the Emergency Management Coordinator of
Cumberland County.
D. The Township of Upper Allen will reimburse its Coordinator for actual
expenses incurred as the result of his or her attendance at scheduled
meetings and training programs.
A. Prepare, maintain and keep current a disaster emergency plan for the
Township of Upper Allen for the prevention and minimizing of injury
and damage caused by disaster, for prompt and effective response to
disaster and for disaster emergency relief and recovery in consonance
with the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Plan and the
Cumberland County Emergency Management Plan.
B. Establish, equip and staff an emergency operations center for the
Township of Upper Allen.
C. Establish a warning and communications system for the Township of
Upper Allen that will support governmental operations in emergencies.
D. Provide essential facilities and equipment to those agencies and
organizations that have been assigned emergency functions under the
provisions of this chapter.
E. Provide individual and organizational training programs for police
officers, fire fighters, rescue personnel, ambulance personnel,
emergency management volunteers and the general public to insure
prompt, efficient and effective disaster emergency services.
§ 22-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 22-7
22:11
§ 22-8. Coordination, assistance and mutual aid.
The Coordinator of the Upper Allen Township Emergency Management
Agency shall develop and maintain mutual aid agreements with adjacent
political subdivisions for reciprocal emergency assistance. The agreements
shall be consistent with the plans and program of the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency and the Cumberland County Emergency
Management Agency. The agreements shall stipulate that direction of
emergency disaster assistance is the responsibility of the lowest level of
government affected, that the County Emergency Management Agency
F. Organize, prepare and coordinate all locally available manpower,
materials, supplies, equipment and facilities necessary for disaster
emergency readiness, response and recovery.
G. Adopt and implement precautionary measures to mitigate the
anticipated effects of a disaster.
H. Execute and enforce such rules, regulations and orders as the Upper
Allen Township Emergency Management Agency may adopt pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
I. Cooperate and coordinate with any public and private agencies or
entities in achieving any purpose of this chapter.
J. Have available for inspection at its emergency operations center all
emergency management plans, rules, regulations and orders of the
Governor and the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
K. Provide prompt and accurate information regarding local disaster
emergencies to appropriate commonwealth and local officials and
agencies and the general public.
L. Make monthly reports to the Township of Upper Allen on the status and
programs of the Upper Allen Township Emergency Management
Agency, its personnel, programs and plans.
M. Execute and enforce such rules and orders as may be adopted by the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
N. Make timely recommendations to and secure the consent of the
Township of Upper Allen concerning the development of plans, the
acquisition of materials, supplies and equipment and the development
of a budget for the agency, except as provided for in disaster
emergencies.
O. Identify areas within the Township of Upper Allen that are particularly
vulnerable to disaster.
P. Upon request of the Board of Commissioners or Emergency
Management Coordinator, assist the Township of Upper Allen and/or its
police, fire, rescue or emergency medical services in handling and
coordinating special, nondisaster emergencies and situations.
§ 22-7 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 22-8
22:12
shall provide coordination and support when more than one political
subdivision within Cumberland County is affected and that the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency, or its area organization, shall provide
coordination and support when two or more counties are affected. In
disaster emergencies, requests for mutual aid assistance shall be referred
to the organization, as outlined above, having responsibility for coordination
and, in time of emergency, it shall be the duty of the Upper Allen Township
Emergency Management Agency to render assistance in accordance with
these mutual aid agreements. In all cases, support services provided from
outside the affected area shall remain under the operational control of the
receiving area.
§ 22-9. Approvals and ratification of agreement.
§ 22-10. Emergency restrictions.
A. Except during local disaster emergencies, the Board of Commissioners
shall:
(1) Approve all expenditures of the Upper Allen Township Emergency
Management Agency in advance.
(2) Approve attendance and participation of personnel of the
Emergency Management Agency at training sessions, seminars and
meetings.
(3) Review and approve the Upper Allen Township Emergency
Management Plan.
B. All mutual aid agreements (§ 22-9) shall be ratified by the Board of
Commissioners and by the governing bodies of other affected
municipalities prior to implementation.
A. Snowfall.
(1) It shall be unlawful to park or permit to be parked any motor
vehicle or other vehicle or item on any street or alley which is part
of the Township-maintained street system two hours after the start
of continuous snowfall and until the snow has been completely
plowed for the full width of the cartway.
(2) Any member of the Upper Allen Township Police Department or
other employee of Upper Allen Township engaged in snow removal
activities is hereby authorized to remove any vehicle abandoned or
parked upon a public street or alley in violation of the terms and
provisions of this chapter and to take any said vehicle to the
nearest authorized storage garage or other place of safety. The
registered owner of any said vehicle shall be promptly notified, in
writing, of the fact of the removal and of the place to which said
vehicle has been removed, where said owner may obtain the same
upon payment of any and all towing and storage charges.
§ 22-8 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 22-11
22:13
§ 22-11. Gifts and grants of monies.
Any gift or grants of monies made to the Upper Allen Township Emergency
Management Agency or to the Township of Upper Allen for the payment of
expenses incurred or to be incurred by or for the Emergency Management
Agency shall be deposited in the treasury of the Township of Upper Allen
and shall be appropriated only for the purpose for which the gift or grants
were made.
§ 22-12. Representation on boards and agencies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the Upper Allen
Township Emergency Management Agency from providing representation
to other boards or agencies, such as outside emergency management
advisory boards, emergency health services councils and regional
communications committees, that coordinate with or otherwise impact the
delivery of emergency management services.
§ 22-13. Insignia and identifying marks.
The Upper Allen Township Emergency Management Agency shall adopt,
with the approval of the Board of Commissioners, such insignia and/or
other identifying marks or markings as are necessary to ensure the correct,
prompt identification of its personnel, equipment and facilities.
§ 22-14. Applicability of state statutes.
The provisions of the Emergency Management Services Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act 1978-323 (P.L. 1332), shall govern
the emergency management activities of the Township of Upper Allen and
the Upper Allen Township Emergency Management Agency, except in
circumstances where the Emergency Management Services Code does not
address local provisions or conditions provided for by this chapter.
§ 22-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of § 22-10 of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice having jurisdiction
thereover, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 10 days.
Chapter 26
FIRE MARSHAL/FIRE PREVENTION OFFICER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Management Agency — See Ch.
22.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 112.
§ 22-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 22-15
22:14
§ 26-1. Appointment Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer.
The Upper Allen Township Board of Commissioners shall appoint the Fire
Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer from time to time by resolution. When the
Board of Commissioners has not appointed a Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention
Officer and/or in the absence of a Board-appointed Fire Marshal/Fire
Prevention Officer, the Director of Community Development shall hereby be
appointed to serve as such until such time as the Board appoints a Fire
Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer.
§ 26-2. Duties and responsibilities of Fire Marshall/Fire Prevention
Officer.
The duties and responsibilities of the Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer
shall be divided into three prime areas:
§ 26-3. Qualifications.
The qualifications of the Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall be set
forth by the Board of Commissioners from time to time.
§ 26-4. Liaison.
A. Liaison.
B. Investigation.
C. Enforcement.
A. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall serve as a member of the
Public Safety/Fire Committee of the Board of Commissioners in an
advisory capacity only. He shall report his activities directly to the
Public Safety/Fire Committee and/or the full Board of Commissioners.
The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall act as a liaison between
the Public Safety/Fire Committee or Board, and the Upper Allen
Township Fire Department, Fire Company, Volunteer Firemen's
Association and Township ambulance company or companies, if any.
B. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention officer shall serve as an advisor to the
Public Safety/Fire Committee, and/or the Board, to develop a
coordinated Township-wide management plan for the operation of fire
services. Included, but not limited to, will be: financial and personnel
management, assisting in equipment selection, fire protection
engineering, fire prevention, fire safety education, research and
planning, maintenance, training, community relations, safety and
health and other related activities.
C. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall act in an advisory
capacity in relation to all activities of the Upper Allen Township Fire
§ 22-15 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 26-4
22:15
Department relating to training. Specifically, the Fire Prevention
Officer shall:
(1) Assist the Department in establishing and maintaining a training
and education program with a goal of preventing occupational
accidents, deaths, injuries and illnesses.
(2) Assist the Department in providing a written training program
indicating the areas in which training will occur and the frequency
of training.
D. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall act in an advisory
capacity at the scene of any fire or emergency situation. When
responding on the initial alarm, and no designated area officer is
responding, the Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer may take the
appropriate action to provide the level of protection needed. He shall
offer advice to or respond to requests for advice from the Fire Chief or
line officer of the Fire Department or other company or companies in
attendance. The Fire Prevention Officer shall have no authority to
require or mandate a Chief, line officer or company to act in any specific
manner at the scene of a fire or emergency situation unless he becomes
aware of a decision or observes an action that is clearly inappropriate
and puts at risk lives or property.
E. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall investigate, in
conjunction with officials of the Fire Department, injuries to Fire
Department personnel which may result in a workman's compensation
claim and shall assist the individual involved in properly making the
appropriate claim.
F. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall act as a liaison between
the property owners of the Township and the Fire Department and
other fire companies serving them in relation to securing plans of the
premises to be utilized by fire companies in firefighting and emergency
situations, to recommend actions to be taken at the property to
facilitate fighting of fires or providing of emergency service, as well as
related matters.
G. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall review with the Fire
Department Chief the emergency response system (fire boxes)
established with the Cumberland County Emergency Management
Agency to ensure that the Township has appropriate coverage and
response and that the Township is properly covered when fire
equipment is dispatched on a mutual aid basis outside the Township.
H. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall use his best efforts to
keep the Fire Department informed on pertinent data relating to
fighting of fires and providing of other emergency services. The Fire
Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall not be required to give the Fire
Department advice on financial matters or the internal operations or
running of it not otherwise provided for in this chapter.
§ 26-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 26-4
22:16
§ 26-5. Investigation.
§ 26-6. Enforcement.
Chapter 44
MANAGER, TOWNSHIP
§ 44-1. Creation of office; right of Board to abolish.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of Upper
Allen, subject to the right of the Board of Commissioners to abolish said
office at any time by ordinance.
I. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall supply to and receive
from the Fire Department a copy of all of its fire and incident reports.
A. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall investigate or cause to
be investigated every fire or explosion occurring within Upper Allen
Township that is of a suspicious nature or which involves the loss of life
or serious injury or causes destruction or damage to property, in
accordance with the 2000 International Fire Prevention Code Chapter
on Administration and Enforcement as adopted by the Township under
the provisions of the 2000 International Fire Prevention Code or its
subsequent equivalent code. The authority to investigate under this
section shall be secondary to any authority or jurisdiction of the State
Fire Marshal, State Police or Township Police to conduct investigations.
B. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall prepare reports of
investigations and submit them to authorized agencies.
A. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall enforce the provisions of
the 2009 International Fire Prevention Code, including the provisions of
Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, Appendix D, Fire
Apparatus Access Roads, and Appendix J, Emergency Responder Radio
Coverage, of the 2009 International Fire Code, or its subsequent
equivalent code and appendices, pursuant to the authority of Chapter
1058 of the Upper Allen Township Code. [Amended 4-3-2013 by Ord.
No. 708]
B. The Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer shall carry out the aforesaid
enforcement provisions in cooperation with any and all other Township
departments, including, but not limited to, Administration, Buildings
and Code Enforcement, Fire Department and Police Department.
8. Editor's Note: Chapter 105, adopted 6-21-2001, was repealed 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 584.
See now Ch. 112, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 26-4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 44-2
44:17
§ 44-2. Appointment and removal.9
The Manager shall be appointed biannually by a majority of all the members
of the Board of Commissioners. Said office shall be filled biannually
thereafter. In the event of a vacancy, the Board of Commissioners shall elect
a replacement by majority vote of all of its members for the unexpired term.
The Manager may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all the
members of the Board of Commissioners. At least thirty (30) days before
such removal becomes effective, the Board of Commissioners shall furnish
the Manager with a written statement setting forth its intention to remove
him/her and the reasons therefore.
§ 44-3. Qualifications.10
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his/her executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his/her actual experience
in or his/her knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his/
her office as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the
Township or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of his/her
appointment, but within one (1) year of appointment, he/she shall become
and during his/her tenure shall remain a resident of the Township. No
Commissioner shall be appointed as Township Manager during the term
for which he/she shall have been elected, nor within one (1) year after the
expiration of his/her term.
§ 44-4. Bonding requirements.11
Upon entering his/her duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Township with a bonding company as surety, said company and amount to
be approved by the Board of Commissioners, conditioned for the faithful
performance of his/her duties. The premium shall be paid by the Township.
The bond of the Township Manager may be included in and covered by any
comprehensive bond now or hereafter in force or effect for all Township
employees.
§ 44-5. Compensation. [Amended 2-17-1983 by Ord. No. 336]
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed yearly by the Board of
Commissioners as an item of the Upper Allen Township annual budget.
§ 44-6. Powers and duties.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township,
and he/she shall be responsible to the Board of Commissioners as a
whole for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 44-2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 44-6
44:18
Township. His/her powers and duties shall relate to the general
management of all Township business not expressly by statute or
ordinance imposed or conferred upon other Township officers.
B. Subject to recall by ordinance of the Board of Commissioners, the
powers and duties of the Township Manager shall include the following:
(1) He/she shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments except the Police Department.
(2) He/she shall, with the prior approval of the majority of the Board of
Commissioners, hire and, when necessary for the good of the
service, suspend or discharge all employees under his supervision,
provided that persons covered by the civil service provisions of the
First Class Township Code12 shall be hired, suspended or
discharged in accordance with such provisions, provided further
that the Manager shall report, at the next meeting thereafter of the
Board of Commissioners, any action taken by authority of this
subsection.
(3) He/she shall prepare and submit to the Board of Commissioners
before the close of the fiscal year or on such alternate date as the
Board of Commissioners shall determine a budget for the next
fiscal year and an explanatory budget message. In preparing the
budget, the Manager or an officer designated by him/her shall
obtain from the head of each department, agency, board or officer
estimates of revenues and expenditures and other supporting data
as he/she requests. The Manager shall review such estimates and
may revise them before submitting the budget to the Board of
Commissioners.
(4) He/she shall be responsible for the administration of the budget
after its adoption by the Board of Commissioners.
(5) He/she shall hold such other municipal offices or head one (1) or
more of the municipal departments as the Board of Commissioners
may from time to time direct, including but not limited to Zoning
Officer, Township Secretary and Building Inspector.
(6) He/she shall attend all meetings of the Board of Commissioners and
its committees with the right to take part in the discussion, and he/
she shall receive notice of all special meetings of the Board of
Commissioners or its committees.
(7) He/she shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of
Commissioners and supply facts pertinent thereto.
(8) He/she shall keep the Board of Commissioners informed as to the
conduct of Township affairs; submit periodic reports on the
condition of the Township finances and such other reports as the
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 44-6 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 44-6
44:19
Board of Commissioners requests; and make such
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners as he/she deems
necessary.
(9) He/she shall submit to the Board of Commissioners, as soon as
possible after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the
financial and administrative activities of the Township for the
preceding year.
(10) He/she shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases,
permits and privileges granted by the Township are observed.
(11) He/she may employ, by and with the approval of the Board of
Commissioners, within a fee limit established by the Board, experts
and consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with
any of the functions of the Township. [Amended 6-17-1993 by
Ord. No. 474]
(12) He/she shall attend to the letting of contracts, with prior approval
of the majority of the Board of Commissioners, in due form of law,
and he/she shall supervise the performance and faithful execution
of the same except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed
upon some other Township office by statute or ordinance.
(13) He/she shall see that all money owed the Township is promptly paid
and that proper proceedings are taken for the security and
collection of all the Township's claims.
(14) (Reserved)13
(15) He/she shall keep an account of all purchases made by him and
shall, from time to time or when directed by the Board of
Commissioners, make a full written report thereof. He shall also
issue rules and regulations subject to the approval of the Board of
Commissioners governing the requisition and purchasing of
municipal supplies and equipment. Notwithstanding anything
herein contained to the contrary, the Township Manager shall not
have the power and authority to make purchases or to enter into
contracts where, according to the First Class Township Code,14
advertising is required, except with the prior approval of the
majority of the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 5-14-1980 by
Ord. No. 292; 2-17-1983 by Ord. No. 336]
C. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township shall be
referred to the office of the Manager. He/she or an officer designated by
him/her shall investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the
Manager shall report thereon to the Board of Commissioners.
13.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(14), regarding purchasing of supplies and equipment,
as amended, was repealed 10-17-1996 by Ord. No. 495.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 44-6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 44-7
44:20
§ 44-7. Limitations on powers of Board.
Neither the Board of Commissioners nor any of its committees or members
thereof shall dictate or attempt to dictate the hiring of any person to or his/
her discharge from employment by the Manager or in any manner take part
in the hiring, suspending or discharging of employees in the administrative
service of the Township except as required to do so by the civil service
provisions of the First Class Township Code.15 Except for the purpose of
inquiry, the Board of Commissioners, its committees and its members shall
deal with the administrative service solely through the Township Manager
and neither the Board of Commissioners nor any of its committees nor any
of its members shall give orders, publicly or privately, to any subordinates
of the Manager. Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary,
the Board of Commissioners reserves unto itself the rights, power and
authority as set forth in § 44-6.
§ 44-8. Disability or absence.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Township, he/
she shall designate one (1) qualified member of his/her staff to perform
the duties of the Manager during his absence or disability. The person so
designated shall not perform these duties for a period longer than two (2)
weeks without the approval of the Board of Commissioners.
Chapter 47
MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Meeting guidelines — See Ch. A252.
§ 47-1. Regular monthly meetings.
The Board of Commissioners shall hold no less than one (1) regular monthly
meeting at the Municipal Building, 100 Gettysburg Pike, Mechanicsburg,
Pennsylvania, on such dates and times as determined annually by the Board
of Commissioners by resolution adopted and published prior to the
commencement of each calendar year.
§ 47-2. Work sessions.
The Board of Commissioners may hold work sessions at the Municipal
Building, 100 Gettysburg Pike, Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania, on such dates
and times as determined annually by the Board of Commissioners by
resolution adopted and published prior to the commencement of each
calendar year.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 44-7 MEETINGS § 47-2
47:21
Chapter 51
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
§ 51-1. Creation.
There is hereby created a Park and Recreation Board to be known and cited
as the "Board."
§ 51-2. Appointments; terms of office.
The Board shall be composed of no more than seven members. The
members of the Board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners
for staggered terms of five years in such order that no more than two
members' terms shall expire annually. All persons appointed shall serve
their full terms unless voluntarily resigned or removed by the Board of
Commissioners for malfeasance or nonfeasance of duty. All the members of
the Park and Recreation Board shall be residents of Upper Allen Township,
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, at the time of appointment and for the
term of the appointment.
§ 51-3. Service without pay; vacancies.
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation and at the
pleasure of the Board of Commissioners. Vacancies occurring other than by
expiration of term shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the
same manner as original appointments.
§ 51-4. Appointment of officers; adoption of rules; expenses;
meetings.
The Board shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairman and create and fill
such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual terms and
may succeed themselves. The Board may make and alter bylaws and rules
and regulations to govern its procedures consistent with the ordinances
of Upper Allen Township, the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners. The Board may
incur expenses only when authorized by and approved by the Board of
Commissioners. The Board shall hold regular meetings at such times and
places as it designates.
§ 51-5. Authority of Board.
The Board shall initiate, provide and recommend to the Board of
Commissioners, from time to time, plans for the acquisition of, or
construction of, improvement of, maintenance of, equipping of, operation
of, financing of and regulation of public parks, parkways, playgrounds, play
fields, swimming pools, bathing places and indoor and outdoor recreation
places and facilities. The Board's recommendations and advice shall be
communicated through the Township Manager or his/her designee, who
§ 47-2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 51-5
47:22
shall be notified of each meeting of the Board and be entitled to attend each
meeting and participate in discussions without vote.
§ 51-6. Restrictions on authority of Board.
The Board shall exercise the authority granted herein over any recreation
place acquired hereafter or now existing, unless otherwise specified by the
Board of Commissioners.
Chapter 55
PENSIONS
§ 51-5 MEETINGS § 51-6
47:23

ARTICLE I
Social Security
[Adopted 12-16-1968 by Ord. No. 125; amended in its entirety
6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 474]
§ 55-1. Membership in program.
The Township of Upper Allen shall become a participant in the social
security program, and the benefits of social security shall be extended to its
employees and officers.
§ 55-2. Authorization to extend coverage to Township officers and
employees.
The proper officers shall be authorized to execute and deliver to the state
agency the plan and agreement required under the provisions of the Social
Security Act, and said enabling Act shall extend coverage to the employees
and officers of the Township of Upper Allen.
§ 55-3. Authorization to make payments into fund and to establish
payroll deductions.
The Treasurer of the Township of Upper Allen shall be authorized, and
he/she is hereby authorized, to make all required payments into the
contribution fund established by said enabling Act and to establish such
system of payroll deductions from wages of employees and officers as may
be necessary to their coverage under the social security program.
§ 55-4. Appropriation of necessary funds.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Allen shall hereby
appropriate from the proper fund or funds of the Township the amounts
necessary to pay into the contribution fund as provided in the enabling Act
and in accordance with the plan and agreement.
§ 55-5. Duties of officers.
The proper officers of this Township of Upper Allen shall do all things
necessary to the continued implementation of said social security program
in accordance with the provisions contained in the plan and agreement and
said laws.
§ 55-1 MEETINGS § 55-5
47:25

ARTICLE II
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 12-19-2002 by Ord. No. 567]
§ 55-6. Repeal and restatement.
Ordinance No. 165 establishing and regulating a Police Pension Fund in said
Township, and Ordinance Nos. 199, 291, 322, 331, 335, 341, 399, 406, 422,
423, 456 and 543 amending said Ordinance No. 165, and as set forth in the
Code of the Township of Upper Allen Chapter 55, Article II, entitled "Police
Pension Fund," are repealed, and restated, effective as of January 1, 2001,
as hereinafter set forth.
§ 55-7. Adoption and establishment.
The Board of Commissioners hereby does approve, adopt and establish the
Upper Allen Township Police Pension Plan, as restated and amended, and
as set forth fully in document named "Upper Allen Township Police Pension
Plan," a copy of which is attached hereto and marked as Exhibit A.16
§ 55-8. Pension Committee.
The Board of Commissioners has established a Pension Committee which
shall be responsible for the administration of the plan. The members of
the Pension Committee shall be designated as such by the Board of
Commissioners by resolution duly enacted from time to time. Capital Bank
and Trust Company is the currently designated trustee of the plan, and
the designation of the trustee shall be designated as such by the Board
of Commissioners by resolution enacted from time to time. The Township
Manager shall act as the chief administrative officer of the plan. The
Pension Committee shall act as the administrative named fiduciary and
investment named fiduciary for the purposes set forth as such in the plan's
trust agreement with the trustee.
§ 55-9. Execution of plan documents.
The President or Vice President and Secretary of the Board of
Commissioners be and they hereby are authorized and directed to execute
the plan documents, including the trust agreement.
§ 55-10. Special ad hoc post-retirement adjustment. [Added
2-20-2003 by Ord. No. 569]
A. The special ad hoc post-retirement adjustment to retirees who began
receiving benefits before January 1, 1996, is provided.
B. The eligibility and amount of such adjustment shall be in accordance
with Act 64 of 2002, and that such adjustment shall be effective with the
first monthly pension payment benefit paid after 30 June 2002.
16.Editor's Note: The current plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 55-6 MEETINGS § 55-10
47:27

ARTICLE III
Nonuniformed Employee Pension Plan and Fund
[Adopted 12-19-2002 by Ord. No. 568]
§ 55-11. Repeal and restatement.
The Code of the Township of Upper Allen Chapter 55, Article III, entitled
"Nonuniformed Employee Pension Fund and Plan," is repealed, and
restated, with respect to benefits accruing on or after the hereafter effective
date of the amendment and restatement of the Plan effective as of 1 January
2001 as hereinafter set forth.
§ 55-12. Adoption and establishment.
The Board of Commissioners hereby does approve, adopt and establish the
Upper Allen Township Nonuniformed Employee Pension Plan, as restated
and amended, effective as of 1 January 2001, and as set forth fully in the
document named "Upper Allen Township Employees Pension Plan," a copy
of which is attached hereto and marked as Exhibit A.17
§ 55-13. Pension Committee.
The Board of Commissioners has established a Pension Committee which
shall be responsible for the administration of the plan. The members of
the Pension Committee shall be designated as such by the Board of
Commissioners by resolution duly enacted from time to time. Capitol Bank
and Trust Company is the currently designated trustee of the plan, and
the designation of the trustee shall be designated as such by the Board of
Commissioners by resolution duly enacted from time to time. The Township
Manager shall act as the chief administrative officer of the plan. The
Pension Committee shall act as the administrative named fiduciary and
investment named fiduciary for the purposes set forth as such in the plan's
trust agreement with the trustee.
§ 55-14. Execution of plan documents.
The President or Vice President and Secretary of the Board of
Commissioners be and they hereby are authorized and directed to execute
the plan documents, including the trust agreement.
17.Editor's Note: The current plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 55-11 MEETINGS § 55-14
47:29
Chapter 58
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 58-1. Creation; compensation.
A Township Planning Commission is hereby created for the Township of
Upper Allen which shall have seven (7) members who shall serve without
compensation.
§ 58-2. Appointment, term and vacancy.
Each member of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Board
of Commissioners of Upper Allen Township for a term of four (4) years
or until his/her successor is appointed and qualified. The Chairman of the
Planning Commission shall promptly notify the Board of Commissioners
of Upper Allen Township of any vacancies in the commission, and such
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by said Board of
Commissioners.18
§ 58-3. Membership requirements.
All of the members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of Upper
Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania. At least five (5) of said
members shall be citizen members who shall not be officers or employees of
the Township of Upper Allen.
§ 58-4. Removal.
Any member of the Planning Commission, once qualified and appointed,
may be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance
in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of
Commissioners aforesaid taken after the member has received fifteen (15)
days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be
held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
Any appointment to fill a vacancy created by removal shall be only for the
unexpired term.
18.Editor's Note: Original Section 2, Members of existing Commission, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
§ 55-14 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 58-5
58:30
§ 58-5. Conduct of business.
The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and create
and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual
terms and may succeed themselves. The Commission may make and alter
bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures consistent with
the ordinances of Upper Allen Township and the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. The Commission shall keep a full record of its business and
shall annually make a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities
to said Board of Commissioners. Interim reports may be made as often as
may be necessary or as requested by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 58-6. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall perform all the duties and may exercise
all the powers conferred upon it by ordinances and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or as requested by the Board of
Commissioners of Upper Allen Township.
§ 58-7. Assistance.
The Planning Commission may, with the consent of said Board of
Commissioners, accept and utilize any funds, personnel or other assistance
made available by the County of Cumberland, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the federal government or any of their agencies or from
private sources.
Chapter 67
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 58-5 PLANNING COMMISSION § 58-7
58:31

ARTICLE I
Board of Commissioners
[Adopted 2-19-1981 by Ord. No. 305; amended in its entirety
6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 474]
§ 67-1. Compensation.
The compensation of all Township Commissioners of the Township of Upper
Allen, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, elected or appointed after the
adoption of this Article may be the maximum amount permitted as the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania may, from time to
time, determine, except as restricted by the provisions of Section 703 of the
First Class Township Code, as amended.19
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 67-1 PLANNING COMMISSION § 67-1
58:33

ARTICLE II
Treasurer/Tax Collector
[Adopted 1-19-1989 by Ord. No. 420; amended in its entirety
4-3-2013 by Ord. No. 706]
§ 67-2. Compensation of Tax Collector. [Amended 12-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 758]
Effective January 1, 2017, the compensation or salary for the office of Tax
Collector for Upper Allen Township shall be in the amount of $7,500 per
annum, said sum to be the compensation or salary for the performance
of all duties as Tax Collector, as prescribed by the First Class Township
Code.20 The Township shall reimburse the Tax Collector upon submission
of proper voucher for the Tax Collector's actual expenditures for printing,
postage and other expenses allowable by law as required to perform his or
her duties. The Township shall pay the premium cost of any fidelity bond
required by the Tax Collector for the performance of duties to or for Upper
Allen Township.
§ 67-3. Compensation of Treasurer.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Allen shall appoint
a Township Treasurer, who may also be the elected Township Tax Collector
or an employee of the Township, to serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Township Commissioners. Compensation for the Township Treasurer will be
set by the Board.
20.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq
§ 67-2 PLANNING COMMISSION § 67-3
58:35
Chapter 71
SEWER ADVISORY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
§ 71-1. Creation; appointment; terms; removal; vacancies.
§ 71-2. Compensation.
The members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services
as Board members. However, if the Board of Commissioners deems it
advisable, the Board may receive such necessary expenses as may be fixed,
from time to time, by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 71-3. Duty of Board; annual report.
It shall be the duty of the Board to advise and offer recommendations
to the Board of Commissioners on matters involving the construction,
improvement and operation of the municipal sewer system of Upper Allen
Township and on such other matters as may be referred to it by the Board
of Commissioners. The Board shall submit to the Board of Commissioners
an annual report of its activities and such additional reports as may be
necessary.
§ 71-4. Election of officers.
The Board shall elect from its members a Chairman, a Vice Chairman and a
Secretary and such other officers as the Board deems necessary, with said
A. There is hereby created a Sewer Advisory Board for the Township of
Upper Allen which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be
appointed by the Board of Commissioners. The following named
persons shall be and they are hereby appointed as first members of the
Board for the terms of office set opposite their names.21
B. Their successors shall in all cases be appointed for terms of five (5)
years, and all appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired
terms. All such members of the Board however, may be removed by and
at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners, which shall promptly fill
any vacancy in membership caused by such removal by appointing a
successor for the period of the unexpired term of the member of the
Board so removed.
21.Editor's Note: The list of original members and their addresses and terms of office are on
file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 67-3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 71-4
71:36
officers to have terms of office of one (1) year and such duties as may be
agreed upon by the Board.
Chapter 73
SPECIAL FIRE POLICE FOR MUTUAL AID
§ 73-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Special Fire Police
Mutual Aid Ordinance."
§ 73-2. Legislative intent and applicability.
The background of this chapter and the legislative intention of the Board of
Commissioners in enacting it are as follows:
§ 73-3. Terms of the agreement.
A. Upper Allen Township (the "Township") is a Pennsylvania first class
Township municipality.
B. The Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177, referred to as the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
provides that local governments may jointly cooperate in the exercise
or in the performance of their respective governmental functions,
powers or responsibilities.
C. The use of special fire police to perform traffic and crowd control
services and other necessary functions, whether within or outside the
boundaries of the municipality by which they are confirmed, is
governed by statutory authority, 35 P.S. § 1201 et seq.
D. The Board of Commissioners of the Township and of Cumberland
County, Pennsylvania, and of the governing bodies of the other
participating municipalities recognize the desirability of sharing special
fire police resources for both emergency and nonemergency events for
the protection of the health, safety and welfare of all residents.
A. The conditions of membership, duration, purpose and objectives of the
intergovernmental agreement, including the powers and scope of
authority delegated therein, manner and extent of financing, and
organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement are set
forth in the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement for Special Fire
Police Mutual Aid and Emergency Assistance ("agreement"), a copy of
which is attached to this chapter as Exhibit A and incorporated herein
as if set forth in full.22
22.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township's offices.
§ 71-4 SPECIAL FIRE POLICE FOR MUTUAL AID § 73-3
73:37
§ 73-4. Authority to enter into agreement.
The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township are hereby authorized to execute all documents and perform all
actions necessary to cause the Township to enter into the agreement.
Chapter 75
TRUSTS AND FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 51. Sewer Reserve Fund — See Ch. 200, Art. V.
B. Any funds for implementation and continuing participation in the
agreement may be appropriated by the Board of Commissioners of the
Township and the governing bodies of participating municipalities as
they shall determine, in their sole discretion, from time to time.
C. Real and personal property may be acquired, managed or disposed of
under this chapter.
D. Each party has the power to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for all of
their employees, including those whose duties further the purposes of
the agreement.
§ 73-3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 73-4
75:38
ARTICLE I
Capital Reserve Fund for Anticipated Capital Expenditures
[Adopted 1-4-1971 as Ord. No. 157]
§ 75-1. Creation of fund; purpose.
The Township of Upper Allen hereby creates a separate Capital Reserve
Fund for Anticipated Capital Expenditures for the purposes of purchasing
land for municipal uses, including recreational lands for the construction,
purchase or replacement of all additions to municipal buildings, and for the
purchase or replacement of equipment, machinery or motor vehicles.
§ 75-2. Additional purposes of fund.
Said Capital Reserve Fund for Anticipated Capital Expenditures may be
used for capital expenditures other than the purposes set forth in § 75-1
hereof if the Commissioners, by four-fifths ( 4/5) vote, shall declare that the
hereinbefore mentioned purposes have become impracticable, inadvisable
or impossible or that other conditions have arisen which make other capital
expenditures more urgent than those for which the fund is hereby
specifically created.
§ 75-3. Appropriation and deposit of moneys.
The Township Commissioners may appropriate moneys from said township
funds, from time to time, to be paid into the Capital Reserve Fund for
Anticipated Capital Expenditures or place in the fund any moneys reserved
from the sale, lease or other disposition of any township property or from
any other source unless received or acquired by a particular purpose.
§ 75-4. Commissioners to oversee fund; investment of fund moneys.
The Capital Reserve Fund for Anticipated Capital Expenditures shall be
controlled, invested, reinvested, administered and the moneys therein and
income from such moneys expended for the specific purposes set forth
in § 75-1 hereof in such manner as may be determined by the Township
Commissioners. The money in said fund, when invested, shall be invested
in securities designated by law as legal investments by sinking funds of
municipalities.
§ 75-1 TRUSTS AND FUNDS § 75-4
75:39

ARTICLE II
Park and Recreation Trust Account
[Adopted 7-13-1977 as Res. No. 226]
§ 75-5. Acceptance of gifts and bequests.23
The Township of Upper Allen may accept gifts and bequests of money
for the purpose of acquiring and developing parks, recreation lands and
facilities and for equipping, operating and maintaining such areas. The
Commissioners may reject any gift or bequest when the Commissioners feel
that it would not be in the best interests of or would be a conflict of interest
for the township to accept the same because of a condition or limitation
attached thereto or for other reasons of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 75-6. Deposit of gifts and bequests into fund.
All gifts or bequests accepted for the purposes as described in § 75-1
shall be deposited in a special fund to be designated as the "Upper Allen
Township Park and Recreation Trust Account," in such bank or savings
institution as may be designated from time to time by the Commissioners.
§ 75-7. Use of funds.
All funds accepted shall be used exclusively for the acquisition and
development of parks, recreation lands and facilities and for the equipping,
operating and maintaining of such areas and for no other purpose.
§ 75-8. Withdrawal of funds.
No funds shall be withdrawn from the trust account except upon orders
approved by the proper township officials, as provided by law.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 75-5 TRUSTS AND FUNDS § 75-8
75:41

ARTICLE III
Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 8-19-1982 as Ord. No. 326]
§ 75-9. Participation in trust.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act24 by becoming a settlor
of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the "trust") and
entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy
of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this Article
was adopted.
§ 75-10. Authorization to purchase and redeem shares.
This municipality is authorized to purchase shares in the trust from time
to time with available municipal funds and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time as funds are needed for municipal purposes. These
actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant
to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting this
Article.25
§ 75-11. Trustees to have custody of invested municipal funds.
The trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the
trust.
§ 75-12. Requirements of Act.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,26 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 75-9.
B. This municipality's participation in the trust shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this municipality's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments as part of a pooled arrangement with other
24.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: Resolution No. 278 provided as follows: "The Township Treasurer and the
Township Manager be and they hereby are designated as officers of the township
authorized to purchase shares in trust from time to time with available municipal funds
and to redeem some or all of those shares from time to time as funds are needed for
municipal purposes."
26.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
§ 75-9 TRUSTS AND FUNDS § 75-12
75:43
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages
of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in the trust.
E. The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this
municipality may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its
cash investment requirements.
§ 75-12 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 75-12
75:44
ARTICLE IV
Penn PRIME Workers Compensation Trust
[Adopted 1-21-1993 as Ord. No. 473]
§ 75-13. Trust agreement.
The proper officers of the township be and they are hereby authorized
and directed to execute the Penn PRIME Workers Compensation Trust
Agreement (or member participation agreement), which agreement
provides for the participation of Upper Allen Township, in cooperation
with other Pennsylvania municipalities and local public agencies, in the
Penn PRIME Workers Compensation Trust. The trust agreement, which
incorporates the organizational structure necessary to implement the
program, is on file for inspection and review at the offices of the
Pennsylvania League of Cities and Municipalities, 414 North Second Street,
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania 17101. The agreement may be amended after
the enactment of this Article to conform to any requirements imposed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Department of Labor and Industry,
Bureau of Workers Compensation, and such other manner as the trust
agreement may permit.
§ 75-14. Purpose.
The participation of Upper Allen Township in the Penn PRIME Workers
Compensation Trust is authorized for the purposes of enabling the township
to ultimately reduce and stabilize the cost of its workers compensation
obligations through the creation of a joint fund to be used for the payment
of workers compensation claims on behalf of all participants in the Penn
PRIME Workers Compensation Trust.
§ 75-15. Conditions applicable to participation of township.
As set forth in the Penn PRIME Workers Compensation Trust Agreement,
the following conditions, among others, apply to the participation of the
township in the Penn PRIME Workers Compensation Trust:
A. That each participating municipality meets the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein.
B. That each participating municipality agrees to pay all of its annual
contributions and any assessments which are required for the creation
and maintenance of the General Operating and Restricted Surplus
Funds created pursuant to the Penn PRIME Workers Compensation
Trust, and pledges its full taxing authority for the payment of those
obligations.
C. That each participating municipality complies with the terms of the
trust agreement as respects contributions, required loss prevention
methods, cooperation with the trust's service and fiscal agents,
attorneys, claims adjustors, etc., and that each participating
municipality complies with all applicable statutes and regulations
§ 75-13 TRUSTS AND FUNDS § 75-15
75:45
§ 75-16. When effective.
The participation of Upper Allen Township in the Penn PRIME Workers
Compensation Trust will not be effective unless and until it is granted a
self-insurance exemption for the payment of workers compensation claims
by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry pursuant to 77 P.S.
§ 501 and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 75-17. Agreement to participate; renewals.
Upper Allen Township agrees to participate in the trust for a minimum
period of two (2) years, with annual renewals thereafter, subject to the
condition that it continues to retain a self-insurance exemption for the
payment of workers compensation claims from the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry.
§ 75-18. Powers of Board of Trustees.
Each participating municipality delegates to the Board of Trustees of the
Penn PRIME Workers Compensation Trust the powers enumerated in the
trust agreement, including the right to expel participants under certain
conditions.
§ 75-19. Conditions of participation.
As a condition of participating in the Penn PRIME Workers Compensation
Trust, Upper Allen Township agrees to:
§ 75-20. Statutory authority.
This Article is being enacted pursuant to 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
governing the payment of workers compensation claims, including but
not limited to the Pennsylvania Workers Compensation Act.27
A. Pay all annual contributions or assessments as may be required of the
township by the Board of Trustees.
B. Designate a contact person for the purpose of communicating with the
trust or its representatives.
C. Perform all covenants contained in the Penn PRIME Workers
Compensation Trust Agreement and delegate to the Board of Trustees
the powers and authority enumerated in that agreement.
27.Editor's Note: See Title 77, Workmen's Compensation.
§ 75-15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 75-20
75:46
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 83
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 83-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning is intended:
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE (ALARM SYSTEM) — Any mechanical
or electrically operated device or instrument composed of sensory
apparatus and related hardware which is designed or used for the detection
of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility or an attempt
thereof or designed or used for alerting others of the commission or
attempted commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or
facility or designed or used for the detection of fire, flames or smoke within
a building, structure or facility, or any combination thereof, and which
emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. "Automatic
protection device" includes but is not limited to audible alarms, automatic
dialing devices, alarms connected directly to a communications center,
alarms relayed through any private central station and proprietary alarms.
The following devices shall not be included under the definition:
COMMUNICATION CENTER — The Cumberland County Communications
Center, the Upper Allen Township Police Department headquarters, any
base of the Upper Allen Township Volunteer Fire Company or any other
specifically authorized location.
FALSE ALARM — Any activation of an automatic protection device signal
or notification of such activation by any means resulting in or expecting the
response of the Upper Allen Township Police Department and/or the Upper
Allen Township Volunteer Fire Company where an emergency situation does
Devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that are
audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected building,
structure or facility such as those systems designed for the detection of
equipment malfunctions.
A.
Devices which are designed, used or provided for the sole purpose of
evacuation of occupants of industries, institutions and other similar
premises.
B.
Devices which are designed for and installed upon motorized vehicles
or trailers.
C.
Devices maintained and/or operated by the Upper Allen Township
Police Department and/or the Upper Allen Township Volunteer Fire
Department used for the detection of unlawful acts or for
demonstration purposes.
D.
§ 75-20 TRUSTS AND FUNDS § 83-1
75:47
not or did not exist at the time of such activation. The term does not include
alarms caused by hurricanes, tornados, earthquakes, floods or other violent
acts of God.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — Any and all officers, members and equipment of the
Upper Allen Township Volunteer Fire Department.
FIRE MARSHAL — An officer appointed by the Board of Commissioners or
his designated representative.
PERSON — Any person, group, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Upper Allen Township Police
Department or his designated representative.
POLICE or POLICE DEPARTMENT — All members of the Upper Allen
Township Police Department.
RECORDS — The reports, incidents, statistics or files of the Upper Allen
Township Police Department and/or the Upper Allen Township Volunteer
Fire Company.
TROUBLE ALARM — A condition whereby an automatic protection device
is in a pre-alarm condition, commonly referred to as a "trouble setting," and
a communications center receives notification of such a condition. In the
absence of an actual emergency, a trouble alarm shall be considered a false
alarm.
§ 83-2. Prohibited acts.
A. Excessive false alarms.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be prohibited
for any person to accumulate more than four false alarms in a
period of 12 months. A twelve-month period shall run from January
1 to December 31, inclusive, on any given year. The number of false
alarms during any twelve-month period shall be ascertained from
the records of the Police Department or Fire Department, Fire
Marshal or both.
(2) When a person has accumulated two false alarms, the Police Chief
or Fire Marshal shall send a letter to said person stating such. The
letter shall also inform the person that the Police Chief or the Fire
Marshal can schedule a physical examination of the alarm system
as the case may be, if the person desires such service. Also, the
person will be permitted to furnish proof, to the satisfaction of the
Police Chief or Fire Marshal, that said person is taking steps to
correct the false alarm problem. If such person requests the alarm
system examination or shows proof of corrective action, the Police
Chief or Fire Marshal may exempt such person from the
requirements of this chapter for a period not to exceed 20 days to
allow for the repair and/or improvement of the alarm system. Only
one such exemption shall be granted during a twelve-month period.
§ 83-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 83-2
75:48
§ 83-3. Authority and responsibilities of Police Department or Fire
Marshal.
§ 83-4. Nonliability of Township.
When the police or Fire Marshal disconnects an automatic protection device
under § 83-3C of this chapter, no liability shall incur to the Township of
Upper Allen or any of its employees through such action.
§ 83-5. Duties and responsibilities of persons possessing and using
automatic protection device.
B. Testing without permission. It shall be prohibited for any person to
conduct any test or demonstration of any automatic protection device
designed to make direct connection to the communications center at
any time without first obtaining the express permission of the
communications center or the police. Such permission is not required
where the device to be tested or demonstrated is not connected to a
communications center and the receipt of the alarm or signal is not
relayed to the Police Department or Fire Department by any means.
C. Connection of automatic dialing service. It shall be prohibited for any
person to authorize and/or connect or interconnect an automatic
dialing device to a communications center telephone line not
designated for such connections. Connections to designated telephone
lines shall not be made without the express permission of the
communications center involved.
D. Operation of automatic protection device when privilege suspended or
revoked. It shall be prohibited for any person to operate or maintain an
automatic protection device at any time when the privilege to do so has
been suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
A. The enforcement and administration of this chapter shall be the
responsibility of the Police Department or Fire Marshal through the
authority of the Chief of Police or Fire Marshal or his designated
representative.
B. The Chief of Police or Fire Marshal may promulgate such rules as are
necessary for administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any such
rules shall be approved by a duly approved resolution of the Upper
Allen Township Board of Commissioners and shall be available for
public inspection.
C. Where an automatic protection device which is directly connected to a
communications center is activated and continuously transmits a
signal, either through malfunction or defect in the system, the police or
Fire Marshal is authorized to order the disconnection of the automated
device.
§ 83-2 TRUSTS AND FUNDS § 83-5
75:49
§ 83-6. Confidentiality.
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be
confidential in nature and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall
be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to those
persons charged with the administration of this chapter.
§ 83-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 for
each offense, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of said
fine and costs shall undergo imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 86
AMBULANCE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. A250.
A. Any person possessing and using an automatic protection device shall
maintain such device in good working order.
B. Any person possessing and using an automatic protection device shall
furnish information to the police concerning emergency contact in case
of system malfunctions. The police shall provide forms for the recording
of this information.
C. Any person who has had an automatic protection device disconnected
under § 83-3C of this chapter shall not reconnect the device without the
permission of the police or Fire Marshal. Such permission shall not be
withheld when proof of repair is shown.
D. Any person who has had an automatic protection device disconnected
under § 83-3C of this chapter shall be deemed to have his privilege to
operate or maintain such device suspended or revoked. Such
suspension or revocation shall remain in full force and effect until the
conditions of § 83-5C of this chapter are met.
E. Where an automatic protection device is installed or attached to a
residence, business, warehouse, institution or other similar premises,
the owner or person having the greatest operations power at that
facility shall be held responsible for that false alarm when a false alarm
is received by the Police Department or Fire Department.
§ 83-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 83-7
86:50
ARTICLE I
Emergency Medical Charges
[Adopted 8-15-1991 as Ord. No. 448]
§ 86-1. Imposition of charges.28
There is hereby adopted a schedule of charges for providing emergency
medical services to residents of the township and others who receive or
are entitled to receive such services. The schedule of charges includes
four (4) general categories of annual subscription fees, base rate fees,
procedure fees and itemized fees. Such schedule of charges, as amended as
hereinafter provided, shall be certified, from time to time, as being correct
and effective by the Township Manager.29
§ 86-2. Issuance of statements for charges.
The township shall issue statements for services rendered to the recipients
directly or to the representative or paying agent for the recipient of those
services as soon after the delivery of such services as possible. The terms of
repayment for such services shall be as set forth on the statements issued.
The township is hereby authorized to establish regular billing procedures
and to initiate any and all action necessary, including legal proceedings, to
collect the same.
§ 86-3. Authorization to enter into contracts.
The township is hereby authorized to enter into special contracts with
schools, businesses, retirement centers, nursing homes and like facilities
to provide emergency medical services to the residents, invitees and
employees of such facilities for charges for such services as negotiated
between the parties.
§ 86-4. Amendment of charges.
The amounts established for providing the various emergency medical
services as set forth in the schedule of charges incorporated herein may be
amended hereafter, from time to time, by the Board of Commissioners of the
township by duly adopted resolution.30
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fees.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fees.
§ 86-1 AMBULANCE SERVICES § 86-4
86:51
Chapter 88
ANIMALS
§ 86-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 86-4
86:52
ARTICLE I
Control of Animals
[Adopted 7-9-1973 by Ord. No. 183; amended in its entirety
7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 74231]
§ 88-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any dog, cat, domesticated animal, or nondomesticated animal.
CAREGIVER — Any person who provides care, including food, water,
shelter, and, in some cases, medical care, to feral cats, in accordance with
a program approved by the Township to trap, neuter, vaccinate, ear-tip, and
return feral cats to the location at which they were trapped.
FERAL CAT — An unowned free-roaming cat that is partially socialized or
unsocialized to humans and tends to resist contact with humans.
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in, having custody of
or who harbors or permits an animal to remain on or around his or her
property, excluding feral cat caregivers as defined herein.
SPONSOR — An eligible animal welfare organization appointed by the
Township to run a TNR program in the Township.
STRAY CAT — Any cat whose owner or keeper from time to time allows the
cat to run free off of the property of the owner or keeper.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
TRAP, NEUTER AND RETURN (TNR) — A nonlethal approach to feral cat
population control whereby feral cats are humanely trapped, sterilized,
vaccinated, ear-tipped, and then returned to the location where they were
originally trapped.
§ 88-2. Running at large prohibited.
No owner shall suffer or permit his or her animal to run at large in the
Township of Upper Allen and upon public streets or highways or upon lands
of any person other than the person having control and custody of such
animal.
§ 88-3. Loud noise prohibited.
No owner shall allow or permit his or her animal to make loud, harsh noises
to the extent that it shall disturb or interfere with the peace, quiet, rest or
sleep of other persons.
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of Art. I from "Control of Dogs and
Other Animals" to "Control of Animals."
§ 88-1 AMBULANCE SERVICES § 88-4
86:53
§ 88-4. Defiling of public property prohibited; exemptions.
§ 88-5. Responsibilities of cat owners regarding stray cats.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any cat to permit such cat to run free
outside the residence of its owner or keeper unless said cat has been:
§ 88-6. Feeding of stray or feral cats.
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed stray or feral cats, where such
feeding causes a nuisance to neighbors or creates a condition contrary
to the health, safety and welfare of the community, unless that person
participates as a caretaker in a trap, neuter and return program managed
by the Township or a sponsor of the Township.
§ 88-7. Responsibilities of TNR program sponsors.
Animal welfare organizations may make application to the Township to
serve as the sponsor of a TNR program. Sponsors appointed by the
Township shall have the following responsibilities:
A. No owner shall allow his or her animal to befoul, defile or corrupt any
public sidewalk, walkway or property of any other person.
B. Any legally impaired person who relies upon a service animal
specifically trained for such purposes is exempt from compliance with
this section.
A. Neutered or spayed to prevent it from procreating;
B. Immunized against rabies in compliance with Pennsylvania law; and
C. Appropriately "tipped" on the left ear to signify that it has been
neutered/spayed and immunized.
A. Register each feral cat colony they are managing with the Township.
Information submitted to the Township shall include general location
(neighborhood), number of cats in the colony, and number of caretakers
working with the colony;
B. Record and report to the Township, on an annual basis, the intake and
disposition of each feral cat brought to their facility;
C. Record and report to the Township, on an annual basis, the total
number of members and the number of sterilized members of each feral
cat colony within the Township for which they have implemented a TNR
program;
D. Record and report to the Township, on an annual basis, the number of
kittens born into each feral cat colony within the Township for which
they have implemented a TNR program; and
§ 88-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 88-7
86:54
§ 88-8. Notice of violation; record of notices.
§ 88-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before any District Justice, pay
a fine of not more than $600, together with the cost of prosecution for each
and every offense, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall
undergo imprisonment in the Cumberland County Prison for a term not to
exceed 30 days, provided that each day's violation of any of the provisions
of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 88-10. Billing for costs incurred by Township.
Any and all costs incurred by the Township in connection with the seizure
and detention of animals at large in the Township, including both domestic
and/or nondomesticated animals, shall be billed to the owner of said
animal(s). The Township, at its discretion, may include reasonable
administrative costs in an amount established from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Such payment shall be in addition
to any fines and costs which may be related to prosecution and shall further
be in addition to any fees claimed by other animal control agencies.
E. Address complaints received by the Township and passed along to the
sponsor regarding caretaker behavior, and serve as an intermediary to
address and, where possible, remediate the behavior within a
reasonable period of time, based on the matters at issue and utilizing
Township resources where necessary.
A. Upon receiving a complaint or information that a violation of §§ 88-2
through 88-6 of this article is being or might be committed in the
Township of Upper Allen, any police officer of said Township or any
other person or persons designated to enforce the provisions of this
article by a duly adopted resolution of the Board of Commissioners of
Upper Allen Township shall make an investigation, and if the complaint
or information is found to be true, a written notice shall be served upon
the owner of the dog or other domesticated or nondomesticated animal,
either by a police officer of said Township or by such other designated
person or persons, notifying said owner that he or she is in violation of
the applicable section of this article.
B. The Police Department shall keep a record of all notices as set forth in
§ 88-8A of this article, and upon receiving a second complaint or
information against the same owner and if, upon investigation, said
second complaint or information is found to be true, then and in that
event any police officer or such other designated person or persons
shall prosecute said owner under the terms of this article.
§ 88-7 AMBULANCE SERVICES § 88-10
86:55
Chapter 92
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 92, Bicycles, adopted 8-10-1977 by Ord. No. 247, as
amended, was repealed 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 780.]
Chapter 95
(RESERVED)
Chapter 97
(RESERVED)
Chapter 112
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Manager/Fire Prevention Officer — See
Ch. 26.
§ 112-1. Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of Upper Allen Township and to conform to the
requirements of the PCCA and regulations to the PCCA promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
§ 112-2. Election to administer and enforce.
The Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the
PCCA, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 et seq., as amended from time to
time, and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 112-3. Adoption of code standards.
The Uniform Construction Code (UCC), contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the Municipal Building Code of the
Township.
§ 112-4. Repealer.
Township Ordinance No. 548 and any amendments thereto, and all other
existing ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, be and they
are hereby repealed; provided that ordinances or those parts of same not
§ 88-10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 112-4
95:56
expressly named in this section which impose building specifications or
requirements more restrictive than adopted hereby shall not be considered
in conflict with this chapter.
§ 112-5. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the PCCA and UCC within the Township
shall be undertaken by the designation of an employee of the Township
to serve as the municipal Building Code Official (BCO) to act on behalf
of the Township. The BCO may delegate duties to other construction code
officials and current code administrators, either employed by the Township
or retained by the Township through contracts with qualified individuals
and/or third party agencies.
§ 112-6. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners of Upper Allen Township in conformity with the
requirements of the relevant provisions of the UCC, as amended from time
to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement
and administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other
municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action of
the participating municipalities.
§ 112-7. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Township for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the UCC shall be established by
the governing body by resolution from time to time.
§ 112-8. Revisions to UCC standards.
Pursuant to UCC Section 403.102 (l), the following regulations are hereby
enacted to facilitate municipal administration and enforcement of the UCC,
including insertion of local climatic and geographic information.
A. The text of the 2003 International Building Code, adopted as a
referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 1612.3 is amended to insert "Upper Allen Township," and
"February 15, 1980."
(2) Section 1805.2.1.1 shall be deleted and replaced with the following
text:
1805.2.1.1 Frost Protection. Extending below the frost line of
Upper Allen Township, which shall extend a minimum of 36 inches
in depth, measured from the bottom of the footing to the surface.
(3) Section 3410.2 shall be amended by inserting "July 9, 1973," as the
date that building codes first became effective in Upper Allen
Township.
§ 112-4 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 112-8
112:57
B. The text of the 2003 International Residential Code for One and Two
Family Dwellings, adopted as a referenced standard by the UCC, is
hereby revised as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to insert "Upper Allen Township."
(2) Section 103 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
R103.1 Enforcement agency. The Community Development
Department shall be charged with the task of administering this
code. The executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the
Building Code Official. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint
the Building Code Official and his deputies.
(3) Table R301.2 (1) is amended to insert the appropriate climatic and
geographic design criteria, as follows:
(a) Ground snow load: 25 psf.
(b) Wind speed: 90 mph.
(c) Seismic design category: B.
(d) Weathering of concrete probability: severe.
(e) Frost line depth: 36 inches.
(f) Termite probability: moderate to heavy.
(g) Decay probability: slight to moderate.
(h) Winter design temperature: = 10° F.
(i) Ice shield underlayment required: yes.
(j) Flood hazards: Consult February 15, 1980, FIRM and FBFM.
(k) Air freezing index: 784.
(l) Mean annual temperature: 53.1° F.
(4) Section P2603.6.1 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
P2603.6.1 Sewer Depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of
36 inches below grade.
(5) Section P3103.1 shall be amended by inserting "12" as the number
of inches that a vent pipe shall extend above a roof through which it
penetrates, and inserting "12" as the number of inches that a roofpenetrating
vent pipe shall extend above anticipated snow
accumulation.
§ 112-8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 112-8
112:58
(6) Building permits shall be required for all residential accessory
utility and miscellaneous structures larger than 400 square feet.
[Added 4-18-2007 by Ord. No. 636]
(7) Building permits shall be required for all decks attached to the
foundation of a residence and shall require footers to be installed in
accordance with the UCC. [Added 4-18-2007 by Ord. No. 636]
(8) Building permits shall be required for all residential alterations and
renovations, subject only to certain established exceptions set forth
in the UCC. [Added 4-18-2007 by Ord. No. 636]
C. The text of the 2003 International Plumbing Code, adopted as a
referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to insert "Upper Allen Township."
(2) Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 Enforcement agency. The Community Development
Department shall be charged with the task of administering this
code. The executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the
Building Code Official. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint
the Building Code Official and his deputies.
(3) Section 106.6.2 Fee schedule. Fees assessable by the Township for
the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this
chapter and the UCC shall be established by the governing body by
resolution from time to time.
(4) Section 106.6.3.2 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced by
the following:
106.6.3.2 One hundred percent of permit fees will be refunded.
Applicant will be charged for plan reviews as indicated on a fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
(5) Section 106.6.3.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
(6) Section 108.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended by inserting
"summary offense" and "1,000" in the appropriate spaces, and by
deleting "...or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF
DAYS], or both such fine and imprisonment."
(7) Section 108.5, Stop work orders, shall be amended as follows:
"...condition, shall be liable to pay a fine of not less than $100 or
more than $1,000."
(8) Section 305.6.1 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with
the following:
§ 112-8 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 112-8
112:59
305.6.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 36
inches below grade.
(9) Section 904.1 shall be amended by inserting "12" as the number of
inches that a vent pipe must extend beyond a roof through which it
penetrates.
D. The text of the 2003 International Code Council Electrical Code,
adopted as a referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as
follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to insert "Upper Allen Township."
(2) Section 301 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
303.1 Enforcement agency. The Community Development
Department shall be charged with the task of administering this
code. The executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the
Building Code Official. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint
the Building Code Official and his deputies.
(3) Section 404.2 is amended by replacing the last sentence of this
section with "The fees for electrical work shall be as indicated on a
fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Commissioners."
E. The text of the 2003 International Mechanical Code, adopted as a
referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Upper Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
(2) Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 Enforcement agency. The Community Development
Department shall be charged with the task of administering this
code. The executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the
Building Code Official. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint
the Building Code Official and his deputies.
(3) Section 106.5.2 Fee schedule. Fees assessable by the Township for
the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this
chapter and the UCC shall be established by the governing body by
resolution from time to time.
(4) Section 106.5.3.2 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced by
the following:
106.5.3.2 One hundred percent of permit fees will be refunded.
Applicant will be charged for plan reviews as indicated on a fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 112-8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 112-8
112:60
(5) Section 108.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended by inserting
"summary offense" and "1,000" in the appropriate spaces, and by
deleting "...or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF
DAYS], or both such fine and imprisonment."
(6) Section 108.5, Stop work orders, shall be amended as follows:
"...condition, shall be liable to pay a fine of not less than $100 or
more than $1,000."
F. The text of the 2003 International Fire Code, adopted as a referenced
standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Upper Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
(2) Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 Enforcement agency. The Community Development
Department shall be charged with the task of administering this
code. The executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the
Building Code Official. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint
the Building Code Official and his deputies. Police officers and
law enforcement officers of the Township are hereby authorized
to institute appropriate action for violations of Section 104.11.2
pertaining to obstructions of Fire Department operations, and
Section 503.4, when the obstruction of a fire apparatus access
road or fire lane is a vehicle.
(3) Section 109.3, Violation penalties, shall be amended by inserting
"summary offense" and "1,000" in the appropriate spaces, and by
deleting "...or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF
DAYS], or both such fine and imprisonment."
(4) A new section shall be added after Section 109.3.1 as follows:
109.3.2 Penalty for obstruction of fire apparatus. Any person
or persons who obstruct or cause to be obstructed a fire lane
or fire apparatus access road with a vehicle shall be guilty of
a violation of Section 503.4 of this code. A police officer or law
enforcement officer shall issue a violation notice of said violation
as set forth in § 233-18 of the Code of the Upper Allen Township,
and the person or persons responsible for this violation shall pay
a fine as set forth in the fee schedule. Any person or persons who
obstruct or cause to be obstructed a fire lane or fire apparatus
access road in a manner not involving a vehicle shall be guilty of
a violation of Section 503.4 and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
liable to pay a fine of not less than $100 or more than $1,000. Each
and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of the
provisions of the Upper Allen Township Fire Code is committed or
continued shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 112-8 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 112-8
112:61
(5) Section 111.4 shall be amended as follows: "...condition, shall be
liable to pay a fine of not less than $100 or more than $1,000."
(6) Section 3204.3.1.1 is amended by adding the following sentence at
the end of this section: "The geographic limits in which the storage
of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited
shall be within any zoning district depicted on the Zoning Map of
Upper Allen Township except the IC, IP and IN Districts."
(7) Section 3404.2.9.5.1 is amended by adding the following sentence
at the end of this section: "The geographic limits in which the
storage of Class I and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks outside
of buildings is prohibited shall be within any zoning district
depicted on the Zoning Map of Upper Allen Township except the IC,
IP and IN Districts."
(8) Section 3406.2.4.4 is amended by adding the following sentence at
the end of this section: "The geographic limits in which the storage
of Class I and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited
shall be within any zoning district depicted on the Zoning Map of
Upper Allen Township except the IC, IP and IN Districts."
(9) Section 3804.2 is amended by adding the following sentence at the
end of this section: "The geographic limits in which the storage of
liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily
populated or congested areas cannot be established by Upper Allen
Township because the Propane and Liquefied Petroleum Gas Act
(35 P.S. §§ 1329.1 through 1329.19) does not permit municipalities
to prohibit or regulate storage of these materials."
G. The text of the 2003 International Energy Conservation Code, adopted
as a referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Upper Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
H. The text of the 2003 International Existing Building Code, adopted as a
referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Upper Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
(2) Section 1201.2 is amended by inserting "July 9, 1973," as the date
that building codes first became effective in Upper Allen Township.
I. The text of the 2003 International Fuel Gas Code, adopted as a
referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Upper Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
(2) Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
§ 112-8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 112-8
112:62
Chapter 116
CURFEW
103.1 Enforcement agency. The Community Development
Department shall be charged with the task of administering this
code. The executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the
Building Code Official. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint
the Building Code Official and his deputies.
(3) Section 106.5.2 Fee schedule. Fees assessable by the Township for
the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this
chapter and the UCC shall be established by the governing body by
resolution from time to time.
(4) Section 106.5.3.2 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced by
the following:
106.5.3.2 One hundred percent of permit fees will be refunded.
Applicant will be charged for plan reviews as indicated on a fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
(5) Section 106.5.3.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
(6) Section 108.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended by inserting
"summary offense" and "1,000" in the appropriate spaces, and by
deleting "...or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF
DAYS], or both such fine and imprisonment."
(7) Section 108.5, Stop work orders, shall be amended as follows:
"...condition, shall be liable to pay a fine of not less than $100 or
more than $1,000."
J. The text of the 2003 International Urban-Wildland Interface Code,
adopted as a referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as
follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Upper Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
K. The text of the 2003 International Code Council Performance Code,
adopted as a referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as
follows:
(1) Add the following new section after Section 101.1, Purpose:
101.1.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
"Performance Code of Upper Allen Township," hereinafter referred
to as "this code.”
§ 112-8 CURFEW § 116-1
116:63
§ 116-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context in which the word
is used clearly indicates otherwise:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.
MINOR — Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
OFFICIAL TOWNSHIP TIME — Eastern standard time, except during those
months when Eastern daylight saving time is observed in the Township of
Upper Allen.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment, and whenever used
in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term "operator," as applied to
associations or partnerships, includes the members or partners thereof and
as applied to corporations, includes the officers thereof.
PARENT — Any natural parent, guardian or other person having the legal
care or custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
wharf, dock, public building or vacant lot.
REMAIN — To loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
§ 116-2. Curfew established.
No minor shall be or remain in or upon any public place or any
establishment between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day,
official township time, except as follows:
§ 116-3. Compliance by minor.
No minor shall remain in or upon any public place or any establishment
during the time prohibited in § 116-2, except as therein provided.
§ 116-4. Compliance by parent.
No parent shall allow or permit any minor to remain in or upon any public
place or any establishment during the time prohibited in § 116-2, except as
therein provided.
A. When such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person
having the legal care or custody of such child or is accompanied by a
responsible person over the age of twenty-one (21) years old.
B. When such minor is engaged in gainful and lawful employment during
the time prohibited or is in route to or from such employment.
§ 116-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 116-5
116:64
§ 116-5. Compliance by establishment.
No operator of an establishment or the servants, agents or employees of
such operator shall allow or permit any minor to be or to remain in or upon
the premises of such establishment during the time prohibited in § 116-2,
except as herein provided.
§ 116-6. Applicability of Juvenile Act of 1972.
To the extent applicable and notwithstanding any provision herein to the
contrary, the Juvenile Act of 197232 and all amendments thereto shall be
followed in the application of this chapter.
§ 116-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 127
(RESERVED)
Chapter 129
EXCAVATION AND FILL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
217, Art. I.
A. Any minor who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not more than six hundred dollars ($600.) for each offense and
costs of suit and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, shall
be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days.
B. Any parent who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not more than six hundred dollars ($600.) for each offense and
costs of suit and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, shall
be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days.
C. Any operator of an establishment and any agent, servant or employee of
such operator who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not more than six hundred dollars ($600.) for each offense
and costs of suit and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs,
shall be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days.
D. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
32.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq.
§ 116-5 (RESERVED) § 129-1
127:65
§ 129-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Upper Allen Township Excavation and
Fill Ordinance."
§ 129-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of Upper Allen Township;
or other person designated by the Board of Commissioners to perform the
function of Building Inspector as herein provided.
CONTRACTOR — Any person or firm engaging in the business or act of
excavating or filling.
EXCAVATION — The cutting, grading, digging or removal of earth or natural
materials in such manner as to change the natural or existing terrain.
FILL — The placing, carrying or depositing of earth or natural materials in
such manner as to change the natural or existing terrain.
MANAGER — The Manager of Upper Allen Township; or other person
designated by the Board of Commissioners to perform the function of
Manager as herein provided.
OWNER — Any person or firm who owns land, or any interest therein,
sufficient to permit excavation or fill thereon.
§ 129-3. Permit for excavation or fill; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to make or cause or permit to
be made any excavation or fill in the Township except in accordance with
a permit issued as specified herein; provided, however, that no permit shall
be required to fill or excavate:
§ 129-4. Application for permit.
An application for a permit to excavate or fill shall be made in duplicate
by the contractor in writing on forms furnished by the Township, filed with
the Building Inspector, who shall forthwith deliver one copy to the Manager.
Said application shall set forth the following information:
A. By the federal government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
political subdivision thereof; or
B. Where less than two cubic yards of earth or material are moved; or
C. Where grading for a building site is being made for the purpose of
immediate construction of a building or improvements thereon, for
which a building permit has been issued, if, in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, evidenced in writing on such building permit, no
hazard to property rights of the Township or adjoining land owners will
be encountered or created by such excavation or fill.
§ 129-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 129-4
129:66
§ 129-5. Schedule of fees.
At the time of filing the application for a permit to excavate or fill, the
applicant shall pay a filing fee in accordance with the following schedule:
§ 129-6. Additional fee in special cases.
When, in the opinion of the Manager, the proper investigation of an
application for a permit to excavate or fill will require the services of an
engineer for technical help and advice, the Manager may consult with such
engineer and require him to make inspections of the work in progress. In
such case, prior to the issuance of the permit, the Manager shall notify the
applicant of the necessity for engineering inspection, and the applicant shall
pay, prior to commencing work, reasonable engineering fees, at current
rates, to be determined in advance of the issuance of the permit, but not to
exceed $50 for each inspection that will be required.
A. The name, identity and address of the owner.
B. The name, identity and address of the contractor.
C. The description and location of the property involved.
D. A statement of the exact nature of the proposed excavation or fill,
indicating the slope of the sides and the level of the finished surface, the
type of earth or material to be moved, the method, manner and
equipment to be used in the work and the disposition of material at the
site.
E. Proposed time of commencement and completion of the work.
F. A statement that all owners of the land involved were notified of the
intention to apply for such permit; and proof of service on such owners
as the Building Inspector or Manager may require.
G. An agreement that if the excavation or fill be not completed in
accordance with the plans and specifications therefor and the permit
issued therefor, then the work may be completed by the Township, the
cost thereof to be paid by the contractor.
H. An agreement to indemnify and save harmless Township and its agents
from all liabilities, costs and expenses which may result from or be a
consequence of the granting of such permit.
A. Two to five cubic yards: $2.
B. Five to 25 cubic yards: $5.
C. Twenty-five to 50 cubic yards: $8.
D. Fifty cubic yards or over: $15.
§ 129-4 EXCAVATION AND FILL § 129-7
129:67
§ 129-7. Investigation of application.
Within 10 days after the filing of the application for a permit to excavate or
fill, the Manager shall cause an investigation to be made, and shall either
issue the permit upon such conditions expressed in the permit as he shall
deem necessary to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter or deny
such permit.
§ 129-8. Matters to be considered concerning applications.
In investigating and taking action on applications for a permit to excavate
or fill, the Manager shall consider the public health, safety and general
welfare, and the effect thereof upon neighboring properties, and he shall
deny such permit if, in his opinion, the excavation or fill would:
§ 129-9. Notice of action on application and appeal.
The manager shall forthwith notify the applicant of the issuance or denial
of the permit, and if the applicant shall be dissatisfied therewith, he may
appeal to the Board of Commissioners by filing a written notice of appeal
with the Township Secretary within 30 days after such notice from the
Manager; and at the same time, the applicant shall deliver to the Township
Secretary a list of the names and addresses of all owners of property within
a radius of 300 feet from the exterior boundaries of the proposed excavation
or fill.
§ 129-10. Hearing on appeal.
The appeal shall be heard at the next succeeding regular or special meeting
of the Board of Commissioners held more than 30 days after the filing of the
appeal. The Township Secretary shall mail notice of such hearing at least 10
days prior thereto to all owners within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the proposed excavation or fill. The hearing on the appeal
may be continued from time to time. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Board of Commissioners may deny or issue a permit upon such terms and
conditions as they shall deem necessary to conform to the provisions of
this chapter. The action of the Board of Commissioners shall be final and
A. Unlawfully remove the lateral or subjacent support of any adjacent
land; or
B. Create a dangerous topographic condition; or
C. Cause seepage or slides; or
D. Improperly divert the flow of drainage waters; or
E. Create a nuisance; or
F. In any manner endanger the health, safety or property of any other
person.
§ 129-7 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 129-10
129:68
conclusive; and no similar application may be filed for the same property for
a period of 12 months.
§ 129-11. Slope of sides of excavations or fills.
In order to minimize the danger of slides on, to or from adjacent land, the
Manager may specify in the permit the permissible angle of slope of the
sides of the excavation or fill. No side of such excavation or fill may be
made steeper at any point than the angle so specified in the permit unless
supported by a substantial, permanent retaining wall of sufficient strength
to permanently support such sides of the excavation or fill and constructed
in accordance with a permit to do so, as herein provided. Such retaining
wall shall be of concrete, brick, stone or other material not subject to rapid
deterioration and shall extend the full height and length of each side of
such excavation or fill which is at any point made steeper in slope than the
angle specified in the permit to excavate or fill. If the applicant desires to
make any side of the excavation or fill steeper than the angle specified in
the permit, he shall so state in a supplemental application, and shall file
therewith, in duplicate as aforesaid, detailed plans and specifications for
such retaining wall. Upon the approval of such plans and specifications,
the permit or supplemental permit to excavate or fill shall authorize the
sides thereof to be made steeper than the angle of slope specified therein
if supported by a retaining wall constructed in accordance with such plans
and specifications.
§ 129-12. General conditions.
Any applicant to whom a permit to excavate is granted shall comply with
the following requirements:
A. The bottom of the excavation shall not be lower than the level specified
in the permit.
B. If, in the opinion of the Manager, any excavation will create or
aggravate a dangerous condition if left open, such excavation shall be
enclosed by a fence sufficiently high, tight and strong to eliminate such
dangerous condition.
C. Any rock, earth or other material which may be dropped or deposited
on any public road or place from any vehicle transporting such
materials from any such excavation shall be immediately removed in a
manner and to an extent satisfactory to the Manager at the expense of
the applicant.
D. The applicant shall agree to indemnify and save the Township and its
agents harmless from all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses
which may result from or be a consequence of the granting of such
permit.
§ 129-10 EXCAVATION AND FILL § 129-13
129:69
§ 129-13. Completion bond and insurance.
The Manager may require, as a condition to the granting of any permit
under this chapter, that the contractor deposit with the Township Secretary
a completion bond, with such surety and in such amount as required by the
Manager, not exceeding, however, the sum of $50,000, inuring to the benefit
of the Township and the general public, guaranteeing that the contractor
will complete the work in accordance with the permit. The Manager may
also require, as a condition to the granting of any permit under this chapter,
that the contractor deposit with the Township Secretary the certificate of a
responsible insurance company, certifying that the contractor is insured for
an amount as required by the Manager, not exceeding, however, the sum
of $100,000, against any injury or damage to persons or property arising
directly or indirectly from the performance of the contractor in making the
excavation or fill for which such permit is issued.
§ 129-14. Revocation or suspension of permit.
Any permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Manager
for any reason for which the issuance of a permit might be lawfully denied
or for the failure of the contractor to comply with any of the terms or
conditions of the permit. Revocation shall be made only after hearing before
the Manager after five days' written notice to the applicant, given by
personal service or deposited in the United States Mail, addressed to the
applicant at the address given in the application. The action of the Manager
may be appealed to the Board of Commissioners as heretofore provided.
If, in the opinion of the Manager, public health, safety or welfare is
endangered, the Manager may suspend any permit granted under this
chapter pending the hearing for the revocation of such permit. Such
revocation or suspension shall be in addition to any other penalties provided
in this chapter.
§ 129-15. Expiration and issuance of supplemental permit.
In the event any excavation or fill for which a permit has been granted
under this chapter is not commenced within six months from the date
of such permit, or in the event the work of excavation or fill is at any
time abandoned for a period of six consecutive months, such permit shall
automatically terminate, without notice, and no further excavation or fill
shall be made; providing, however, that the conditions and responsibilities
in such permit shall remain binding upon the person or firm to whom
such permit was issued, and all legal and equitable remedies shall be
available against such person or firm for any breach thereof. When the
amount of material excavated or filled equals the number of cubic yards
authorized by the permit, no further excavation or fill may be made until
a supplemental permit has been issued. An application for a supplemental
permit to continue or enlarge the excavation or fill shall set forth the same
information required in the original application, correcting, however, the
quantity of excavation or fill, and paying the proper fee therefor.
§ 129-13 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 129-16
129:70
§ 129-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
summary conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, and
in default of payment of said fine, to be imprisoned in Cumberland County
Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day's violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 133
FEES
§ 129-16 FEES § 129-16
133:71

ARTICLE I
Attorney's Fees for Municipal Claims
[Adopted 9-16-1999 by Ord. No. 530]
§ 133-1. Legal authority.
Charges for reasonable attorneys' fees for municipal claims is authorized
under the Municipal Claims Law, as amended, of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., and such charges are to be determined
by the municipality making such charges and adopted as such by ordinance.
§ 133-2. Schedule of charges.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Allen hereby
determines that the schedule of charges for reasonable attorneys' fees shall
be as follows:
§ 133-3. Authorized persons.
The Township Solicitor and/or the Staff Attorney for the Township of Upper
Allen, or designated agents thereof, are hereby authorized to claim
reasonable attorneys' fees according to the schedule in the preceding
section.
A. Seventy-five dollars to prepare and file any complaint or claim before a
District Justice.
B. Seventy-five dollars to prepare and file a municipal lien with the
Prothonotary of Cumberland County.
C. Fifty dollars to prepare and file a release of municipal lien filed with the
Prothonotary of Cumberland County.
D. One hundred dollar minimum charge, and the charge per hour ($100)
pro rata thereafter, for any court appearance before a District Justice or
any other court of competent jurisdiction for any matter related to
preparation for and pursuit of any litigation or for any other municipal
claim authorized by law.
§ 133-1 FEES § 133-3
133:73
Chapter 136
FIRE-DAMAGED PROPERTY
§ 136-1. Enforcement officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed as the designated officer
who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 136-2. Structures for which amount recoverable for fire loss
exceeds $7,500. [Amended 10-21-1999 by Ord. No. 531]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Township of Upper Allen (hereinafter the "Township") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the named insured or insuring agent is furnished by the
Township Treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(b)
of Act 98 of 1992,33 as amended by Section 1 of Act 93 of 1994 [40 P.S.
§ 638(b)], and unless there is compliance with Section 508(c) and (d) of Act
98 of 1992,34 as amended by Section 1 of Act 93 of 1994 [40 P.S. § 638(b)]
and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 136-3. Payment of claims by insuring agent. [Amended
10-21-1999 by Ord. No. 531]
A. Where, pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992,35 as amended
by Section 1 of Act 93 of 1994 [40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i)], the Township
Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent
taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, the
insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided,
however, that if the loss, as agreed upon by the named insured and the
insuring agent, equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building restructure, the
following procedures must be followed:
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township the aggregate of
$2,000 for each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that
amount of a claim, this subsection to be applied such that, if the
claim is $15,000 or less, the amount transferred to the Township
shall be $2,000; or
(2) If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a
33.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
34.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(c) and (d).
35.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 133-3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 136-3
136:74
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall
transfer to the Township from the insurance proceeds the amount
specified in the estimate.
(3) The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(4) After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall
return the amount of the funds transferred to the Township in
excess of the estimate to the named insured, if the Township has
not commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure.
(5) Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the Township shall do
the following:
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer shall place the proceeds in a
separate fund to be used solely as security against the total
costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
structure which are incurred by the Township. Such costs shall
include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the Township in connection
with such removal, repair or securing of the building or any
proceedings related thereto.
(b) It is the obligation of the insuring agent, when transferring the
proceeds, to provide the Township with the name and address
of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds
and the name and address of the named insured, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall contact the named insured, certify
that the proceeds have been received by the Township and
notify the named insured that the procedures under this
subsection shall be followed.
(c) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure has been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the Township and the required proof
of such completion has been received by the Code
Enforcement Officer, and if the Township has not incurred any
costs for repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be
returned to the named insured. If the Township has incurred
costs of repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund, and if excess
funds remain, the Township shall transfer the remaining funds
to the named insured.
(d) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Township pursuant to this section and not returned to the
§ 136-3 FIRE-DAMAGED PROPERTY § 136-3
136:75
§ 136-4. Power of Board to adopt additional provisions. [Amended
10-21-1999 by Ord. No. 531]
The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 98 of 199236 as amended by Section 1 of
Act 93 of 1994, (40 P.S. § 638), and this chapter may, by resolution, fix
reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or services provided
pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as amended by Section 1 of Act 93 of 1994
(40 P.S. § 638), and this chapter, including but not limited to issuance of
certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate fund
accounts.
§ 136-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty of up to
one thousand dollars ($1,000.) per violation and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment
for not more than thirty (30) days.
Chapter 138
(RESERVED)
Chapter 151
(RESERVED)
Chapter 155
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 97. Zoning — See Ch. 245.
named insured, such interest shall belong to the Township. To
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the
named insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Township to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the Township and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property has been negotiated.
36.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. §§ 636.1 and 638.
§ 136-3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 136-5
138:76
§ 155-1. Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERATION — Any change, modification or addition to a part of or all of
the exterior of any building or structure.
BUILDING — Any enclosed or open structure which is a combination of
materials to form a construction that is safe and stable.
BUILDING AND/OR ZONING OFFICER — The officer or officers of this
township authorized to issue permits for the erection, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building
(within an Historic District).
BUILDING PERMIT — An approval statement signed by the Building and/
or Zoning Officer authorizing the erection, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building (within an
Historic District).
BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION — The request filed by any person with
the Building and/or Zoning Officer that seeks authorization to erect,
reconstruct, alter, restore, demolish or raze all or a part of any building
(within an Historic District).
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The approval statement signed
by the governing body which certifies the appropriateness of a particular
request for the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition
or razing of all or a part of any building within an Historic District and which
authorizes the issuance of a building permit for said request.
DEMOLITION — The dismantling or tearing down of all or a part of any
building and all operations incidental thereto.
ERECTION — Any or all work necessary for the construction of any building
or structure from a combination of materials that form a safe and stable
structure.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Commissioners of this township.
HISTORICAL ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD (HARB) — The agency
that advises on any requests for authorization to erect, reconstruct, alter,
restore, demolish or raze all or a part of any building (within an Historic
District).
PLANNING COMMISSION — The agency of this township which advises the
governing body on planning and zoning related matters.
RAZING — The dismantling or tearing down of all or a part of any building
and all operations incidental thereto.
RECONSTRUCTION — Any or all work needed to remake or rebuild all or
a part of any building to a sound condition, but not necessarily of original
materials.
§ 136-5 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 155-1
155:77
RESTORATION — Any or all work connected with the returning or restoring
of a building or a part of any building to its original condition through the
use of original or nearly original materials.
SIGN — A lettered board, structure or other surface or any other device
used to visually announce, advertise or convey information to the public for
any purpose. Included would be the following:
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 155-2. Statutory authority; creation of districts.
In accordance with the provisions of an Act entitled "An Act authorizing
counties, cities, boroughs, incorporated towns and townships to create
historic districts within their geographic boundaries; providing for the
appointment of Boards of Historical Architectural Review; empowering
governing bodies of political subdivisions to protect the distinctive historical
character of these districts and to regulate the erection, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of buildings within the historic
districts," adopted by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and approved by the Governor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania on the 13th day of June 1961, as amended,37 and for the
purpose of protecting portions of this township which recall the rich
architectural and cultural heritage of this township and of the state,
awakening in our people an interest in our historic past and promoting the
general welfare, education and culture of this township, there is hereby
created in this township historic districts to be known as "Upper Allen
Historic Districts."
§ 155-3. Enumeration of districts.
The Upper Allen Historic Districts are as follows:
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing lights or
color changes requiring electrical energy or electronic or manufactured
sources of supply, but not including wind-actuated elements such as
flags, banners or pennants.
A.
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which announces or directs attention to a
business, product, service or activity sold or conducted on the premises
where such sign is located.
B.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign incorporating a source of light in order
to make the message readable. Included are internally and externally
lighted signs.
C.
A. Rosegarden Mill: consisting of the mill and miller's house and generally
bounded by Gettysburg Pike on the west, the Yellow Breeches Creek on
37.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 155-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 155-3
155:78
§ 155-4. Township Historic Districts Map; interpretation of
boundaries.
The Upper Allen Historic Districts shall be shown on a map which shall be
known as the "Township Historic Districts Map" and which shall be a part
of this chapter.38 Where uncertainty and/or discrepancies exist as to the
boundaries of the districts as shown on the Township Historic Districts Map
and/or as described in this chapter, the following rules shall apply:
the south, U.S. Route 15 on the east, and on the north by a line
approximately 1,200 feet from the Yellow Breeches Creek.
B. Trout Run: consisting of the properties generally located on both sides
of West Lisburn Road west of the intersection with Stumpstown Road
and surrounding Trout Run and the springs at the source thereof.
C. Shepherdstown: consisting of the properties generally located on both
sides of Gettysburg Pike from a point approximately 900 feet northeast
of the intersection with Fisher Road to a point approximately 300 feet
northeast of the intersection with South York Street, and the properties
on both sides of South York Street from the intersection with
Gettysburg Pike to a point approximately 300 feet northwest thereof.
D. Yellow Breeches: consisting of an area along both sides of McCormick
Road from the Nauman Bridge to McCormick's Mill, an area along the
east side of Arcona Road from the intersection with McCormick Road to
a point approximately 500 feet north thereof, and an area along the
west side of Arcona Road from the intersection with McCormick Road
to a point approximately 800 feet north thereof.
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in the above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated
on this map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
D. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the map or in other circumstances not
covered by the above, the governing body shall interpret the
boundaries of the districts.
38.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 155-3 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 155-5
155:79
§ 155-5. Request for certification.39
When directed by the Board of Commissioners, the Township Secretary
shall forward a copy of this chapter to the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission with a request for certification.
§ 155-6. Architectural Review Board.
§ 155-7. Powers and duties of Board.
The powers and duties of HARB are the following:
A. A Historical Architectural Review Board, hereinafter referred to as
"HARB," is hereby established to be composed of seven (7) members
appointed by the governing body. One (1) member shall be a registered
architect; one (1) shall be a licensed real estate broker; one (1) shall be
the Building Inspector of this township; and four (4) shall be persons
who own property and reside in one (1) of the Historic Districts and who
have a knowledge of and interest in the preservation of the Historic
Districts.
B. Members of HARB shall each be appointed for a term of five (5) years,
and the terms of no more than two (2) members shall expire in any one
(1) year. Persons appointed to HARB shall show interest and/or
knowledge in historical districts or structures. An appointment to fill a
vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.40
C. Any member of the Board once qualified and appointed may be removed
from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for
other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of Commissioners
aforesaid taken after the member has received fifteen (15) days'
advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held
in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
Any appointment to fill a vacancy created by removal shall be only for
the unexpired term.41
D. Members of HARB shall disqualify themselves from voting on any
project in which they are, directly or indirectly, financially interested.
A. Giving counsel to the governing body regarding the advisability of
issuing any certificate of appropriateness required to be issued in
accordance with said Act of June 13, 1961, as amended,42 and this
chapter.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
41.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
42.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 155-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 155-7
155:80
B. Making and altering rules and regulations for its own organization and
procedure, consistent with this chapter and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Meeting at such intervals, at least bimonthly, as shall be specified in its
rules and regulations or as shall be required to process expeditiously
the matters pending before it. A majority of the members of HARB shall
constitute a quorum, but no action shall be taken without the
affirmative vote of at least four (4) members.
D. Serving without compensation.
E. Making an annual report of its transactions to the governing body.
F. Pursuant to appropriations which may be made by the governing body,
employing secretarial assistants, paying their salaries and wages and
incurring other necessary expenses.
G. Conducting a survey of buildings for the purpose of determining those
of historic and/or architectural significance and pertinent facts about
them; maintaining and periodically revising the detailed listings of
historic sites and buildings and data about them, appropriately
classified with respect to national, state or local significance, to period
or field of interest or otherwise.
H. Proposing, from time to time as deemed appropriate, the establishment
of additional historic districts and revisions to existing historic districts.
I. Formulating recommendations concerning the establishment of an
appropriate system of markers for selected historic and/or architectural
sites and buildings, including proposals for the installation and care of
such historic markers.
J. Formulating recommendations concerning the preparation and
publication of maps, brochures and descriptive material about the
township's historic and/or architectural sites and buildings.
K. Cooperating with and advising the governing body, the Planning
Commission and other township agencies in matters involving
historically and/or architecturally significant sites and buildings (such
as appropriate land usage, parking facilities and signs, as well as
adherence to lot dimensional regulations and minimum structural
standards).
L. Cooperating with and enlisting assistance from the National Park
Service, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission and other agencies, public and
private, from time to time, concerned with historic sites and buildings.
M. Advising owners of historic buildings on problems of preservation.
N. Promoting public interest in the purposes of this chapter by carrying on
a public relations program.
§ 155-7 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 155-8
155:81
§ 155-8. Procedure for Building and/or Zoning Officer upon receipt
of building permit application.
Upon receipt of an application for a building permit for work to be done
in an Historic District, the Building and/or Zoning Officer shall act in
accordance with the procedures then being followed in that office, except
those procedures that are necessarily modified by the following
requirements:
§ 155-9. Procedure for HARB upon receipt of building permit
application.
Upon receipt of any building permit application under the jurisdiction of this
chapter, HARB shall proceed as follows:
A. He/she shall forward copies of the application for a building permit,
together with copies of any plot plan, building plans and specifications
filed by the applicant, to HARB.
B. He/she shall not issue a permit for any erection, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any
building in an Historic District until the governing body has issued a
certificate of appropriateness.
C. He/she shall require applicants to submit a sufficient number of
additional copies of material required to be attached to an application
for a building permit to permit compliance with the foregoing.
D. He/she shall maintain in his/her office a record of all such applications
and of his/her handling and final disposition of the same which shall be
in addition to, and appropriately cross-referenced with, his/her other
records.
A. HARB shall consider such application at a regular or special meeting
which shall be held within thirty (30) days after receipt of such
application.
B. At least ten (10) days prior to the meeting, HARB shall advise the
person(s) applying for the permit of the time and place of the meeting
and shall invite such person(s) to appear and explain his/her reasons for
the application. HARB may also invite other persons to attend the
meeting.
C. In determining the counsel to be presented to the governing body
concerning the issuing of a certificate of appropriateness of authorizing
a permit for the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,
demolition or razing of all or a part of any building within an Historic
District, HARB shall consider the following matters:
(1) The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the district;
§ 155-8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 155-9
155:82
(2) The appropriateness of exterior architectural features which can
be seen from a public street or way only; and
(3) The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building or structure and the relation of such factors to similar
features of buildings or structures in the district.
D. Within ten (10) days after the meeting, HARB shall reach a decision on
the application and communicate it to the person(s) applying for the
permit. If HARB decides to advise against the granting of a certificate of
appropriateness on the basis of the application as filed, it shall indicate
to the person(s) applying for the permit the changes in plans and
specifications, if any, which, in the opinion of HARB, would protect the
distinctive historical character of the district. If the person(s) applying
for the permit is willing to make the changes, he/she shall so advise
HARB within five (5) days after the decision of HARB was made.
E. Within twenty (20) days after making its decision or, if changes
specified in the decision are made in the plans and specifications, then
within ten (10) days after the revised plans and specifications are filed,
HARB shall submit, in writing, to the governing body its counsel
concerning the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. The
following matters shall be set forth:
(1) The exact location of the area in which the work is to be done.
(2) The exterior changes to be made or the exterior characters of the
structure to be erected,
(3) A list of the surrounding structures with their general exterior
characteristics.
(4) The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the district.
(5) The appropriateness of exterior architectural features of the
building which can be seen from a public street or way.
(6) The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building or structure and the relation of such factors to similar
features of buildings or structures in the district.
(7) The opinion of HARB (including any dissent) as to the
appropriateness of the work proposed as it will preserve or destroy
the historic aspect and nature of the district.
(8) The specific recommendations of HARB as to the issuance by the
governing body of or its refusal to issue a certificate of
appropriateness. If the application is for the demolition or razing of
a building, HARB shall, where deemed necessary, recommend to
the governing body that the proposed demolition be postponed for
a period not exceeding nine (9) months. However, in the event that
demolition or razing cannot be avoided, then the moving of a
§ 155-9 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 155-9
155:83
§ 155-10. Procedure for governing body upon receipt of written
counsel of HARB.
Upon receipt of the written counsel of HARB as provided in § 155-9E of this
chapter, the governing body shall proceed as follows:
§ 155-11. Disapproval by governing body; appeal.
Upon receipt of the written disapproval of the governing body, the Building
and/or Zoning Officer shall disapprove the application for a building permit
and so advise the applicant. The applicant may appeal from the disapproval
as provided by law and the Building Code of the township.
§ 155-12. Individual historic sites and structures.
In addition to the creation of Historic Districts, the governing body may
establish a listing of individual sites or structures of historic value. Such
sites or structures shall not be governed by the provisions of this chapter
pertaining to Historic Districts, but the governing body may establish such
reasonable restrictions on the use of such sites or structures and land
adjacent thereto as will tend to preserve their historic character.
building shall be encouraged as an alternative to demolition if there
is no other way to preserve the building.
A. The application shall be considered at the next regular or special
meeting of the governing body held at least fifteen (15) days after
receipt of the written counsel of HARB.
B. At least ten (10) days prior to the meeting, the governing body shall
advise the person(s) applying for the permit of the time and place of the
meeting and of his/her right to attend and to be heard as to the reasons
for filing the application.
C. In determining whether or not to certify to the appropriateness of the
proposed erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or
razing of all or a part of any building within an Historic District, the
governing body shall consider the same factors set forth in § 155-9C of
this chapter and the report of HARB.
D. If the governing body approves the application, it shall issue a
certificate of appropriateness authorizing the Building and/or Zoning
Officer to issue a permit for the work covered.
E. If the governing body disapproves, it shall do so in writing and copies
shall be given to the person(s) applying for the permit and to the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission within five (5) days
after the decision is made. The disapproval shall indicate what changes
in the plans and specifications would meet the conditions for protecting
the distinctive historical character of the district.
§ 155-9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 155-13
155:84
§ 155-13. Signs.
Signs in Historic Districts shall comply with the following requirements:
A. No sign or permanent external advertising display of any kind shall be
erected, altered or used in Historic Districts except for advertising
informing the public of a service, business, occupation or profession
carried on in or about the property on which such sign or permanent
external advertising display appears. In conjunction with this, no such
sign or advertising display of any kind or for any purpose shall be
erected or altered until an application for a permit to make such
erection or alteration has been reviewed by HARB for its conformity in
exterior material composition, exterior structural design, external
appearance and size with similar advertising or information media used
in the architectural period of the districts and a permit granted thereon.
B. In addition to the above, and those matters considered in § 155-9C, the
following shall be adhered to:
(1) No animated, revolving or moving signs shall be permitted.
(2) Illumination of any sign shall be indirect, shielded or otherwise
arranged to prevent direct glare.
(3) No freestanding sign shall be more than fifteen (15) feet high.
(4) Projecting signs extending more than two (2) feet over any public
walk or right-of-way shall be at least ten (10) feet above the walk
grade and at least fourteen (14) feet above any vehicular right-ofway.
(5) No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or at any location where
by reason of its position, shape or color it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device.
(6) No sign shall be located so as to prevent or hinder free ingress to or
egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign shall be
attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(7) No signs shall be attached to or placed on any public utility pole or
tree located within any public right-of-way.
C. Furthermore, all other requirements of any township ordinance must be
complied with. Historical markers may be authorized by HARB subject
to the provisions stipulated, and such markers shall not be considered
as signs but are to be erected in accordance with the requirements
established for historic markers by HARB.
§ 155-13 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 155-14
155:85
§ 155-14. Enforcement.
The Building and/or Zoning Officer shall have the power to institute any
proceedings at law or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this
chapter in the same manner as in his/her enforcement of Ch. 97, Building
Construction, as presently enacted or as the same may from time to time be
amended.
§ 155-15. Violations and penalties.43
Any person or persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.), plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for a term not to exceed
thirty (30) days.
Chapter 157
HOTELS, MOTELS AND INNS
43.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 155-14 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 155-15
155:86
ARTICLE I
Guest Register
[Adopted 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 766]
§ 157-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to secure the safety of persons and property
in the Township by requiring the operators of hotels to obtain and keep
identifying information about hotel guests to deter criminal conduct by
guests in hotel rooms and elsewhere in the Township and to facilitate
investigation and prosecution of crimes by Township police.
§ 157-2. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated
below:
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Allen,
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
HOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing six or more individual
rooms as rental units for guests or transients for a limited period of time.
The building may include common hallways for all rooms on the same
floor, and provision may or may not be made for cooking in any individual
room or suite. The term "hotel" does not include institutional or educational
uses, buildings where persons are housed under legal constraint, bed-andbreakfasts
or campgrounds. The term "hotel" shall be synonymous with
"motel."
OPERATOR — The individual or entity which is responsible for the
management of a hotel as defined herein, or the person who appears to
the general public to have supervisory responsibility for the management of
such hotel.
POLICE — The Upper Allen Township Police Department.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 157-3. Maintenance of register required.
A. Every owner and/or operator of a hotel in the Township shall maintain a
register of all persons provided with accommodations at the hotel.
B. Upon the arrival of a guest, the hotel owner and/or operator or his or
her agent shall require the guest to enter into the register, or shall
enter for the guest, the following:
(1) The name and address of the guest;
(2) The make, model, and color of any guest's vehicle parked on hotel
property;
(3) The guest's date and time of arrival and scheduled departure date;
§ 157-1 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 157-3
155:87
§ 157-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 together
with costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof shall undergo
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 157-5. Repealer.
All other ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with this article
are hereby repealed.
(4) The room number assigned to the guest;
(5) The number of persons in the guest's room;
(6) The rate charged and amount collected for the room; and
(7) The method of payment.
C. In addition to the requirements of Subsection B above, the hotel owner
and/or operator or his or her agent shall view photo identification of a
guest and record the number and date of such identification in the
following circumstances:
(1) When a guest has no reservation; or
(2) When a guest pays for accommodations in cash; or
(3) When a hotel rents a room to a guest for less than 10 hours.
D. The guest register may be maintained in either electronic or paper
form.
E. The guest register shall be kept for a period of 90 days either on the
hotel premises, in the guest reception or guest check-in area or an
office adjacent thereto, or, if not on the premises, in a location where it
can be obtained within two hours of any request therefor. This
subsection does not alter or modify any additional period for which
certain information must be kept by hotel owners and/or operators
pursuant to Pennsylvania law.
F. The hotel owner and/or operator or his or her agent shall not provide
accommodations to any person who fails to provide the information
required by this section. However, this section shall be read
consistently with Pennsylvania law, including the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 951 et seq. ("Act"), and any similar law, and
accommodations shall not be refused or denied based upon the
prohibited factors identified in the Act.
§ 157-3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 157-6
155:88
§ 157-6. Severability.
If any one or more sections, subsections or sentences of this article are held
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such decisions shall not affect the
constitutionality, legality, or validity of the remaining portion of this article,
and the same shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 157-7. Effective date.
This article shall become effective immediately on August 16, 2017.
§ 157-6 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 157-7
155:89
Chapter 160
JUNK AND JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pawnbrokers, junk dealers and transient
merchants — See Ch. 178.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
Fees — See Ch. A250.
§ 160-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Allen Township
Junk Dealer and Junkyard Ordinance of 1979."
§ 160-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Discarded materials, articles or things possessing value in
part, gross or aggregate, and including but not limited to scrapped
and inoperable motor vehicles and parts thereof, but not including
garbage or other organic waste or farm machinery, provided that said
farm machinery is used in connection with a bona fide agricultural
business, or objects or materials accumulated on any premises as the
by-products, waste or scraps of a legitimate business, other than a
junkyard as defined in this chapter, conducted thereon.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who shall be engaged in the business
of collecting, accumulating, buying, selling, storing, disassembling,
treating or processing for scrap automobiles not fit for highway use,
secondhand building materials, rags, bottles, scrap paper and all other
items not intended to be repaired for reuse.
JUNKYARD — Any place or establishment where junk is stored or
accumulated out of doors or in any manner other than within a building,
edifice or structure that is enclosed on all sides, where the business
of selling, buying or dealing in junk is carried on or where ten (10) or
more motor vehicles which are unlicensed, inoperable and do not have
a current and valid inspection sticker as required by the Motor Vehicles
Laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are stored out of doors; but
not including any place where inoperable motor vehicles intended to
be repaired are stored for a period not in excess of thirty (30) days in
connection with a bona fide automotive repair business.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 157-7 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 160-3
160:90
§ 160-3. License required.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, no person shall engage or
continue to engage in business as a junk dealer or establish or operate
a junkyard in the Township of Upper Allen except as authorized by this
chapter and without first having obtained a license therefor from the Board
of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Allen.
§ 160-4. License application.
Application for such license shall be made in writing, under oath and in the
form prescribed by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper
Allen, and shall contain the name of the applicant, his/her address, his/
her length of residence at such address, his/her previous criminal record,
if any, the address of the premises upon which such business is to be
conducted or upon which such junkyard is to be established or operated
and the name of the owner or owners of said property if other than the
applicant and, upon any subsequent applications, a statement that the
applicant, during the preceding term of his/her license, did comply with
and did maintain his/her premises in full compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. Each application shall describe the premises upon which
the junkyard is to be established or operated, specifying therein setback
lines, structures erected thereon, dwellings erected upon premises adjacent
to the premises proposed to be used and a reference to the place where
the deed is recorded. If the applicant is a partnership or association, the
application shall furnish the above information for every member thereof.
If the applicant is a business corporation, the application shall furnish the
above information for each officer and director thereof. The application
shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by all members if the
applicant is a partnership or association and by the President and Secretary
if the applicant is a business corporation. A separate application shall be
required for each junkyard conducted by a junk dealer.
§ 160-5. Conditions for issuing license; annual fee; refunds.44
Every junk dealer or person operating or maintaining or intending to
establish or maintain a junkyard shall pay an annual license fee as shall
be set, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of Commissioners
for every license or renewal thereof issued hereunder. The current fee
resolution shall be on file with the Township Secretary. All licenses shall be
issued for a term of one (1) year, beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of the
following year. No abatement of the annual license fee shall be made for any
cause whatsoever. All licenses must be renewed annually on or before the
first day of July of each year. Such license shall be issued upon the condition
that the same may be summarily revoked in the event that said licensee is
found to have given any false information or in any way misrepresented any
material fact upon which the issuing authority has relied in granting such
license. No refunds will be given in such case.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 160-3 JUNK AND JUNKYARDS § 160-6
160:91
§ 160-6. Issuance of license; posting; nontransferability.
The Board of Commissioners of the township, upon receipt of an application
for license under this chapter, shall determine whether or not a license shall
be issued or a renewal thereof shall be granted after an examination of
the application and upon the fullest consideration of the suitability of the
premises proposed to be used for the purposes of the license, the character
of the property adjacent thereto and the effect of the proposed use, taking
into consideration the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the
township and any potential hazard which may result to adjacent properties
and structures thereon or to the citizens of Upper Allen Township. Upon
approval of the application for license, the Board of Commissioners of the
township shall issue to the applicant a license upon which said license
shall be designated the name of the junkyard. Such license shall be at
all times conspicuously posted upon the premises licensed thereunder. No
such license issued by the Board shall be transferable or assignable by
agreement, will, intestacy or otherwise.
§ 160-7. Denial of license due to conviction.
No license or renewal of license shall be issued to any person who, within
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of his/her application, shall
have been convicted for any felony or misdemeanor crimen falsi.
§ 160-8. Records.
Every licensee hereunder shall provide and shall at all times keep and
maintain records in the English language of the time of his/her purchase,
acquisition or receipt of junk, a full and complete description, including
trade names, serial or manufacturer's numbers, if any, of every article or
item of junk purchased, acquired or received by him/her, the date and
approximate hour of such purchase, acquisition or receipt and the name
and address of the person from whom such article or item of junk was
purchased, acquired or received. Such written records shall at all times be
subject to the inspection of the Township Chief of Police for just cause. Such
records shall be retained for a period of five (5) years.
§ 160-9. Temporary retention of items.
Every licensee hereunder shall keep and retain upon the licensed premises,
for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after the purchase, acquisition or
receipt thereof, every item or article of junk so purchased, acquired or
received by him/her and placed on the licensed premises. The licensee shall
not disturb or reduce or alter the original form, shape or condition of the
same until such period of twenty-four (24) hours shall have elapsed.
§ 160-10. Maintenance of licensed premises.
Every licensee hereunder shall constantly maintain the licensed premises in
the manner hereinafter prescribed:
§ 160-6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 160-10
160:92
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health and welfare of the community or to
residents nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored on such premises.
C. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the licensed land and to facilitate access for
inspection purposes and fire fighting.
D. No junk shall be stored or accumulated nor shall any structure be
erected within twenty-five (25) feet of the side and rear lines of the
licensed premises nor within seventy-five (75) feet of any existing
dwelling house erected upon premises adjacent to the licensed
premises, nor shall any junk be stored or accumulated or any structure
be erected that is used in connection with said junkyard within forty
(40) feet of that line of the licensed premises abutting a public street or
highway within the Township of Upper Allen, provided that in cases
where two (2) or more lines of the licensed premises abut public streets
or highways within the township, one (1) line only of such premises
shall be governed by the above-provided setback of forty (40) feet,
provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall apply to
existing structures pertaining to and being used in connection with
junkyards presently established and operating.
E. Every structure erected upon the licensed premises and used in
connection therewith shall be of fireproof construction.
F. The premises shall be enclosed by a metal chain link fence constructed
of good heavy-duty steel and supported upon steel posts or, in lieu
thereof, a solid masonry or metal wall of a uniform design, texture and
structure. The erection of such fence or wall shall be controlled by the
setback provisions of Subsection D hereof. Such fence or wall shall not
be less than six (6) feet in height, nor shall two (2) or more vehicles or
major parts thereof be stacked on top of one another or otherwise as to
protrude above it. The erection of said fence shall be completed within
twelve (12) months after the effective date of this chapter. If, in the sole
and exclusive opinion of a majority of the Township Board of
Commissioners, it should appear that the owner and/or operator of a
junkyard situate within the township have clearly demonstrated that
they are making a continuing bona fide effort to comply with the fencing
provisions of this subsection, then and in such event the Board may, in
its sole discretion, grant an extension of time to such owner or operator
of a junkyard for the completion of the erection of said fence, upon
receipt of a written letter from said junkyard owner or operator
requesting such an extension of time. It is further provided that the
foregoing fencing provisions shall be applicable only to that portion of
the premises being immediately used for the storage of junk and shall
not be applicable to the balance of the property owned or used by said
§ 160-10 JUNK AND JUNKYARDS § 160-10
160:93
§ 160-11. Inspection of premises by Chief of Police; report.
The Township Chief of Police shall, from time to time, regularly inspect
the premises of every licensee hereunder for the purpose of determining
whether said licensee has established and maintained his/her premises in
full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and such rules and
regulations which may hereafter be adopted by the Township of Upper
Allen regulating and licensing junk dealers and the establishment and
maintenance of junkyards. The Township Chief of Police shall forthwith
prosecute any discovered violation of this chapter. The Township Chief of
Police shall not less than twice yearly furnish to the Township Board of
Commissioners a report of such inspections, the same to be in writing and
in the form prescribed by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Upper Allen.
§ 160-12. Arrangement of junk to facilitate inspection.
Every junkyard in the Township of Upper Allen shall at all times be subject
to inspection during reasonable hours of the day by the Township Chief of
Police. To facilitate such inspection, all junk therein shall be arranged and
maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. All of such junk vehicles and other
junk are to be arranged in rows, with a minimum of twenty (20) feet of clear
space between each row and each of said rows to be no greater in width
than forty (40) feet.45
§ 160-13. Storage near water bodies restricted.46
No junk, scrap or automobile bodies, motors or any other item of junk,
as defined in this chapter, shall be stored, maintained, situate, placed or
otherwise located within twenty (20) feet of any river, stream, run, creek,
floodplain, wetlands, groundwater recharge area, public water watershed,
public utility groundwater pumping facility, private well, irrigation ditch or
any other natural watercourse within the boundary lines of Upper Allen
Township.
junkyard operator so long as said remaining portion of land is not being
used for the storage of junk, as defined in this chapter.
G. The land area between the above-provided chain link fence or wall and
any public highway, street or avenue shall be implanted with shrubbery,
bushes and evergreens at reasonable intervals between each such
plant.
45.Editor's Note: Original Section 13, which dealt with the burning of junk and which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 160-10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 160-14
160:94
§ 160-14. Off-street parking required.
No junkyard, as defined in this chapter, shall be granted a license under the
provisions hereof unless off-street parking is provided within the property
owner's boundary lines.
§ 160-15. Violations and penalties.47
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.) and costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment thereof, to imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days,
provided that each day's violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 168
(RESERVED)
Chapter 175
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 51.
Park and Recreation Trust Account — See Ch.
75, Art. II.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 233.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 160-14 (RESERVED) § 160-15
168:95

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 2-5-2020 by Ord. No. 79448]
§ 175-1. Purpose and applicability.
The parks and playgrounds of Upper Allen Township are for the benefit
and pleasure of the entire public, and the rules and regulations governing
their use are established for the express purpose of providing for the
general welfare of persons using the parks and the public as a whole. They
shall apply to all persons who use the parks, playgrounds and park-based
facilities.
§ 175-2. Authority to prescribe rules, regulations and charges.
The Board of Commissioners may prescribe rules and regulations for the
use of the facilities, including, but not limited to, procedures for the filing
and approval of applications, and use of the facilities or structures within
the facilities. The Board may prescribe by resolution charges for the use of
said facilities. The Park and Recreation Board shall make recommendations
with respect to such rules and regulations.
§ 175-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ORGANIZED GROUP — A group of five or more unrelated individuals or 10
or more people (related or not) who use a park facility (example: pavilions,
fields, and playgrounds) in Upper Allen Township.
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS — Includes all lands and waters (including
bikeways and walkways), whether owned or leased by the Township, which
are designated by the Board of Commissioners to be for recreational use.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
VEHICLES — Any motorized device for carrying passengers or goods.
WALKWAY — A thoroughfare constructed and designed for pedestrian
traffic.
§ 175-4. Hours of park operation.
No person shall be in any park or on any trail during the hours the Township
facility is closed except as preapproved, in writing, by the Township
Manager or his/her designee. All parks are open from sunrise to sunset,
except areas lighted for evening use, which shall close at the time posted at
the specific park.
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Rules and Regulations, adopted
11-12-1975 by Ord. No. 222, as amended.
§ 175-1 (RESERVED) § 175-5
168:97
§ 175-5. Closing of parks, fields, equipment.
Any park, park amenity, park equipment or specified park area may be
closed during such hours as designated by the Board of Commissioners,
Township Manager/Assistant Township Manager, Chief of Police or Park
Maintenance Supervisor, and all persons found within the parks or specified
area of the park when it is closed shall be subject to the penalties imposed
by this article.
§ 175-6. Park lands not for private use.
Park lands are public lands and shall not be put to use for a personal garden,
nursery, storage uses or other purely personal uses.
§ 175-7. Fees, charges and permits.
The Board of Commissioners may, at its discretion, levy charges on
nonresidents or residents, or both, for use of park or playground facilities.
Charges shall be determined by the Board of Commissioners through
resolution. Permits for events in or on any Township land or facility shall be
obtained by application to the Township Manager or authorized designee.
The Township shall have the authority to charge a fee for any damage done
either willfully or accidentally by person(s) or organization(s) using any
Township facility.
§ 175-8. Motor vehicle regulations.
These regulations apply to all motor vehicles within the parks, except
fire, police, emergency, Township vehicles or vehicles on official Township
business:
A. Vehicle operation permitted on roadways and designated parking areas
only. All vehicles shall operate on the regularly designated roadways
and in parking areas only, and no vehicle may be operated on or
through any other area of the park, including, but not limited to, grass
areas or trails. Vehicles may be parked only in designated parking areas
B. The legal speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour on all roadways and
parking areas.
C. Vehicles weighing over 10,000 pounds shall not be permitted.
D. Repair and maintenance of vehicles. Washing, greasing, lubricating, or
other maintenance or repair of vehicles on park property is prohibited
E. Unlicensed motor vehicles shall not be permitted.
F. All state and Township laws pertaining to vehicular use shall be valid
and enforceable.
G. Current inspection sticker required.
§ 175-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 175-8
168:98
§ 175-9. Prohibited acts.
No person shall perform the following actions within the parks, playgrounds
or park-based facilities, unless specifically noted:
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any Township
park at any time other than during park hours.
I. It is prohibited to park or store a vehicle in a Township-owned park
when not using the facilities of the park, unless written permission is
granted by the Township Manager or his/her designee.
J. It shall be unlawful to land a private or commercial airplane or
helicopter on Township park lands. Emergency aircraft are exempt
from this prohibition.
K. It shall be prohibited to operate or ride a wheeled device without
reasonable regard to the safety of others and property.
L. Electric vehicle charging station parking spaces may be utilized by
electric vehicles that are actively charging. Any vehicle that is not
actively charging is subject to a fine. Any vehicle parked at an electric
vehicle charging station that is not charging four (4) or more hours may
be towed at the owner's expense. Cars may charge for a maximum of
eight (8) hours. Fees for charging electrical vehicles will be established
by the Township Fee Resolution.
M. Parking is available on a first-come-first-served basis only. Parking
spaces/spots cannot be saved. Reservations at group areas do not
include reserved parking.
A. Acts in violation of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
B. Litter, dump or deposit any garbage or other offensive substance or
article, except in receptacles when provided. Where receptacles are not
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park
by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
C. Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any
buildings, bridges, tables, benches, grills, railings, paving or paving
materials, waterlines or other public utilities (or parts or appurtenances
thereof), signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent,
monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property, or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
D. All fireworks shall be prohibited on Township park land.
E. No alcoholic beverage shall be brought into, possessed or consumed in
any park.
§ 175-8 (RESERVED) § 175-9
168:99
F. Smoking or use of tobacco products, including vaping or e-cigarettes or
similar device, in any Township park.
G. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters, wetlands, any fountains, pond, lake, stream or other body of
water in or adjacent to any Township facility, or any tributary, stream,
storm sewer or drain flowing into same, any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
H. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, including
those for amusement, whether permanent or temporary, or run or
string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except
on special written permission of the Township Manager or his/her
designee.
I. All laws, rules and regulations pertaining to fishing in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply to fishing in recreation
areas, and the provisions thereof are hereby incorporated herein by
reference thereto.
J. Any fire or other burning, except for open fires in charcoal grills or
other facilities provided for such purpose.
K. Walk a dog or other domestic animal without a leash, said leash to be no
longer than six feet in length. All dogs or domestic animals must be
under control and must not be allowed to run at large. Further, any
person(s) who is accompanied by a dog or other domestic animal while
on or in a Township facility shall, in addition to any fine or penalty as
hereinafter set forth, be liable for any injury to people or other domestic
animal caused by the dog or animal and further shall indemnify the
Township as hereinafter set forth. Domestic animals are permitted only
in designated areas and specifically not allowed in buildings, on
playgrounds or athletic fields. Owners must provide for and clean up
after their dogs accordingly. This provision shall not apply to service
animals when accompanying individuals with disabilities, as defined by
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).49 This rule shall not govern
the use of the Township dog park, where the special site rules will apply.
L. Hitting of golf balls or playing of golf in the parks.
M. No unmanned motorized vehicle (example: drones, model airplanes,
model helicopters, remote-controlled cars, etc.) may be taken off/
launched from, landed at or operated (both remotely or within) at any
Township park facility or lands by any private, commercial, business
person or entity.
N. Possession, discharge or transportation of weapons or paintball guns,
airsoft guns, BB guns, fireworks, firecrackers or similar propelling
explosives, bows and arrows and sling shots. The prohibitions under
49.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S. C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 175-9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 175-9
168:100
§ 175-10. Amplification and sound systems.
When amplifying or sound systems are used, they may only be used between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and 1:00
p.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Sunday. Music amplified or played through a sound
system shall be limited to a maximum of four hours in a day.
§ 175-11. Tennis, pickleball and basketball facilities.
this subsection do not apply to otherwise lawful possession, discharge
or transportation of firearms as protected by state and federal law
O. No person shall damage, cut, carve, uproot or injure any tree, or injure
the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any plant in any park; nor shall
any person attach any rope, wire, nail, tacks, staples or other
contrivance to any tree or plant in any park; nor shall any person dig in
or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair the
beauty or usefulness of any park.
P. Hunting or trapping of live animals or wildlife; capturing, harassing,
injuring of wildlife.
Q. Camping, sleeping overnight on the ground or anywhere else within the
park.
R. No person shall post, paint, affix, distribute, deliver, place, cast or leave
about any billboard, placard, ticket, handbill, circular or advertisement.
S. Sell any article, food or service within the limits of the park; or
distribute, sell, service or rent any services or commodity or solicit for
any purpose without written permission of the Township Manager or
his/her designee.
T. Play, engage or take part in any game or competitive sport for money or
other thing of value.
U. Ice skating.
V. No chewing gum, food, beverages (excluding water), or cleats of any
kind are permitted in the inclusive playground areas (currently Winding
Hill Park North)
W. Swimming is not permitted in any Township-owned waterway or body of
water. No use may be made of these waters which may contaminate
them.
X. Skateboarding, in-line skating, roller skating, scooters and bicycling
are prohibited in all pavilions, courts (basketball/tennis), playgrounds,
and picnic areas.
Y. Use of nails, tacks, screws, or any other item that will result in holes in
the pavilions or other park equipment is prohibited.
§ 175-9 (RESERVED) § 175-11
168:101
§ 175-12. Trespass.
§ 175-13. Permits.
A. Use of the tennis courts, pickleball and basketball facilities is on a firstcome
basis.
B. Only racket-type sports with appropriate footwear are permitted within
Township-owned tennis/pickleball courts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any Township park
facility before the opening hours or remain in such facility after closing.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that he/she is not licensed
or privileged to do so, to enter upon any Township park facility after
having been duly notified, either verbally or in writing, that he/she is
not permitted to enter upon such facility at any time.
C. No person shall enter or leave a park except by the entrances and exits
provided for such purposes.
A. Facilities and areas in Township park sites shall be used for the
purposes designated or implicit in their character. Scheduled use of
park facilities, including, but not limited to, organized and unorganized
instruction, exhibition, competition, or demonstration, shall require a
facility use permit prior to such events being conducted.
B. A facility use permit is required for use of any field, pavilion or park
amenity by an organized group, association, or organization. Whenever
any organized group, association or organization desires to use a park,
playground or park facility, a representative thereof shall first obtain
authorization from the Township Manager or his/her designee.
Authorization shall be granted to such a group if it appears that its use
will not interfere with the general use of said facilities by individual
members of the public. Fund-raising events shall be permitted only
when monies derived from such events are solely used by not-for-profit
organizations to benefit the Upper Allen Township community. Park
users who have been issued permits will have priority of use of the
facility for which their permit has been issued. Permits shall not be
transferable without written consent of the Township Manager.
C. Athletic field facilities are for the general use of the public for
nonorganized activity at no cost to the users on Monday through Friday,
9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., exclusive of holidays. Permits are required for
the exclusive use of athletic fields for both organized and nonorganized
activity at all other times. Permits may be issued to applicants for times
within the general use period, with those permit holders having priority
of use during those times.
D. Holders of permits for an athletic field or pavilion shall have priority of
use for the facility listed on the permit. Those individuals who do not
have a permit for the facility should vacate at the request of the permit
§ 175-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 175-13
168:102
§ 175-14. Picnic tables.
The use of picnic tables outside of reservable pavilions are available on a
first-come-first-served basis with no reservation or extra fee required. No
more than two (2) picnic tables and the immediate area around those tables
can be used by a single group. A responsible adult with picnic items must
be present to hold a picnic table. Reservations of a designated reservable
pavilion are required for groups that want more than two tables. Picnic
tables within the parks may not be rearranged or removed.
§ 175-15. Insurance.
holder. Nonpermit use of athletic fields is only permissible during the
described general use period and if the permit-holding group is not
present. Failure to vacate a facility at the permit holder's request may
result in fines and penalties under this section. If a park pavilion or park
amenity (excluding athletic fields) is open and not reserved, it may be
used on a first-come-first-served basis by non-organized groups.
E. Upper Allen Township reserves the right to deny an application for a
facility use permit if, in the opinion of the Township, the use would
endanger the health, safety and welfare of the public. If the entire
application is not denied, Upper Allen Township reserves the right to
deny or approve certain activities requested by the user.
F. Approved users of parks and facilities will be provided a copy of the
signed permit application from the Township. Users will also be
provided a copy of the Upper Allen Township Parks and Facilities Rules
of Use. The signed permit and rules form should be maintained by the
user or group contact during the time of the event at the park or facility.
G. The Township may require that a police officer or officers be present at
a park event depending upon the type of activity proposed by the
applicant. The applicant would be required to pay for that police service
as established by the Township Fee Resolution.
H. The Township Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to
revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or provision of
this Code, or upon the violation of any condition or restriction under
which the permit was issued.
A. Organized sports groups, special use permit holders and professional or
business organizations must provide liability insurance coverage at a
minimum amount set by the Township Manager or his/her designee. All
certificates of insurance must provide for written notice of cancellation,
revocation or modification prior to the date of the event(s).
B. All insurance certificates shall be originals and list Upper Allen
Township as an additional insured. All certificates must be signed by a
licensed insurance broker or insurance company representative.
§ 175-13 (RESERVED) § 175-15
168:103
§ 175-16. Rules for special use locations.
A special use location, for instance walking paths, bike routes, bikeways
and dog parks, may have special rules and regulations as determined by the
Board of Commissioners which shall apply to that location only. Rules for
those sites will be posted at the entrance to the special use sites.
§ 175-17. Exceptions to rules.
Exception to the foregoing rules can be made only where and as directed,
and to facilitate maintenance and emergency responder performance, by
the Board of Commissioners.
§ 175-18. Violations and penalties.
§ 175-19. (Reserved)
Sublimits shall not be less than the per-occurrence limit amount
required.
C. Insurance certificates must be received in the Upper Allen Township
Municipal Building prior to the close of the last business day before the
first date of park, field, or facility use requested by the organization or
group's first event. Failure to provide the insurance certificate
automatically voids the approved, permitted use of the park, field, or
facility by the requesting individual or group.
A. Any person apprehended violating any of the foregoing rules and
regulations may be expelled from the park or playground by Township
Police and shall be responsible to restore or make restitution to the
Township for any damage caused by him or her.
B. Any person, firm, organization or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution for each and every
offense, plus the cost of all damages inflicted upon Township property,
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this
article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 175-15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 175-19
168:104
ARTICLE II
Mechanicsburg Municipal Pool Intergovernmental Agreement
[Adopted 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 640]
§ 175-20. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Mechanicsburg
Municipal Swimming Pool Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement
Ordinance."
§ 175-21. Legislative intent and applicability.
The background of this article and the legislative intention of the Board in
enacting it are as follows:
§ 175-22. Terms of the agreement.
A. The Borough of Mechanicsburg is a Pennsylvania Borough municipal
government entity and the Township is a Pennsylvania first class
Township municipal government entity.
B. The Act of 19 December 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177, referred to as the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
provides that local governments may jointly cooperate in the exercise
or in the performance of their respective governmental functions,
powers or responsibilities.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania First Class Township
Code, the Board is authorized to provide recreation facilities and
programs for the benefit of Township residents, 53 P.S. § 58001 et seq.
D. The Board recognizes the desirability of sharing park and recreation
facilities with neighboring municipalities for the benefit, health, safety
and welfare of area residents.
A. The conditions, duration, purpose and objectives of the
intergovernmental cooperation agreement (the "agreement"), including
the powers and scope of authority delegated therein, manner and
extent of financing, organizational structure necessary to implement
the agreement and manner in which real and personal property will be
acquired, managed and disposed of are set forth in the agreement, a
copy of which is attached to this article as Exhibit A and incorporated
herein as if set forth in full.50
B. Any funds under the agreement may be appropriated by the Board as it
shall determine, in its sole discretion, from time to time.
C. Real and personal property may be acquired, managed or disposed of
under this article and as set forth in the agreement.
50.Editor's Note: A copy of said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-20 (RESERVED) § 175-22
168:105
§ 175-23. Authority to enter agreement.
The President or Vice President of the Board are hereby authorized to
execute all documents and perform all actions necessary to cause the Board
to enter into the agreement and to implement the terms and provisions
thereof.
§ 175-24. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, phrase or section of this article is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, sections or parts of this article. It is
hereby declared as the intention of the Board that this article would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause,
phrase, section or part thereof not been included therein.
§ 175-25. Effective date.
This article shall become effective as provided by law. The agreement shall
be effective upon the effective date of the Intergovernmental Cooperation
Ordinance last enacted by the parties.
D. Each party has the power to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for all of
their employees, including those whose duties further the purposes of
the agreement.
§ 175-22 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 175-25
168:106
Chapter 178
PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and junkyards — See Ch. 160. Transient retail merchants — See Ch. 227.
§ 175-25 PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS AND § 175-25
178:107

ARTICLE I
Pawnbrokers
§ 178-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PAWNBROKER — Includes any person who:
PLEDGE — An article or articles deposited with a pawnbroker as security
for a loan in the course of his business as defined in the preceding
paragraph.
§ 178-2. Records to be kept.
Each and every pawnbroker shall keep a book legibly written in the English
language in which shall be recorded:
§ 178-3. Report to Police.
All pawnbrokers shall, daily, before twelve o'clock noon of the following day
of business, provide a written report to the Police Department containing
a complete description of all articles received in the course of his
pawnbroking business during the previous business day, together with the
number of ticket(s) and a description of the person(s) making such sale,
including such person's name, address, date of birth, race, sex and motor
vehicle operator's number. Forms for this purpose are to be provided by the
Police Department.
Engages in the business of accepting money on the deposit or pledge
of personal property other than choses in action, securities, or written
evidence of indebtedness; or
A.
Purchases personal property with an express or implied agreement or
understanding to sell it back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price;
or
B.
Accepts money for goods, wares or merchandise pledged, stored or
deposited as collateral security.
C.
A. A full and accurate description of all articles purchases or left in pawn
with him.
B. The date and time of pledging, pawning or purchasing the same.
C. The date and time within which such pawned or pledged article is to be
redeemed.
D. The amount of money lent or paid therefor.
E. The description of person or persons making a pledge, including such
person's name, address, date of birth, sex, race and motor vehicle
operator's number.
§ 178-1 PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS AND § 178-4
178:109
§ 178-4. Prohibited transactions.
A pawnbroker shall not accept a pledge from a person under the age of
eighteen years nor from any person under the influence of alcohol or drugs
or any known thieves.
§ 178-5. Retention of Pledged Articles.
No pawnbroker shall sell or dispose of in any way to any person any article
received by him in the course of his business until seven (7) days have
elapsed from the time of furnishing to the police of a form containing the
information on such articles as required by § 178-3.
§ 178-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 178-5
178:110
ARTICLE II
Junk Dealers
§ 178-6. Definitions.
As used in this Article, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
JUNK DEALER — Includes any person who shall carry on the business
of buying or selling and dealing in junk, scrap iron, brass, lead, copper,
aluminum and other metals or alloys, or other materials commonly referred
to as junk.
§ 178-7. Records to be kept.
Every junk dealer shall keep a book legibly written in the English language
in which shall be recorded:
§ 178-8. Report to Police.
All junk dealers shall, daily, before twelve o'clock noon of the following day
of business, provide a written report to the Police Department containing a
complete description of all articles received in the course of his junk dealing
business during the previous business day, together with the description
of the person(s) making such sale, including such person's name, address,
date of birth, race, sex and operator's number. Forms for this purpose are
to be provided by the Police Department.
§ 178-9. Prohibited Transactions.
A junk dealer shall not accept a pledge from a person under the age of
eighteen years nor from any person under the influence of alcohol or drugs
or any known thieves.
§ 178-10. Retention of Purchased Articles.
All junk dealers shall keep and retain on their premises all articles
purchased in the course of their business, in the original form, shape, and
condition in which they received such goods until seven (7) days have
elapsed from the time of furnishing to the police the form containing the
information required in § 178-8.
A. A full and accurate description of all articles purchased.
B. The date and time of the purchase of the same.
C. The amount of money paid therefor.
D. The description of the person or persons selling such articles, including
that person's name, address, date of birth, race, sex and motor vehicle
operator's number.
§ 178-6 PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS AND § 178-10
178:111

ARTICLE III
Transient Merchants
§ 178-11. Definitions.
As used in this Article, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person who occupies a room, apartment,
store, shop, building, private lot or other fixed location, including, but not
limited to, a person who rents space and maintains a stall or other place
of business at a location in common with other such persons and business
locations, some of which operations are commonly known as "flea markets",
for the purpose of purchasing and/or selling goods, wares or merchandise
of any description with the intention of not remaining more than 100 days.
In addition, "transient merchants" shall be deemed to include dealers in
metals and jewelry, both precious and semi-precious, stamps and other
like valuable collectibles, regardless of whether their place of business is
permanent or temporary in the Township. Each and every operator of an
establishment with facilities used and occupied by a number of transient
merchants, including operators of flea markets, shall keep a record of all
such transient merchants using and occupying space which shall include
the name, address and phone number of each transient merchant and the
space number, location and general description of the merchandise being
handled by each such transient merchant.
§ 178-12. Records to be Kept.
Each and every transient shall keep a book legibly written in the English
language in which shall be recorded:
§ 178-13. Report to Police.
All transient merchants shall, within two (2) hours of the close of their
business day, provide a written report to the Police Department containing
a full and accurate description of all articles received in the course of his
business during that immediate business day, the amount of money paid
therefor and a description of the person(s) from whom such goods were in
any way received, including that person's name, address, date of birth, sex,
race and motor vehicle operator's number. Forms for this purpose are to be
provided by the Police Department.
A. A full and accurate description of all articles received in any way in the
course of business.
B. The date and time of such transaction.
C. The description of the person(s) with whom such a transaction was
completed, including that person's name, address, date of birth, sex,
race and motor vehicle operator's number.
§ 178-11 PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS AND § 178-14
178:113
§ 178-14. Notification of termination of business.
Notification must be provided to the Police Department that the transient
dealer intends to terminate his business operation not less than 48 hours
before such termination. Such notification shall include an address at which
the transient dealer may be reached for the 10 days immediately prior to
the termination.
§ 178-15. Retention of Articles.
All transient merchants shall retain, at their immediate local place of
business, any goods received in the course of business, in the original
shape, form, and condition in which they were received, and shall not sell or
dispose of such goods in any way until seven (7) days have elapsed from the
time of furnishing to the police a form containing the information on such
articles as required by § 178-13.
§ 178-16. Prohibited transactions.
A transient merchant shall not accept a pledge from a person under the
age of eighteen years nor from any person under the influence of alcohol or
drugs or any known thieves.
§ 178-14 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 178-16
178:114
ARTICLE IV
Administation and Enforcement
§ 178-17. Affirmative defense.
It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution or administrative
proceeding brought for the violation of any section of this chapter
pertaining to the retention of articles obtained in the course of business
operations, that, in the case of precious metals, retention for the time
period required would have resulted in serious and substantial economic
losses to the dealer, or the probability of such losses was significant, due
to rapid and highly fluctuating market conditions, provided the persons so
charged shall prove the existence of the market conditions giving rise to the
aforesaid defense by a preponderance of the evidence. Market conditions,
in order to be a defense hereunder, must be such that financial analysts
would characterize trading as at or approaching a level or occurrence in
an atmosphere of panic so as to clearly distinguish trading conditions from
normal variations in market movement in response to economic news or
other events.
§ 178-18. Information to be supplied to police; failure to comply.
§ 178-19. Violations and penalties.51
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall, if such violation
is his/her first, be subject upon conviction therefor in a summary
proceeding, to a fine not more than six hundred dollars ($600.), shall pay
the costs of prosecution or in default of payment undergo imprisonment for
not more than thirty (30) days. Each subsequent violation shall constitute a
summary offense and, upon conviction therefor, shall subject each person to
additional fines and costs. Each day during which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. Any police officer, upon showing a badge and proper identification, shall
be given any information from all of the above classes of businesses that
is legitimately required in the execution of his duties. This shall include,
but not be limited to, names of employees and any and all records
concerning transactions over the past twenty-four (24) months.
B. Failure to do so shall result in any and all licenses for operation of said
business being revoked by the Township of Upper Allen in addition to
imposition of the penalties as stated in § 178-19.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 178-17 PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS AND § 178-19
178:115
Chapter 181
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 181-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of this township, on the
streets, public places or elsewhere therein, to:
§ 181-2. Violations and penalties.53
Any person or persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.) for each offense and
costs of prosecution and, in default thereof, to suffer imprisonment for a
period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
A. Commit a breach of the peace, to be guilty of vagrancy, riotous or
disorderly practice, to engage in fighting or assaulting or in inciting
others to fight, assault or engage in any unlawful act tending to imperil
the personal security or endanger the property of citizens or the
property of companies or corporations or of the township or others.
B. Use publicly profane or blasphemous language, commit open lewdness
or any act of public indecency or make any indecent exposure of the
person; to be found publicly in a state of intoxication or drunkenness; or
to be gathered together in disorderly assemblies on the streets or in
drinking places, gambling houses or houses of prostitution.
C. Make willfully or cause to be made loud, boisterous or unseemly noise
or disturbance to the annoyance of the peaceable residents nearby,
more particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
D. Willfully or knowingly carry on his or her person or possess or carry, in
any vehicle owned, operated or occupied by such person, any device of
any type or description defined as an "offensive weapon" in Section 908
of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code,52 as in effect from time to time, and
any nun-chuck stick or other martial arts weapons, unless such person
has a legal right to possess or a lawful reason for possession of such
device. Any device found in violation of this section is subject to seizure
by the Upper Allen Township Police. [Amended 6-16-1983 by Ord.
No. 339]
E. Throw wantonly any stone, brick or other missile; or to explode any
torpedo, bomb, firecrackers or fireworks of any kind in the streets,
alleys or highways; or to raise any false alarm of fire or other calamity.
52.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 908.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 178-19 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 181-2
181:116
Chapter 185
(RESERVED)
Chapter 189
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 112.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 151.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210.
§ 189-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 5-20-2015 by Ord. No.
737]
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Manager
of Upper Allen Township at the Municipal Building, 100 Gettysburg Pike,
Mechanicsburg, Upper Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania,
being marked and designated as the "International Property Maintenance
Code, 2012 Edition," as amended, as published by the International Code
Council, be and it hereby is adopted as the Property Maintenance Code
of the Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 189-5 of this
chapter.
§ 189-2. Inconsistent ordinances repealed. [Amended 5-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 737]
Township Ordinance Nos. 187, 439, 478, 508, 539, 548 and 585, and any
amendments thereto, and all other existing ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict herewith be and are hereby repealed; provided that
ordinances or those parts of same not expressly named in this section which
impose specifications or requirements more restrictive than adopted hereby
shall not be considered in conflict with this chapter.
§ 189-3. Cooperation of other officials.
The Code Official (as defined in the Property Maintenance Code) may
request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge of
his or her duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the
municipality.
§ 189-4. Definitions and word usage.
§ 181-2 (RESERVED) § 189-4
185:117
§ 189-5. Additions, insertions and changes. [Amended 5-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 73754]
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are
hereby revised as follows:
A. Wherever the term "appointing authority" is used in the Property
Maintenance Code as adopted, it shall be held to mean the Board of
Commissioners of the Township.
B. Wherever the term "building" or "structure" is used in the Property
Maintenance Code as adopted, it shall be held to mean all buildings and
structures within the Township.
C. Wherever the term "date of adoption of this code" is used in the
Property Maintenance Code as adopted, it shall be held to mean the
date of enactment of this chapter.
D. Wherever the term "legal representative" or "legal official" is used in
the Property Maintenance Code as adopted, it shall be held to mean the
Solicitor of the Township.
E. Wherever the word "municipality" or term "name of jurisdiction" is used
in the Property Maintenance Code as adopted, it shall be held to mean
the Township.
A. Section 101.0, entitled "General" is hereby amended as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “Property
Maintenance Code” of Upper Allen Township, hereinafter referred to as
“the Code.”
B. A new Section 101.5, shall be added, following Section 101.4, and shall
read as follows:
101.5 Other regulations. When the provisions herein specified are
more restrictive than specifications or requirements of other
regulations or ordinances, this code shall control; but in any case,
the strictest requirements of either this code or other regulations or
ordinances shall apply whenever a difference exists. Violation of such
other regulation or ordinance shall be considered a violation of this
code and, at the option of the Township, the enforcement provisions,
(including penalties and fines) of this code may be applied in lieu of
enforcement provisions, if any, provided for in such other regulation or
ordinance. Notwithstanding the above, this code shall not control if this
code is identified by name and its application is expressly restricted
by such other ordinance or regulation by provisions referenced in such
other ordinance or regulation or by provision of this code or ordinance.
54.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Subsections F through J were
redesignated as Subsections L through P, respectively.
§ 189-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 189-5
185:118
C. Section 103, entitled "Department of Property Maintenance Inspection"
is hereby amended as follows:
103.5 Fees. The fees for property maintenance work performed by
staff charged with the administration and enforcement of this code
shall be as indicated in the Fee Schedule set by the resolution of the
appointing authority establishing such fees, which may be amended
from time to time by said appointing authority.
D. Section 104.1 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
104.1 General. The Code Official or other designee authorized by the
appointing authority shall enforce all of the provisions of this code.
E. Section 106.4 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person(s) who shall violate any of
the provisions of this code or who shall fail to comply with any order
issued pursuant to any section thereof, shall be guilty of a violation of
this code and, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice of
the Township or other court having jurisdiction over the same, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of
prosecution for each offense and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30
days. The owner of a building or structure or portion thereof or of
the premises where anything in violation of this code shall be placed
or shall exist and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent,
person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may
have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall each be
guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice of the Township or other court having jurisdiction over
the same, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and
costs of prosecution for each offense and, in default of payment thereof,
to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
F. Section 111.1 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a
decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code
shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals, provided that a
written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day of
decision, notice or order was served. The appeal shall be upon such
form as the Board of Commissioners shall prescribe, shall be filed in
duplicate and shall be filed with the Township Code Official. The parties
to the appeal shall be the person filing the appeal, the owner and the
Codes Office.
G. Section 111.2 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
§ 189-5 (RESERVED) § 189-5
185:119
111.2 Membership of the Board. The Board of Appeals shall consist
of the Commissioners of Upper Allen Township. The Board of Appeals
may engage the services of such professionals and disciplines as it shall
deem necessary.
H. Section 111.4 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
111.4 Hearing. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing
within 30 days after the appeal is filed. Unless a party requests a
stenographically recorded hearing not less than five days before the
hearing, the testimony will be tape-recorded. If a stenographically
recorded hearing is requested, the party making the request shall pay
the cost thereof.
I. Section 111.5 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
111.5 Evidence. The Board of Appeals shall not be bound by technical
rules of evidence, and all relevant evidence of reasonable probative
value may be permitted. Reasonable examination and crossexamination
shall be permitted.
J. Section 111.6 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
111.6 Adjudication. The Board of Appeals shall, in every case, reach
a decision within 30 days after the hearing is continued, within 30 days
after the continued hearing. Failure to render a decision within 30 days
after the continued hearing shall not be deemed approval in favor of
appellant. Every decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings
and the reason for the adjudication. Every decision shall be filed in the
office of the Building Official and shall be open to public inspection.
A certified copy of the decision shall be served upon all parties or
their counsel personally or by mail not later than 15 days following the
decision.
K. Section 111.7 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
111.7 Court review. Any person aggrieved by an adjudication who
has a direct interest in such adjudication shall have the right to appeal
therefrom to the court vested with jurisdiction of such appeals by or
pursuant to Title 42 (relating to judiciary and judicial procedures).
L. Section 302.4 of said Code is hereby amended in part to read as follows:
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property within any districts
shall be maintained free from weeds or weed growth in excess of 10
inches. All noxious plants shall be prohibited. “Weeds” shall be defined
as all grasses and vegetation, other than trees, shrubs or vegetation
that is edible, provided, however, this term shall not include farm fields,
cultivated flowers and gardens. The provisions of this section shall be
applicable to land that is located 200 feet or less from any building or
structure available for use for human occupancy.
M. Section 303.14 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
§ 189-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 189-5
185:120
303.14 Insect screens. At all times, every door, window and other
outside opening utilized or required for ventilation purposes serving
any structure containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized
in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged
or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of
not than 16 mesh per inch, and every swinging door shall have a selfclosing
device in good working condition.
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved
means such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are employed.
N. Section 602.2 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
602.2 Residential occupancies. Every dwelling shall be provided
with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of
68° F. (20° C.) at a level of three feet (914 mm) above the floor
and a distance of three feet (914 mm) from the exterior walls in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the outside
design temperature required for the locality indicated in Appendix D of
the International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition.
O. Section PM 602.3 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory
or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat
to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period
from 1 October to 31 March to maintain the room temperatures
specified in Section 602.2 during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and
10:30 p.m. of each day and not less than 65° F. (18° C.) during other
hours. The temperature shall be measured at a point three feet (914
mm) above the floor and three feet (914 mm) from the exterior walls.
Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the outdoor design
temperature required for the locality by Appendix D of the International
Plumbing Code 2003, the owner or operator shall not be required to
maintain the minimum room temperatures, provided that the heating
system is operating at full capacity, with supply valves and dampers in
a full open position.
P. Section 602.4 of said code is hereby amended as follows:
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall
be supplied with sufficient heat during the period from 1 October to 31
March to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) during
the period the spaces are occupied. The temperature shall be measured
at a point three feet (914 mm) above the floor and three feet (914 mm)
from the exterior walls.
§ 189-5 (RESERVED) § 189-5
185:121
Chapter 192
PUBLIC SAFETY RADIO SYSTEM AMPLIFIERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Marshal/Fire Prevention Officer — See
Ch. 26.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 112.
§ 192-1. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings for purposes of this
chapter:
800 MHZ BAND — Radio frequencies between 806 and 870 MHz.
APPROVED VENDOR — A vendor capable of installing a BDA or DAS who
has a current FCC license (or equivalent) for two-way radio on file with the
Department of Public Safety, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
BDA — Bi-directional amplifier.
CCDPS — Cumberland County Department of Public Safety, Technical
Systems.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING — Any large building or enclosure used or
intended for use in the operation of one or more business enterprises
for the sale and distribution of any product, commodity, article or service
used or intended for use for any social, amusement, religious, educational,
charitable or public purpose, and shall include institutional dormitories,
individual condominium units and integral units within a single structure
(such as "flex-space offices"). Includes the gross floor area, including
storage areas, basements, attics, and stairwells.
DAS — Distributed antenna system.
DELIVERED AUDIO QUALITY (DAQ) —
Exceptions: 1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require
cooling or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in
vigorous physical activities.
A. DAQ 1: Unusable. Speech present but not understandable.
DAQ 2: Speech understandable with considerable effort. Requires
frequent repetition due to noise or distortion.
B.
DAQ 3: Speech understandable with slight effort. Requires occasional
repetition due to noise or distortion.
C.
DAQ 3.4: Speech understandable without repetition. Some noise or
distortion present.
D.
§ 189-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 192-1
185:122
ECC — Emergency Communications Center.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
FREQUENCY RANGE — Frequency range(s) being used will be determined
by the Cumberland County Department of Public Safety, Technical Systems
(CCDPS).
LARGE BUILDING — Buildings that meet one or more of the following
characteristics:
MINIMAL SIGNAL STRENGTH FOR PUBLIC SAFETY — Minus (-) 95 dBm
(milliwatts) or as set forth by Cumberland County Department of Public
Safety.
NFPA — National Fire Protection Association.
PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL — Police, fire and emergency medical
personnel, and as set forth by the Upper Allen Township Board of
Commissioners.
TIA/TSB — Telecommunications Industry Association/Telecommunications
Systems Bulletin.
§ 192-2. Administration.
E. DAQ 4: Speech easily understandable. Little noise or distortion.
F. DAQ 4.5: Speech easily understandable. Rare noise or distortion.
G. DAQ 5: Perfect. No distortion or noise discernible.
A. Gross building size of 32,000 square feet or more.
B. High concentration of steel or machinery.
C. Hospitals.
D. Nursing homes.
Schools or colleges, including elementary, secondary, post-secondary,
public and private.
E.
A. Upper Allen Township has determined to participate in an integrated
and coordinated public safety radio system, involving police, fire,
emergency medical services and other public safety users within
Cumberland County and many municipalities located within said
county.
B. In order for the radio equipment to be employed by Upper Allen
Township and other participating public safety personnel to
communicate effectively from the belt of public safety personnel who
may enter any structure, all buildings must have a minimum ninety-fivepercent
radio coverage with a reliability factor of 95% on each floor of
the building, at a minimum signal strength in the 800 MHz band or
other frequency range as approved by the Cumberland County
§ 192-1 (RESERVED) § 192-2
185:123
§ 192-3. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Department of Public Safety, Technical Systems (CCDPS). The owner(s)
and/or building contractor shall provide Upper Allen Township with a
certification that the building has the minimum radio coverage meeting
the requirements of this subsection.
C. Upper Allen Township, in keeping pace with changes in building
construction technology, has determined that there may be certain
buildings located within Upper Allen Township which, due to the large
size of the structure and/or other characteristics of the construction
and/or design, may not be able to accommodate communications among
public safety personnel who may be called to the premises of such
buildings and structures to respond to public safety situations.
D. Whenever it is determined that the characteristics of a large building
are such that the signal strength is not sufficient to allow public safety
personnel to communicate reliably with the ECC, Upper Allen Township
shall require the owner(s) and/or building contractor of said large
building to install bidirectional amplifiers in or on the building to
remedy the communications problem and reach the coverage criteria
set forth in this chapter or otherwise required by the integrated public
safety radio system.
E. Upper Allen Township adopts Appendix A, "Emergency Radio
Communications System In-Building Certification Requirements," and
Appendix B, "Coverage/Acceptance Test Plan," as may be amended
from time to time by resolution55 as the radio communication system inbuilding
certification requirements and coverage/acceptance test plan
and rules and regulations of the Township of Upper Allen Township.
A. The Upper Allen Township Code Enforcement Officer and the Upper
Allen Township Fire Marshall are hereby appointed as the designated
officials who are authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties
slated herein.
B. Upon determination by the appropriate Township officials that
bidirectional amplifiers must be installed in a large building in
accordance with this chapter, then said Township officials shall give
notice to the owner(s) of such large building to install the said
bidirectional amplifier. In the event the applicable large building
owner(s) fails to install the required speakers within 30 days of the said
notice, then the appropriate Township officials shall bring an
enforcement action before the District Justice.
C. Liability for violation shall result in a civil judgment of not more than
$1,000, plus costs and attorneys' fees incurred by the Township in
enforcing this chapter, but no violation shall be deemed to have
occurred nor any judgment be commenced, imposed or paid until a final
55.Editor's Note: Appendixes A and B are on file in the Township offices.
§ 192-2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 192-3
185:124
Chapter 195
RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF
§ 195-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
LESSEE — That person or persons who has the use of real estate of a lessor
and is responsible for the giving of any type of consideration therefor, but
excluding those who are lessees for a period of less than thirty (30) days.
LESSOR — Any person who grants a lease or otherwise permits the use of
his real estate or portion thereof for a consideration, monetary or otherwise.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
§ 195-2. Report of rental property required.
All lessors, within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter or,
in case of real estate thereafter acquired or thereafter rented or becoming
available for rental, within thirty (30) days after the acquisition, rental
or availability for rental thereof, as the case may be, shall report to the
Township Secretary, in writing, addressed to him/her at the Township
Office, the number of parcels or units of real estate presently or hereafter
rented and available for rental, a description (by address, number and/or
some other meaningful method) of said parcels or units and the names of its
lessees at the time of such report, together with a designation as to which
unit or parcel is occupied by each.
§ 195-3. Report of change in occupancy required.
Any change in the occupancy of real estate rented or leased or in the
identity of the lessee from that shown in the report of the lessor as required
in § 195-2 hereof shall be reported by lessor to the Township Secretary
within ten (10) days after such change. It is intended hereby that lessors
shall report a new lessee or a lessee who rents or leases a different unit or
parcel of the lessor's real estate and when a unit or parcel of the real estate
becomes vacant.
determination is made. In case the defendant fails to pay or to appeal
the judgment in a timely manner, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless
it is determined that a good-faith basis existed for the violation, in
which case there shall be deemed only one violation until the fifth day
following the violation; thereafter, each day shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 192-3 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF § 195-4
195:125
§ 195-4. Status of occupancy report.
The Township Secretary may prepare a form report entitled "Status of
Occupancy Report," which form report may require that information set
forth above and such other pertinent information that the Commissioners,
by resolution, may direct the Township Secretary to incorporate into said
report form. The failure to have such report forms, however, shall not
excuse the obligation of lessors to provide the information required herein.
§ 195-5. Violations and penalties.56
Any lessor violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who furnishes
false information to the township or who uses a false name or address in
any report required by this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before
any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than six hundred
dollars ($600.) and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof,
to suffer imprisonment in the Cumberland County Jail for not more than
thirty (30) days.
Chapter 199
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, ON-LOT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 92.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 151.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 200.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ 199-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the Upper
Allen Township "On-Lot Sewage Disposal System (OLSDS) Management
Ordinance."
§ 199-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter includes:
A. Regulation of the installation, inspection, operation, rehabilitation,
replacement and timely ongoing maintenance of OLSDSs within the
Township;
B. Establishment of provisions and safeguards for the Township which
enable the issuance of permits for OLSDSs by and through the Sewage
Enforcement Officer (SEO);
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 195-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 199-2
195:126
§ 199-3. Legislative intent.
§ 199-4. Adoption of standards by reference.
Chapters 71, 72, and 73 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, as
promulgated by the DEP, are hereby adopted as the sewage permit
application and installation procedure of the Township and each and all of
C. Registration of pumper/hauler businesses that remove and dispose of
septage;
D. Establishment of minimum standards for the periodic pumping,
treatment, dosing and lift-pump tanks which are components of
OLSDSs;
E. Adoption of standards for inspection and pumping of systems and tanks;
and
F. Provision for the Township to take action to correct conditions which
are declared public nuisances or hazards to the public health.
A. As mandated by the Municipal Codes, the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S.
§§ 691.1 to 691.1001), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et. seq.,
known as Act 537), municipalities have the power and the duty to
provide adequate sewage treatment facilities for the protection of the
public health by preventing the discharge of untreated or inadequately
treated sewage. The Board of Commissioners recognizes that individual
and community OLSDSs constitute a valid and approved manner of
protecting the quality of the water and other natural resources of the
Township through proper treatment of wastes generated by certain
development within the Township. The use of OLSDSs must be
regulated in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), which
pertain to the location and permitted types of OLSDSs. In addition, the
Township has determined that, should the OLSDSs installed by a
landowner fail, thereby endangering the health and welfare of the
residents and visitors, the Board of Commissioners desires to require
that all landowners provide and set aside areas for the installation of
replacement individual OLSDSs.
B. It is the further intent of the Board of Commissioners to insure that
OLSDSs are properly maintained. Failure to maintain an OLSDS can
eventuate into a pollution of the groundwater and other natural
resources of the Township. OLSDSs must be pumped on a regular basis
to ensure such maintenance is performed. In order to determine that
OLSDSs within the Township are being maintained properly, all
landowners using OLSDSs shall file manifests with the Township
concerning such service. The pumpers/haulers shall also be required to
report any OLSDS to the Township which is polluting groundwater,
surface waters or discharging sewage to the surface of the ground.
§ 199-2 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF § 199-4
195:127
the regulations contained in the said chapters are hereby adopted by the
Township, except as specifically modified by this chapter. It is the intent of
the Board of Commissioners to adopt automatically, without further action
of the Board, all subsequent amendments and revisions to the said chapters
as permitted by law and in accordance with the provisions of 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937(a). If such intent is found invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
it is the intent of the Board to adopt the said chapters as they existed on the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 199-5. Terms and definitions.
A. General terms. In the interpretation of this section, the singular shall
include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
B. Specific terms. For the purposes of this section, the terms used shall be
construed to have the following meanings:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966,
P.L. (1965) 1535, No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
ALTERNATIVE SYSTEM — A system for the disposal of domestic
wastewaters not operating below ground level but located on or near
the site of the building or buildings being served (e.g., composting
toilets, gray water recycling systems, incinerating toilets, spray
irrigation and black water recycling systems, etc.).
AUTHORITY — Upper Allen Township Authority, a Pennsylvania
municipality authority.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A licensed sewage enforcement officer,
professional engineer or sanitarian, plumbing inspector, soils scientists,
or any other qualified or licensed person who is delegated to function
within the specified limits as the agent of the Board of Commissioners
of Upper Allen Township to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Allen,
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
CESSPOOL — A covered pit with open-jointed lining which receives
the sewage or other organic wastes directly from a building drain or
building sewer. The pit retains the solid waste and allows the liquid
waste to pass through its bottom and sides.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, which collects sewage from two or more lots or uses.
Treatment and/or disposal of the sewage occurs on one or more of
the lots or at any other site which shall comply with all applicable
regulations of the DEP.
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any successor agency.
GRAY WATER — Used water from a laundry, bath, or kitchen sink.
§ 199-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 199-5
195:128
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system of piping, tanks, or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil or any waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plot
or otherwise as permitted by and to be used, developed or built upon as
a unit.
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — The management program shall
encompass the entire area of Upper Allen Township where public
sewage disposal service is not available and wastewater service is
provided by OLSDS or any other alternative system which discharges
into the soils of the Township or the waters of the commonwealth. All
systems shall be operated under the jurisdiction of the Township and
other applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — A comprehensive plan for
the provision of adequate sewage disposal systems adopted by the
Township and approved by DEP in accordance with the Act and with
applicable DEP regulations.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (OLSDS) — Any sewage system
disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil of the lot it serves
or any waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any owned property.
PERSON — Any individual, company, association, society, trust,
corporation or other group or entity.
PLANNING MODULE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — A revision to, or
exception to the revision of, the official sewage facilities plan of the
Township submitted in connection with the request for approval of a
subdivision or land development in accordance with DEP regulations.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more
residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots,
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division
or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features;
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land; or
Development in accordance with Section 503 (1.1) of the
Municipalities Planning Code (Act 170 of 1988, as amended).
(3)
§ 199-5 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF § 199-5
195:129
POLLUTION/POLLUTING — The discharge of raw or partially treated
sewage to the surface water, groundwater, or surface of the ground.
PRIMARY AREA — An area on a lot, tract or parcel of land that has been
tested by the SEO and found suitable, based upon the then-current DEP
site requirements, for the installation of an OLSDS, and which will be
preserved and protected from alteration for installation of the initial
OLSDS for sewage generated on that lot, tract, or parcel.
PUMPER/HAULER BUSINESS — Any sole proprietor, company,
partnership or corporation which engages in cleaning any or all
components of a community or individual OLSDS and evacuates and
transports the sewage cleaned therefrom, whether for a fee or free of
charge.
PUMPER/HAULER — A person who engages in cleaning any or all
components of a community or individual OLSDS and evacuates and
transports the sewage cleaned therefrom, whether for a fee or free
of charge, and is certified by the Pennsylvania Septic Management
Association to perform on-lot management treatment inspection.
PUMPER'S REPORT — A form, provided by the Township, which shall
be used by all pumpers/haulers to report every pumping of an OLSDS
in the Township.
REPAIR — Work done to modify, alter, rehabilitate or enlarge an
existing OLSDS.
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or
replace an existing OLSDS.
REPLACEMENT AREA — An area designated as the future location
of an OLSDS that shall be installed should the initial OLSDS fail or
otherwise become inoperable. The area shall meet all the regulations of
DEP and all applicable Township ordinances for an OLSDS.
SEPTAGE — The residual scum, sludge and other materials pumped
from septic or aerobic treatment tanks and the systems they serve.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains gray water, waste products,
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or any
noxious or deleterious substance harmful to public health, to animal or
aquatic life, to the use of water for domestic water supply or recreation,
or which constitutes pollution under the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987,
No. 94), known as "The Clean Streams Law," as amended.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — A person certified by the
State Board for the Certification of Sewage Enforcement Officers, who
is appointed by the Board to administer the provisions of the ordinance,
the provisions of the Act, and the regulations in Pa. Code Title 25,
Chapters 71, 72 and 73.
SEWAGE FACILITIES — Any method of sewage collection, conveyance,
treatment, and disposal which will prevent the discharge of untreated
§ 199-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 199-5
195:130
§ 199-6. Applicability.
From the effective date of this chapter, its provisions shall apply to all
persons owning any property serviced by an individual or community
OLSDS and to all persons installing, repairing or rehabilitating such
systems.
§ 199-7. Permits required.
No person shall install, construct or alter an individual sewage system or
community sewage system or install or occupy any building or structure
for which an individual sewage system or community sewage system is to
be installed without first obtaining a permit from the Sewage Enforcement
Officer of Upper Allen Township indicating that the site, plans and
specifications of such system are in compliance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as
or inadequately treated sewage into the waters of the commonwealth
or otherwise provide for the safe and sanitary treatment of sewage.
SUBDIVISION — As defined by the Upper Allen Township Land
Development Ordinance,57 a "subdivision" is the division or redivision
of a lot, tract or parcel of land, by any means, into two (2) or more
lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in
existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes
into parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or
easement of access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, a Pennsylvania municipality, acting by and through its
Board of Commissioners, in appropriate cases, acting by and through
its authorized representatives.
TREATMENT TANK — A water-tight tank designed to retain sewage
long enough for satisfactory bacterial decomposition of the solids to
take place. The term includes the following:
SEPTIC TANK — A treatment tank that provides for anaerobic
decomposition of sewage prior to its discharge.
(1)
AEROBIC SEWAGE TREATMENT TANK — A mechanically aerated
treatment tank that provides aerobic biochemical stabilization of
sewage prior to its point of discharge.
(2)
C. All other definitions of words and terms used in this part shall have the
same meaning as set forth in Chapter 73, Standards for Sewage
Disposal Facilities of Title 25, Rules and Regulations, DEP.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 199-5 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF § 199-7
195:131
amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.) and the rules and regulations adopted
by the Department of Environmental Resources pursuant thereto. A permit
shall be required regardless of the size of the lot or tract of ground on which
the building or structure is to be constructed, altered or occupied.
§ 199-8. Issuance of permit.
No person, firm or corporation shall construct, alter or extend any
individual or community sewage disposal system within the Township of
Upper Allen, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, unless he/she holds a valid
permit issued by the person or officer charged with the issuance thereof.
Permits shall be issued, if they comply with the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act and the rules and regulations issued in connection therewith,
upon the payment of a fee as designated by the Commissioners of Upper
Allen Township. The term "individual sewage disposal system" shall mean
one system per residential unit. Community sewage disposal systems shall
mean sewage disposal units as described in the rules and regulations of
the Department of Environmental Resources, and permits therefor shall be
issued upon the payment of a fee as designated by the Commissioners of
Upper Allen Township.
§ 199-9. Appeals from refusal to grant permits and inspection of
installations.
Appeals from a refusal to grant permits and inspection of installations
of individual or community sewage disposal systems shall be as provided
by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and the rules and regulations
as promulgated thereunder, a copy of which shall always be kept at the
office of the Secretary of the Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, where the same may be inspected during office hours.
§ 199-10. Duties of Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO).
The local agency official who issues permits, reviews permit applications
and sewage facilities planning modules and conducts investigations and
inspections necessary to implement the Sewage Facilities Act and the
regulations thereunder; more specifically, the duties of the SEO shall
include the following:
A. Issue, deny or revoke septic system permits in accordance with state
regulations and standards.
B. Review soil profiles (deep probes) and percolation tests.
C. Inspect newly-installed systems to ensure proper installation.
D. Conduct initial septic system site investigations to document
conditions, determine the causes of malfunctions, and decide the extent
of the repair needed to resolve septic system malfunction problems.
§ 199-7 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 199-10
195:132
§ 199-11. System markers.
§ 199-12. Replacement areas.
E. Issue a notice of violation to the responsible property owner for a failed
septic system and issue a sewage permit application for the proper
system repair.
F. Issue the responsible property owner a permit to repair or replace the
malfunctioning system after any necessary site testing has been done
and an acceptable system design has been submitted.
A. Any person who shall install a new OLSDS shall use underground
warning tape to identify the location of all treatment tanks and
appurtenances. The underground warning tape shall be buried six
inches below finished grade. The underground warning tape shall be
magnetic polyethylene tape, three inches in width with a minimum
lettering of one inch.
B. In addition, a manhole riser and cover shall be installed on all new
septic tanks to enable easy access. The riser shall bring the cover to the
surface or to within 12 inches of the top of grade. A mechanism to
prevent unlawful entry shall be installed on the cover if it is brought to
the surface.
A. Requirements:
(1) A replacement area for an individual or community OLSDS shall be
provided for all new lots which are not serviced by public sewer.
Lots that are served by an OLSDS that existed prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall be exempt from the requirements of this
Subsection A.
(2) The replacement area provided shall comply with the Act, with all
regulations issued by DEP concerning OLSDS, including isolation
distances, and with the terms of this chapter and any other
applicable Township ordinances.
B. Identification of replacement area:
(1) Each applicant who shall submit a plan for subdivision or land
development, or who shall request approval of a planning module
for land development or the adoption of a revision, planning
exemption, or supplement to the official sewage facilities plan,
shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the SEO that a functional
OLSDS and a suitable replacement area exist on the residual lot. To
confirm the suitability of the primary area and replacement area,
the SEO shall perform or observe all soil tests required in Chapter
73 of the Act for the location of an OLSDS.
§ 199-10 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF § 199-12
195:133
§ 199-13. Operation of system.
(2) The location of the initial OLSDS and the replacement area(s), as
confirmed by the SEO, shall be identified on a plot plan and
diagram submitted as part of the permit application.
(3) If the application is for a subdivision or land development plan
approval or as part of a request that the Township approve a
planning module for land development to amend its official sewage
facilities plan, or approval of a request for a planning exemption to
the revision of the official sewage facilities plan, the location of
each initial OLSDS, and each replacement area shall be noted upon
the plans. If the application is for subdivision or land development
approval, a note shall also be added to the plans stating that no
improvements shall be constructed upon the primary area and
replacement area with the exception of those identified in
Subsection C herein below.
(4) An owner may submit a written request for planning exemption to
submit a sewage facilities planning module for any new lot using
the application mailer as provided for by the Act and for which said
request must be approved by the Township and the DEP.
(5) Any revisions to a permit or plan affecting a replacement area
which previously has been approved pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be reviewed for approval by the SEO and
forwarded to the Board of Commissioners and the owner.
C. Construction restrictions:
(1) The site for the primary area and replacement area shall be
protected and a note added upon the plan stating that no
permanent or temporary improvements of any character, other
than shallow-rooted plant matter, shall be constructed upon the
identified suitable on-lot sewage disposal test areas. Movable
structures (without foundations), such as sheds, fences, and animal
shelters, may be placed in the replacement area.
(2) This provision shall be enforced by the Township unless the person
who desires to construct such improvements shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the SEO that an alternate replacement area,
which complies with all applicable regulations of DEP, this chapter
and all other applicable Township ordinances, exists upon the lot. If
an alternate replacement area is identified, the alternate
replacement area shall be designated the replacement area
required by this chapter. The owner shall provide a revised plot
plan to the Township showing the location of the new replacement
area.
(3) The replacement area may consist of an area set aside for any
OLSDS that is acceptable to the DEP.
§ 199-12 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 199-13
195:134
§ 199-14. Maintenance.
A. All OLSDSs shall be operated by the owner in a manner that is in full
compliance with the terms of this chapter, the DEP regulations, and the
system's permit.
B. Only sewage shall be discharged into an OLSDS.
C. The following shall not be discharged into any individual or community
sewage system:
(1) Any substance defined as "industrial waste" under the Clean
Streams Law;
(2) Motor oil, gasoline and fuel oil;
(3) Fats and grease;
(4) Hazardous waste;
(5) Chemicals, including but not limited to:
(a) Pesticides and herbicides;
(b) Acids;
(c) Paint, paint thinner and solvents, including latex or waterbased
paints;
(d) Wallpaper pastes and adhesives; and
(e) Photo-processing chemicals.
(6) Clean surface or ground water, including water from roof or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and French drains.
D. In accordance with § 73.11(c) of Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Title
25, DEP, Chapter 73, kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener
backwash shall be discharged to a treatment tank.
A. The owner of a property upon which an OLSDS is located shall at all
times operate and maintain the system in such condition as will permit
it to function in the manner in which it was designed and to prevent the
unlawful discharge of sewage.
B. The owner of a property upon which an OLSDS is located shall maintain
the area around such system so as to provide convenient access for
inspection, maintenance and pumping.
C. In the event an owner detects conditions that indicate or could
reasonably be interpreted to indicate the OLSDS is not operating
properly, the owner shall contact the SEO and, if repair or replacement
is necessary, apply for and obtain a permit to repair or replace the
system.
§ 199-13 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF § 199-14
195:135
§ 199-15. Maintenance districts created.
D. Every treatment tank or cesspool shall be pumped out according to the
pumping schedule in § 199-15C of this chapter. If a component's
manufacturer requires a more frequent pumping interval than
contained in this chapter, that interval shall be deemed the minimum
interval for pumping.
E. When a treatment tank is pumped out, all dosing tanks, sand filter
tanks, lift tanks and other tanks associated with the system shall also be
pumped out.
A. The Township is hereby divided into three districts, designated Districts
1, 2 and 3 as illustrated on the On-Lot Sewer Management District Map,
which is incorporated by reference into this chapter as Appendix 1,58
and as may be amended from time to time.
B. Every OLSDS in the Township shall be inspected and every treatment
tank or cesspool associated with every OLSDS shall be pumped at least
one time between the effective date of this chapter and December 31,
2008.
C. Districts and pumping schedule. The requirements of this section shall
become effective in a sequential manner as follows:
District
First Pumping and Inspection
Shall Be Completed By
1 12/31/06
2 12/31/07
3 12/31/08
D. After the initial pumping/inspection, all treatment tanks or cesspools in
an OLSDS shall continue to be pumped and inspected at a regular
interval of once every three years within the prescribed interval and
time frame set forth in § 199-15C for each district. Treatment tanks that
have been subject to more frequent pumping, by the nature of their
size, loading rate or other system characteristics, should continue to
receive that frequency of pumping. [Amended 7-2-2008 by Ord. No.
655]
E. The Township may allow Treatment Tanks to be pumped out at less
frequent intervals when the owner can demonstrate to the Township
that the property the OLSDS serves is not occupied on a full-time basis,
or for other acceptable reasons. Such a request may be made at any
time and must be in writing. The Township, in making its determination,
shall take into account the information submitted by the applicant, the
sewerage permit issued by the SEO, and any other supporting
documentation or information. The Township may also conduct an on-
58.Editor's Note: Said Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 199-14 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 199-15
195:136
§ 199-16. Pumping/inspection.
site inspection of the OLSDS to verify its current condition. The
applicant shall bear the cost of any inspection or soil and water
sampling conducted for the purposes of evaluating the request.
F. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
the Township if the treatment tank is undersized; if solids' buildup is
above average; if the hydraulic load on the system increases
significantly; if a garbage grinder is used; if the system malfunctions; or
if the treatment tank is filled with solids in excess of 1/3 of the liquid
depth of the tank or with scum in excess of 1/3 of the liquid depth of the
tank. If an owner can submit written proof that their treatment tank had
been pumped within one year of the date set forth in § 199-15C
hereinabove, then the Township may delay, change or alter that owner's
initial required pumping schedule to conform to the general three-year
frequency requirements. [Amended 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 646]
A. Each pumper/hauler shall have a person, certified by the Pennsylvania
Septic Management Association, present during the initial and
subsequent pumping to inspect, observe, confirm and report on the
condition of the OLSDS.
B. Upon completion of each required pumping, the pumper/hauler
business shall:
(1) Complete a pumper's report;
(2) Deliver a copy of the pumper's report to the Township within 14
days of pumping;
(3) Deliver a copy of the pumper's report to the owner upon completion
of pumping.
C. The pumper's report shall be on a Township-provided form, which is
incorporated by reference into this chapter as Appendix 2,59 and as may
be amended from time to time without the requirement to amend this
chapter. The pumper's report shall include the required information as
outlined on Appendix 2.
D. Should the pumping/inspection reveal that the OLSDS is polluting the
groundwaters, surface waters or discharging to the surface of the
ground, the pumper/hauler shall notify the Township who shall notify
the owner to take corrective action of the pollution.
E. In the event that an owner fails to carry out the requirements for the
initial or subsequent pumping/inspection, the SEO shall have the right
to enter upon land for the purpose of conducting inspections required
by this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: Said Report form is on file and available in the Township offices.
§ 199-15 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF § 199-16
195:137
§ 199-17. System rehabilitation.
F. The SEO shall make an effort to contact the owner, current tenant, or
both, in writing, prior to conducting the inspection. The notice shall
include the date and time of the inspection and the reason for the
inspection. If the owner or tenant cannot be reached and, in the
judgment of the SEO, there is an immediate and substantial safety,
water pollution or health hazard, the SEO may enter upon the property
and proceed with the inspection of the OLSDS.
G. No provision of this chapter shall require notice to be given before
entry, where it can be observed from a public street or abutting
property with the consent of abutting property owner that an OLSDS is
polluting.
H. Any OLSDS or an alternative system which contains an aerobic sewage
treatment tank shall follow the operating and maintenance
recommendations of the equipment manufacturer. A copy of the
manufacturer's recommendations and a copy of the service agreement
shall be submitted to the Township within six months of the effective
date of this chapter. Thereafter, service receipts shall be submitted to
the Township at the intervals specified by the manufacturer's
recommendations.
I. The Township may require additional maintenance activity as needed,
including but not necessarily limited to cleaning and unclogging of
piping, servicing and repair of mechanical equipment; leveling of
distribution boxes, tanks and lines; removal of obstructing roots or
trees; and diversion of surface water away from the disposal area.
Repair or rehabilitation permits issued by the SEO must be secured
before these activities are commenced.
A. No person shall operate or maintain an OLSDS in such a manner that it
causes pollution. All liquid wastes, including bathroom, kitchen and
laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be discharged to a
treatment tank. No sewage facility shall discharge untreated or
partially treated sewage to the surface of the ground or into the waters
of the commonwealth unless a permit to discharge has been obtained
from the DEP.
B. The Township shall issue a written notice of violation to any person who
is the owner of a property in the Township which is found to be served
by an OLSDS which is discharging raw or partially treated sewage to
the surface water, groundwater or surface of the ground.
C. Within seven days of notice of violation by the Township that a pollution
has been identified, the owner shall make application to the Township's
SEO for a repair or rehabilitation permit to abate the pollution. Within
90 days of the original notification by the Township, construction of the
permitted repair or rehabilitation shall commence. Within 120 days of
the original notification by the Township, the repair or rehabilitation
§ 199-16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 199-17
195:138
§ 199-18. Liens.
The Township, upon written notice from the SEO that an imminent health
hazard exists due to failure of an owner to maintain, repair or rehabilitate
an OLSDS as provided under the terms of this chapter, shall have the
authority to perform or contract to have performed the work required by the
SEO. The owner shall be charged for the work performed and, if necessary,
a lien shall be entered therefor in accordance with law.
§ 199-19. Pumper/hauler business registration.
shall be completed, unless seasonal or unique conditions mandate a
longer period, in which case the Township may set an extended
completion date.
D. The Township shall compel or may take immediate corrective action
whenever the pollution represents a public health hazard or
environmental threat.
E. The Township's SEO shall have the authority to require the repair or
rehabilitation of any pollution by the following methods: cleaning,
repair or replacement of components of the existing system; adding
capacity or otherwise altering or replacing the system's treatment tank;
expanding the existing disposal area; replacing the existing disposal
area; replacing a gravity distribution system with a pressurized system;
or other alternatives as appropriate for the specific site, in accordance
with the Act.
F. In lieu of or in combination with the remedies described in § 199-17E,
the SEO may require the installation of water conservation equipment
and the institution of water conservation practices in structures having
an OLSDS. Water-using devices and appliances in the structure may be
retrofit with water-saving appurtenances or they may be replaced by
water-conserving devices and appliances. Wastewater generated in the
structure may also be reduced by water-usage patterns in the structure
served.
G. In the event that the repair or rehabilitation measures in § 199-17A
through F are not feasible or do not prove effective, the Township may
require the owner to apply for a permit to install a holding tank in
accordance with Township ordinance. Upon receipt of said permit, the
owner shall complete the installation of the holding tank within 90 days,
unless seasonal or unique conditions mandate a longer period, in which
case the Township may set an extended completion date.
A. Each pumper/hauler business providing pumping services to owners of
an OLSDS within the Township, including but not limited to pumping
out the OLSDS, shall register with the Township. Such registration shall
include, but is not limited to, the following:
§ 199-17 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF § 199-19
195:139
§ 199-20. Disposal of septage.
§ 199-21. Administration.
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the pumper/hauler
business.
(2) Identification of all persons that will perform these services in the
Township.
(3) List of all vehicles, including make, year, model and motor vehicle
registration number.
(4) Copy of general liability and motor vehicle insurance coverage.
(5) Copy of membership in the Pennsylvania Septic Management
Association.
(6) Documentation that there is at least one person employed by the
pumper/hauler business who is certified by the Pennsylvania Septic
Management Association to perform on-lot management treatment
inspections.
(7) Identify the location(s) at which the pumper/hauler business
proposes to dispose of septage collected in the Township that shall
be valid for the calendar year.
B. The pumper/hauler business shall pay an annual registration fee, which
is established hereby with the amount thereof set by resolution by the
Board.
C. No person other than a registered pumper/hauler business shall be
permitted to remove septage from any OLSDS in the Township.
D. The Township shall maintain a list of registered pumper/hauler
businesses.
A. All septage originating within the Township shall be disposed of at sites
or facilities approved by the DEP. Approved sites or facilities shall
include the following: Septage treatment facilities, wastewater
treatment plants, composting sites, and DEP-approved farmlands.
B. All pumpers/haulers operating within the Township shall operate in a
manner consistent with the provisions of Pa. Code, Title 25,
Environmental Protection, Chapter 285 and the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S.
§§ 6018.101-6018.1003).
A. The Township shall establish all administrative procedures necessary to
carry out the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Township may employ a secretary, administrator or other persons
as needed to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The Township may
§ 199-19 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 199-21
195:140
§ 199-22. Fees.
The Board may, by resolution, establish a fee schedule and collect fees to
cover the Township's costs of administering this chapter.
§ 199-23. Violations; penalties; suspensions.
also appoint an authorized agent or may contract with private
individuals or firms as necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter.
C. All permits, records, reports, files and other written material related to
the installation, operation and maintenance of Township OLSDSs shall
become the property of the Township. Existing and future records shall
be available for public inspection during regular business hours at the
Township office. All records pertaining to sewage permits, building
permits, occupancy permits, and all other aspects of the Township's
management program shall be made available, upon request, for
inspection, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Open Records Law.
A. It shall be illegal to construct, alter, repair or rehabilitate an OLSDS
without first obtaining a permit for the installation or repair from the
SEO.
B. It shall be illegal to fail to maintain the components of an OLSDS at the
intervals specified in this chapter, or those specified by the equipment
manufacturer.
C. It shall be illegal for a pumper/hauler business to fail to register and/or
file all required reports in a timely manner as required by this chapter.
D. Any person who commits a summary offense and violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution by the
Township and, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution and Township's attorney fees.
E. Each day of a continuing violation shall be considered a new and
separate violation of this chapter and shall be subject to separate fine.
F. Upon discovery of any violation of this chapter, the Township may, at its
option, forgo any prosecution hereunder, and may grant to the owner a
period of up to 30 days to initiate corrective action with the provisions
of this chapter. Upon failure of the owner to effect such compliance, the
Township may initiate prosecution as hereinabove set forth.
G. Any pumper/hauler business which has been found guilty by a
Magisterial District Judge for violations of this chapter, or which fails to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or which violates the
conditions of its DEP permit relating to the handling, treatment or
disposition of septage, or of any state law or Township ordinance
§ 199-21 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF § 199-23
195:141
§ 199-24. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective January 1, 2006, and may be amended
from time to time in accordance with procedures established by law.
Chapter 200
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Advisory Board — See Ch. 71.
On-lot sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
199.
Fees — See Ch. A250.
governing its operation, shall be barred from operating within the
Township for a period of one year.
H. In addition to any other actions to obtain compliance, the Township may
assess civil penalties as described in the Act.
§ 199-23 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 199-24
195:142
ARTICLE I
Definitions and Word Usage
200-1.1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of Region III of the
EPA.
APPROVED TRANSPORTING ENTITY — A person who obtains sewage from
a holding tank and transports such matter to a disposal site approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and who is at that
time covered by a valid and binding agreement with the Township governing
such transportation and disposal.
AUTHORITY — Upper Allen Township Authority, a Pennsylvania municipal
authority, acting by and through its Board or, in appropriate cases, acting
by and through its authorized representatives.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE (OF THE USER) —
If the user is a corporation, the authorized representative shall be:
The president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make
management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated
facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making
major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct
other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions take to
gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism
requirements; and where authorized to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(2)
A.
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, an authorized
representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
B.
If the user is a federal, state or local government facility, the authorized
representative shall mean a ranking elected official or principal
executive official having responsibility for the overall operation and
performance of the activities of the principal geographic unit of the
government facility.
C.
200-1.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-1.1
195:143
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in §§ 200-5.1 and 200-5.2
of Article V of these regulations and 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs
also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices
to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage.
BILLING UNIT — Includes, as applicable, each of the following: an
equivalent dwelling unit, a residential unit, or any nonresidential use,
including a commercial establishment, industrial establishment and an
institutional establishment.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure for five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight and
concentration (mg/L). The standard laboratory procedure shall be that
found in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS or BOARD — The governing body of the
Township.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sanitary sewer. The building sewer shall be
maintained by the owner.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — A location where business is conducted,
goods are made or stored or processed, or where services are rendered, and
may include commercial and/or institutional land use for facilities such as a
retail store, office, warehouse, factory, assembly plant, or similar use, and
where generally the main objective is the receipt or generation of a financial
return in exchange for goods or services provided.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of wastewater from any portion of
an industrial user's pretreatment facility through which the wastewater
normally passes.
CALENDAR DAY — Unless otherwise specified, the term "calendar day"
when referred to in these rates, rules, and regulations consists of the period
The individuals described in Subsections A through C, above, may
designate another authorized representative if:
The authorization is made in writing by the individual described
above;
(1)
The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
indirect discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and
(2)
The written authorization is submitted to the Township and
Authority.
(3)
D.
200-1.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-1.1
195:144
from midnight to midnight, or any equivalent twenty-four-consecutive-hour
period, as determined to be appropriate by the Township.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to
categorical standards.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — The national categorical pretreatment
standards (40 CFR 403-471).
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A registered professional engineer under
the laws of the state.
CHAIN OF CUSTODY — A record of sample collection indicating the place,
date and time of collection and the person collecting the sample. It shall
also include a record of each person involved in possession of the sample,
including the laboratory person who takes final possession of the sample for
the purpose of analysis.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — A measure of the oxygen required
to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
CLEAN STREAMS LAW — The Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1937, as amended
and reenacted by the Act of October 10, 1980, P.L. 894, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to
691.702.
COLOR — Color of light transmitted through a waste after removal of all
suspended matter, including pseudo-colloidal particles, and measured in
platinum-cobalt units.
COMBINED WASTE FORMULA — A procedure for calculating discharge
concentrations of constituents of industrial waste, as defined in 40 CFR
403.6(e).
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building or
enclosure used or intended for use in the operation of one or more business
enterprise for the sale and distribution of any product, commodity, article
or service used or intended for use for any social, amusement, religious,
educational, charitable or public purpose and containing plumbing facilities
for kitchens, toilets or washing facilities, and shall include institutional
dormitories, individual condominium units and integral units within a single
structure (such as "flex-space offices"), but does not include personal-care
boarding homes as licensed by the state. A commercial establishment
represents a nonresidential use. Each business enterprise shall represent a
minimum of one EDU subject to applicable tapping fees.
COMPLIANCE — Adherence to conditions and requirements of these Rates,
Rules, and Regulations, any order issued by the Township and any
wastewater discharge permit and other permit issued under the provisions
of these Rates, Rules, and Regulations.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample composed of individual subsamples
taken at regular intervals over a specified period of time. Subsamples
may be proportioned by time interval or size according to flow (flowproportioned
composite sample) or be of equal size and taken at equal time
intervals (equal-time composite sample).
200-1.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-1.1
195:145
CONDENSATE — The liquid that condenses from chiller or cooling unit gas
caused by a reduction in temperature.
CONFESSED JUDGMENT PROMISSORY NOTE — A signed legal agreement
made by a party to a promissory note to a creditor, such as a municipality,
that, in the event that the party does not abide by the repayment terms
or otherwise defaults on the agreement, the creditor has the right to file
a complaint in confession of judgment against the party in the County
Courthouse, declare a default and enter judgment immediately in an agreed
amount. The defaulting party does not receive the benefit of a trial.
CONNECTION FEE — A fee, as established and defined by Act 203 of 1990
and amended by Act 57 of 2003, which is imposed to recover the Township's
cost for facilities installed between the sewer mains and the property line of
the property to be connected to the sewer system and which is payable to
the Township.
CONTRACT DRAWINGS — All drawings or plans pertaining to a
development project as prepared by a registered professional engineer and
as approved by the Township.
COOLING WATER — The water from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, not otherwise considered as process wastewater,
and to which the only pollutant added is heat.
CUSTOMER FACILITIES FEE — A fee, as established and defined by Act
203 of 1990 and amended by Act 57 of 2003, which is imposed to recover
the Township's cost for facilities installed between the property line and the
internal plumbing of the building being connected to the Township's sewer
and which is payable to the Township.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The highest value obtained for samples collected in
any calendar day. When used in a limit, the daily maximum is the highest
value allowed in any composite sample or the maximum value allowed as
an average of one or more grab samples taken during a calendar day. The
daily maximum may also be expressed as the maximum mass allowed to be
discharged during any one calendar day.
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or its successor in authority.
DESIGNATED PLUMBER — A master plumber or plumbers selected by
the Township to perform installation, repair and maintenance services for
grinder pump systems.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, or sometimes hereafter and otherwise
referred to as "owner," agent of such landowner, or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development, or other prospective users of
the Township's sanitary sewer system developing in that portion of the
Township served through the sewage treatment plants of the Lower Allen
Township Authority and the Township.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
200-1.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-1.1
195:146
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Human excrement and gray water (showers,
dishwashers, washing machines, etc.) generated from residential
households, institutions, commercial and industrial establishments, but
excluding industrial wastewater.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room, group of rooms, building, house trailer,
mobile or manufactured home or other enclosure occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters by a family or other group of persons
living together or by a person living alone.
EMERGENCY — A generally unexpected occurrence that demands
immediate action.
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN — A plan and guide developed pursuant
to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5) providing for the enforcement of the industrial
pretreatment program.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency, or, where
appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — With to regard residential owner:
any home, mobile home, house trailer, enclosure, room, group of rooms,
etc., occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for a
family or other group of persons living together or by persons living alone.
An EDU also represents a unit of measurement applied to a nonresidential
establishment or improvement and its use which produces a volume of
sanitary sewage equivalent to residential dwelling units. The unit rate of
flow of sanitary sewage generated by one EDU is stated to be an average
daily flow of 221 gallons per day, subject to adjustment from time to time in
conjunction with the Township tapping fee calculation in accordance with
the provisions of PA Act 57 of 2003. Measurement of average daily flow is to
be based upon water consumed at said use or structure or upon the actual
flow of sewage discharged into the said sewer system.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of
proposed categorical standards, which categorical standards will be
applicable to such source if the categorical standard is thereafter
promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG) — Organic polar compounds derived from
animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride
molecules, such as rendered animal fat, vegetable shortening and other
such oily material used for the purposes of and resulting from cooking and/
or preparing food, and is distinct from petroleum or mineral oils.
FLEX SPACE — Refers to a type of building designed to provide its
occupants or tenants with the ability to configure a flexible amount of space
for an office, warehouse, showroom, manufacturing facility or other use.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any food service facility that
prepares, packages or serves food or beverages for sale or consumption, on
site or off site, with the exception of private residences, and that uses one or
200-1.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-1.1
195:147
more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods),
baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all
methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting or poaching. Also included
are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing and other food preparation
activities that produce a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a
receptacle that requires washing. Food service establishments shall
include, but are not limited to, food courts, food manufacturers, food
packagers, meat distributors, restaurants, grocery stores, bakeries,
lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, churches and schools.
GARBAGE — Solid or semisolid wastes resulting from preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A device located underground and outside of
a food service establishment designed to collect, contain or remove food
wastes and grease from the waste stream while allowing the wastewater to
discharge to the sewer system by gravity.
GREASE TRAP — A device located inside a food service establishment or
under a sink and designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and
grease from the waste stream by hydromechanical means while allowing
the wastewater to discharge to the sewer system.
GRINDER PUMP — A manufactured device enclosed in an impervious
container containing an electrically powered pumping device for the
movement of wastewater or sewage with various operating and safety
controls as specified from time to time by the Township and owned by the
owner.
GRINDER PUMP SYSTEM — The sewage movement system as contained
within an owner's property, including the inflow sewage pipe from the
house, building or other structure to the grinder pump, the outflow sewage
pipe from the grinder pump to the point of connection to the Township's
sewer system (whether beyond the owner's property), and the necessary
exterior controls and the electrical wiring to energize the grinder pump and
any exterior controls.
GROUNDWATER — Water which is contained in or passing through the
ground.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water-carrying
system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within this Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
200-1.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-1.1
195:148
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants into the POTW
from any nonresidential source regulated under Section 307 (b), (c) or (d)
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, including holding tank waste
discharged into the sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building
or other enclosure used or intended for use, in whole or in part, in the
operation of one business enterprise for manufacturing, processing,
cleaning, laundering or assembling any product, commodity or article or
from which process waste, as distinct from sanitary sewage, shall be
discharged. An industrial establishment represents a nonresidential use.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — The sum of the provisions
of these Rates, Rules, and Regulations, amendments thereto, and any
activities authorized by this chapter as regards the regulation and control
of industrial users to the extent required by the federal pretreatment
regulations set forth in 40 CFR 403, and including similar provisions in
ordinances administered and enforced by the Lower Allen Township
Authority.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, waterborne
waste or form of energy which is produced as a result, whether directly or
indirectly, of any industrial, manufacturing, commercial, trade or business
or research process or activity or in the course of developing, recovering
or processing of natural resources and which is discharged into the sewer
system; but not noncontact cooling water or sanitary sewage. Any
wastewater which contains industrial waste and which is discharged from
an industrial, manufacturing, trade or business premises is considered
industrial waste for the purposes of these Rates, Rules, and Regulations.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — Any substance which is discharged and which
consists of or is contaminated by pathogens or other etiologic agents and
which has not been sterilized, neutralized or otherwise rendered harmless.
Infectious waste includes but is not limited to contaminated blood, blood
products or other bodily fluids (excepting excreta discharged by normal
bodily functions); wastes, including excreta, from patient isolation areas;
laboratory samples or test materials; animal wastes and bedding; body
parts; pathology and autopsy wastes; and glassware, hypodermic needles,
surgical instruments and other sharps.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any
discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building
or other enclosure which does not constitute a commercial establishment, a
200-1.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-1.1
195:149
dwelling unit or an industrial establishment. An institutional establishment
represents a nonresidential use.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge, which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources:
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement, conversion of use or expansion
of existing use of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of
land for any purpose involving:
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer main
to the limits of the sewer easement or street rights-of-way for the purpose
of providing for connection of any building sewer; this term may also be
referred to as "service lateral."
LOCAL LIMITS — Numerical limitations on the concentration, mass or
other characteristics of wastes or pollutants discharged, or likely to be
discharged, by industrial users, and which are developed by the Township to
implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and (b).
LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP FACILITIES — The sewage treatment plant,
interceptor and related facilities owned and operated by the Lower Allen
Inhibits or disrupts the processes or operations of the sewage
treatment plant or the sewage collection system, or sludge processes,
use or disposal; and therefor
A.
Is a cause of or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the
Township's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or
local regulations): Article 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more commonly referred to as
the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" (RCRA) and including
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research
and Sanctuaries Act; or which results in or increases the severity of
a violation of other state or national environmental statutes, rules or
regulations.
B.
A group of two or more residential buildings or one or more
nonresidential buildings on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure.
A.
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two or
more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups
or other features.
B.
Any other project requiring the approval of the Board of the Township
pursuant to any act or ordinance.
C.
200-1.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-1.1
195:150
Township Authority and used for the purpose of transportation, treatment
and disposal of sewage collected in the sewer system.
MANHOLE — A structure allowing access from the surface of the ground to
a sewer.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, etiologic agents,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
METERING FACILITIES — A flow measuring system designed and installed
in accordance with accepted engineering practices and approved by the
Township for the measurement of wastewater flows. For industrial and
nonresidential establishments, publicly metered water use records may be
considered "metering facilities" if approved by the Township.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter, a measure of concentration of waterborne
substances.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The arithmetic mean of all daily determinations of
concentration and/or mass measurements made during a calendar month.
MULTIPLE UNIT — Any improved property in which shall be located more
than one billing unit.
MUNICIPALITY — Upper Allen Township, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to
a specific category of industrial users. National categorical pretreatment
standards are enumerated in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405
through 471.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued to control the discharge of pollutants from
point sources into the navigable waters, the contiguous zone and the oceans
pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or
may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed federal categorical pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which
apply to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
A.
200-1.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-1.1
195:151
NONCOMPLIANCE — Not in compliance.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — The water used for cooling that does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product,
waste product or finished product.
NONRESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms,
building or other enclosure, including commercial establishments,
industrial establishments, and institutional establishments, which do not or
does not constitute a residential dwelling unit.
NONSIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (NSCIU) — An
industrial user subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards that
is deemed not a significant industrial user (SIU), as defined in this section,
based on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100
gallons per day (GPD) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary,
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
(3)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection A(2) or (3) of this definition but otherwise alters,
replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.
B.
Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b)
(1)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time from the date on which the
contract was entered. Options to purchase or contracts which can
be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering and design studies, do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this subsection.
(2)
C.
200-1.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-1.1
195:152
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically
included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are
met:
NORMAL PRODUCTION DAY — For the purposes of sampling wastewater,
a normal production day is that portion of a calendar day during which
wastewater is discharged and production, cleanup and other activities that
normally produce wastewater or industrial waste are occurring. If a sample
is specified to be collected during a normal production day, it should not
include aliquots taken during low waste stream flow periods that are not
representative of such normal activities or during times when wastewater
is not being discharged.
NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS) —
Provides common industry definitions for Canada, Mexico, and the United
States to facilitate economic analyses that cover the economies of the three
North American countries and includes groupings of industries as defined
by the Office of Management and Budget.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township stating that all
work indicated on a building permit has been satisfactorily completed, or, in
cases not involving construction, a proposed new use is in conformity with
applicable ordinances, and the building or lot may be occupied.
OPERATOR (INDUSTRIAL) — Any person having charge, care, control or
management of a pretreatment facility for industrial wastes or of a truck
or trucks used in the removal, transport or disposal of sewage or industrial
wastes.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the sewage treatment plant
into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the Township's or the Lower
Allen Township Authority's NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
association, joint-stock company, society, trust, corporation, estate,
governmental entity, limited-liability company or other group or legal entity,
The industrial user, prior to the Township's finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements;
A.
The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in § 200-6.4 of Article VI of these regulations and under 40
CFR 403.12(q), together with any additional information necessary to
support the certification statement; and
B.
The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
C.
200-1.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-1.1
195:153
or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender
shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where
indicated by context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight
(concentration) of hydrogen ions, expressed in grams per liter of solution,
and indicates the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a substance.
PLANNING MODULE — The DEP sewage facilities planning module for new
land development required for submission by the Township on behalf of the
owner or developer to DEP for approval as a revision to the Official Sewage
Facility Plan of the Township.
POLLUTANT — Any substance, including but not limited to dredged spoil,
solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, medical
wastes, backwash from water filtration and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste and certain characteristics of wastewater (BOD, COD,
color, odor, pH, temperature, TSS, toxicity, turbidity).
POLLUTION — The contamination of any waters of the state such as will
create or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters harmful,
detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic,
municipal, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other
legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other
aquatic life; or contamination of the air, soil or the environment so as to
produce or is likely to produce similar deleterious effects.
POTW — A publicly owned treatment works as defined by Section 212 of
the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292). The term includes any devices or systems used
in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of domestic
or industrial wastewater and any conveyances which convey wastewater
to a POTW. The term also means the municipality as defined in Section
502(4) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1362(4)) which has jurisdiction over the indirect
discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works.
PPC PLAN — A preparedness, prevention, and contingency plan prepared
by an industrial user to prevent and control hazards to human health and
the environment from fires, explosions or accidental discharge of polluting
materials to surface water or groundwater, to minimize the likelihood,
duration and intensity of a slug load or spill, and to expedite control and
cleanup activities should a slug load or spill occur.
ppm — Parts per million, by weight.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewer system.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, or by means of other process changes except as
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d), which prohibits dilution as a substitute for
treatment.
200-1.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-1.1
195:154
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR — An agent of the Township designated
to assist the Township Manager and Sewer Department Manager in the
administration of the provisions of the industrial pretreatment program, and
so designated by that title.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement, other than a categorical standard or prohibitive discharge
standard, imposed on an industrial user by Section 303(b) and (c) of the Act
or associated regulations, the state or the industrial pretreatment program.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge standards, federal
categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any wastewater resulting from the direct
contact of water with any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product or waste during any manufacturing process, or water
other than noncontact cooling water which results from a manufacturing
process.
PROHIBITED OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation
developed under Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317),
including prohibitive discharge limits under 40 CFR 403.5. Prohibitive
discharge standards are included in the list of prohibited discharges in
§ 200-5.1 of Article V of these regulations.
PROPERLY CHOPPED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been chopped to such
a degree that all its particles will be carried freely under normal sewer flow
conditions, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUMPING STATION — A system designed to accumulate wastewater at a
low point in the collection system and pump it to a wastewater treatment
plant or to a continuation of the sewer system at a higher elevation, and
generally consisting of a wet well and a series of pumps housed in a
subsurface or aboveground structure.
QUALIFIED ANALYST — Any person who has demonstrated competency in
the analysis of wastewater by submission of his/her generally recognized
documentation of competency to the Township and Authority, or who has
received an academic degree or professional certification of competency in
the field of chemical and/or biological analysis of water and wastewater.
REFRIGERATION — Maintenance of temperature for storage, preservation
of food or as a process of manufacturing.
REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE — A sample taken so that it is representative
of the wastewater discharged during the sampling period. A representative
sample is normally a flow-proportioned composite sample taken during a
normal production day.
RESERVATION OF CAPACITY AGREEMENT or ROC AGREEMENT — The
agreement between the owner or developer and the Township setting forth
the terms and conditions for capacity reservation.
RESERVATION OF CAPACITY FEE or ROC FEE — The charge or fee
imposed by the Township pursuant to this chapter when an owner or
200-1.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-1.1
195:155
developer has requested the Township to reserve sanitary sewer capacity
for an EDU, or EDUs, in connection with an approved preliminary plan,
which said fee shall be based on debt and fixed operating expenses in
connection with the sewer system (hereinafter defined).
RESERVED CAPACITY — The sewage volume or capacity allocated to and
reserved by an owner or developer.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any private dwelling, any dwelling unit
in a double house or in a row of connecting houses, any apartment, room,
group of rooms, house, trailer, mobile home, building or other structure
occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by a family
or other group of persons living together or by persons living alone,
excluding institutional dormitories, but including personal-care boarding
homes licensed by the commonwealth.
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land into lots intended for
conveyance to persons for single-family or multifamily dwellings.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The limits of an area dedicated to the Township or the
state for use for streets, roads and other public access, granted by deed of
dedication and recorded at the County Office of the Recorder of Deeds.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer carrying only domestic or industrial wastes
and to which stormwater, surface water or groundwater are not
intentionally admitted.
SANITARY SEWER EASEMENT — A legal document or agreement
conveying limited property rights from the grantor (property owner) to
the grantee (Township or another property owner) and being recorded at
the County Office of the Recorder of Deeds, said document creating a
nonexclusive, perpetual right to use a portion of the grantor's property
to provide access rights to repair, replace, inspect, change, maintain, test
or remove the sanitary sewer facilities located within or accessed by the
easement.
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES — A schedule, adopted by resolution
of the Board of Commissioners, setting forth various fees and charges to be
levied by the Township for different purposes relative to the sewer system.
The Schedule of Fees and Charges shall be considered part of the official
rates, rules and regulations.
SERVICE LATERAL — A term that is synonymous with the term "lateral."
SEWAGE — This term, which is synonymous with "wastewater," represents
any waterborne wastes that contain the waste products or excrement or
other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals and noxious or
deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the public health, or to
animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water supply or
for recreation. These wastes may also include discharges from commercial
establishments, industrial wastes, and groundwater or stormwater
infiltration and inflow. This term includes any substance which constitutes
pollution under the Clean Streams Law.60
200-1.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-1.1
195:156
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — Any network of sewer pipes, mains or
conduits that are referred to as collection, trunk, or interceptor sewers,
force mains, or low-pressure sewers constituting a portion of the sewer
system that is used or usable for sewage collection and transport.
SEWAGE WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — The plant and facilities
owned by the Township, including all additions, extensions, alterations and
improvements, and used for the purpose of treatment and discharge of
treated sewage or wastewater to the environment.
SEWER — Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system
used or usable for sewage collection and conveyance purposes and to which
stormwater, surface water or groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER RENTS — All rates charged for sewer service imposed under the
Schedule of Fees and Charges, including volume charges, charges for
excess-strength wastewaters and penalties and interest charges imposed
under such schedule.
SEWER SERVICE LATERAL — That part of the sewer system that extends
from the sewer main to a point near the edge of the public right-of-way. The
service lateral shall be maintained by the owner.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for the collecting,
transporting, pumping, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage and
industrial waste, including all related and necessary facilities, and including
all additions, extensions, alterations and improvements owned or to be
owned by the Township or to which the Township has the right to utilize
such facilities for the purpose of providing public sanitary sewer service.
SHALL and MAY — When used in the chapter, "shall" is mandatory; "may"
is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) —
An industrial user who:
Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more of process
wastewater during a normal production day, excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater;
(1)
Discharges industrial waste which makes up 5% or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the sewage
treatment plant;
(2)
(3) Is regulated by categorical standards; or
Is determined by the Authority, Township, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or EPA to have the
potential of adversely affecting the operation of the POTW, causing
interference or pass-through, or of violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement.
(4)
A.
60.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
200-1.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-1.1
195:157
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — A noncompliance which meets or
exceeds standards of significant noncompliance determined by the
Township, Township Manager, Authority, or Authority Manager and
contained in these rules and regulations.
SIGNIFICANT VIOLATOR — Any industrial user in significant
noncompliance at any time during a calendar year.
SLUG or SLUG LOAD — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
or at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the
general or specific prohibited discharge standards in §§ 200-5.1 and 200-5.2
of Article V of these regulations, including but not limited to an accidental
spill or noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violates Township
regulations, local limits or wastewater discharge permit conditions.
SPILL — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not
limited to an accidental spill or a deliberate or accidental noncustomary
or unauthorized batch discharge, or the control or cleanup activities
associated with such an occurrence; an accidental spill may result from the
spilling, overflowing, rupture or leakage of any storage, process or transfer
container.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a single lot, tract or parcel of
land or part thereof by any means into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of
land, including changes in street lines or lot lines for the purposes, whether
immediate or future, of improvement and development.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the Township to supervise
the operation of the sewage treatment plant, or his duly authorized
representative.
TAPPING FEE — A term that is synonymous with the term "connection fee."
TOTAL SOLIDS — The sum of the dissolved and undissolved solid
constituents of water or wastewater.
Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in Subsection
A(1), (2) and (4) of this definition has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Authority and Township
may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures
established in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user
should not be considered a significant industrial user and may, in
accordance with regulations at 40 CFR 403.3(v) instead be considered
a nonsignificant industrial user.
B.
200-1.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-1.1
195:158
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on
the surface or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS — The sum of all quantifiable values of various
organic pollutants as determined by the Township or, for certain categorical
industrial users, as defined in the applicable categorical standard.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen, a First-Class Township,
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, a Pennsylvania municipality, acting by
and through its Board of Commissioners or, in appropriate cases, acting by
and through its authorized representatives.
TOXIC ORGANIC MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan submitted in lieu of
testing for total toxic organics in which an industrial user specifies methods
of control to assure that total toxic organics do not routinely enter the sewer
system.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provision of Section 307(a) of the Act, or other
acts, or is present in sufficient quantity, either singly or in combination with
other wastewater, so as to present risk of causing interference or passthrough,
causing harm to humans, animals or plants, or creating a hazard
to persons or property, either in the sewage collection system, the sewage
treatment plant or the environment into which it is released.
UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE — Discharge of an unauthorized waste or
a discharge which otherwise is not in compliance with the requirements
of the industrial pretreatment program or other rules or regulations of the
Township or a contributing municipality.
UNAUTHORIZED WASTE — Any substance which is discharged into the
sewer system and which is not in compliance with the provisions of the
industrial pretreatment program, or which is discharged by a person in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, resolution or the provisions
of the ordinances of a contributing municipality.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes, or allows the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.
WASTEWATER — A term that is synonymous with the term "sewage."
WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM — A term that is synonymous with
the term "sewage collection system."
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in Article VI of these
regulations.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
200-1.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-1.1
195:159
WATER SYSTEM — The facilities owned by any person and used for the
supply of water to the public in the Township.
200-1.2. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BMR Baseline monitoring report
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
DEP Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
EDU Equivalent dwelling unit
GPD Gallons per day
L Liter
LEL Lower explosive limit
mg Milligrams
mg/L Milligrams per liter
MGD Million gallons per day
NH3-N Ammonia nitrogen
NOV Notice of violation
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NAICS North American Industry Classification System
O&M Operation and maintenance
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
PPC Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency Plan
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SNC Significant noncompliance
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act
TSS Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
200-1.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-1.2
195:160
ARTICLE II
Sewage Disposal System Permits
200-2.1. Permit required for connection.
A. Permit required.
(1) On-lot sewage disposal system. No person shall install, construct or
alter an individual on-lot sewage disposal system or community
sewage disposal system or install or occupy any building or
structure for which an individual sewage system or community
sewage system is to be installed without first obtaining an on-lot
sewage disposal system permit from the Sewage Enforcement
Officer of Upper Allen Township, indicating that the site, plans and
specifications of such system are in compliance with the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January 24, 1966,
P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.) and the rules and
regulations adopted by the DEP pursuant thereto. A permit shall be
required regardless of the size of the lot or tract of ground on
which the building or structure is to be constructed, altered or
occupied.
(2) Public sewer system. No connection shall be made to a public
sewer nor construction of the building sewer commenced unless
and until the owner of the improved property shall have made
application for a sewer connection permit as provided herein and
until a sewer connection permit is issued by the Township. A sewer
connection permit shall also be required when a new building or
facility with an estimated wastewater flow of at least one EDU is
connected to an existing building, or the internal drainage system
of an existing building, or an existing building or facility is
expanded in such a way that the increased potential for the
generation of wastewater equals or exceeds one EDU. No sewer
connection permit shall be issued unless there is sufficient capacity
in the sewer system to convey the wastewater to the wastewater
treatment plant and sufficient capacity in the wastewater
treatment plant exists to treat the wastewater.
B. Issuance of on-lot sewage disposal permit. No person, firm or
corporation shall construct, alter or extend any individual or community
sewage disposal system within the Township of Upper Allen,
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, unless he/she holds a valid permit
issued by the person or officer charged with the issuance thereof.
Permits shall be issued, if they comply with the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act and the rules and regulations issued in connection
therewith, upon the payment of a fee as designated by the
Commissioners of Upper Allen Township. The term "individual sewage
disposal system" shall mean one system per residential unit.
"Community sewage disposal systems" shall mean sewage disposal
units as described in the rules and regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection, and permits therefor shall be issued upon
200-2.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-2.1
195:161
200-2.2. Appeals; violations and penalties; conflicts.
the payment of a fee as designated by the Commissioners of Upper
Allen Township.
C. Application for sewer connection permit.
(1) Application for connection to the sewer system, as required under
§ 200-2.1 of this chapter, shall be made by the owner of the
improved property to be served, or by his duly authorized
representative, on a form provided by and available at the
Township Sewer Department office. Connection permit
applications shall be accompanied by plans and specifications as
required under the Township's Standard Construction and Material
Specifications for the Sanitary Sewer System.
(2) Upon receipt of a properly prepared application for connection to
the sewer system, together with the required connection or tapping
fees, the Township may issue a sewer connection permit to the
owner of the improved property. The sewer connection permit shall
describe the property for which the permit is issued, and neither
the owner nor any subsequent owner or tenant shall allow any
other property to be attached to or connected with the sewer lines
or transferred to another property as authorized under the permit.
A. Appeals from refusal to grant on-lot sewage disposal permits and
inspection of installations. Appeals from a refusal to grant permits and
inspection of installations of individual or community sewage disposal
systems shall be as provided by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act
and the rules and regulations as promulgated thereunder, a copy of
which shall always be kept at the offices of Upper Allen Township,
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, where the same may be inspected
during office hours.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who or which
violates any of the provisions of this chapter or of the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, or of the rules,
regulations or standards of the Department of Health promulgated
thereunder and referred to herein or any provisions of any regulation
adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Upper Allen Township,
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding before a District Justice in Upper Allen Township,
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than one $100 and not more than $300, and costs, or, in default thereof,
shall be confined in the Cumberland County Jail for a period of not more
than 30 days; and each day's failure to comply shall constitute a
separate violation.
C. Conflicts with other legislation. In any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning,
building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of this Township of
200-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-2.2
195:162
Upper Allen existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection
of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where
a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of
any other ordinance or code of the Township of Upper Allen existing on
the effective date of this chapter which establishes a lower standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other
ordinance or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent
that they may be found to be in conflict with this chapter.
200-2.2 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-2.2
195:163

ARTICLE III
Sewer Connection and Discharge Requirements
200-3.1. Notice by Township to make connection.
The notice by this Township to make a connection to a sewer shall consist
of a written or printed document requiring such connection in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and specifying that such connection shall
be made within 60 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may
be given at any time after a sewer is in place which can receive and convey
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal from the
particular improved property. Such notice shall be served upon the owner
either by personal service or by registered or certified mail or by such other
method as at the time may be provided by law.
200-3.2. Permit required.
No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use,
alter or disturb, in any manner, any sewer or the sewer system without
first making application for and securing a permit, in writing, from this
Township. Application for a permit required under Code § 200-3.2 shall be
made by the owner of the improved property to be served or his/her duly
authorized agent.
200-3.3. Township standards.
No connection shall be made to the sewer system unless the manner in
which the connection is made and the material and workmanship employed
in effecting such connection shall comply with the requirements of the
Township's Standard Construction and Material Specifications for the
Sanitary Sewer System.
200-3.4. Street opening permits.
Whenever the surface of any public street, sidewalk or cartway is disturbed
by construction of the building sewer, the surfacing material must be
restored in kind and maintained to the satisfaction of the Township. Any and
all construction in a public street of the Township shall be in compliance
with the ordinances of the Township, and any and all construction in a
state highway shall be in compliance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation requirements and specifications, and all necessary permits
shall be obtained from the Township before construction is commenced,
including the permit required for opening or disturbing the surface of a
street.
200-3.5. Connection to public sewer system.
A. Conditions required prior to connection. No person shall make or cause
to be made a connection of any improved property with a sewer until
such person shall have fulfilled each of the following conditions:
200-3.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-3.5
195:165
(1) Such person shall have notified the Township Sewer Department of
the desire and intention to connect such improved property to the
Township sewer.
(2) Such person shall have applied for and obtained a permit as
required by § 200-2.1 of these rules and regulations.
(3) The Township shall, at the expense of the property owner, construct
the sewer service lateral if the connection is to be made to an
existing public sewer main owned by the Township and no lateral
presently exists. At the Township's discretion, a property owner
may be permitted to install said service lateral, provided he enters
into a sewer extension agreement with the Township. The Township
shall prepare such sewer extension agreement for execution by the
property owner and the appropriate Township officials; blank
copies of the sewer extension agreement are available for public
inspection at the Township Sewer Department office.
(4) Such person shall construct, at his expense, a building sewer that
shall extend from the building to the Township sewer lateral
terminating at the Township street or sewer right-of-way line.
(5) Such person shall have given the Township Sewer Department
Secretary at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such
connection will be made so that this Township may supervise and
inspect the work of connection and necessary testing.
(6) Such person shall pay a tapping fee as required by § 200-8.2 of
these rules and regulations.
(7) Wastewater may only be discharged to the sewer system through
an approved connection. Any unlawful discharges may be subject
to enforcement action by the Township.
B. Connection to public sewer system required.
(1) The owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining any
street, road, lane, alley, court, public square, highway, or sewer
easement in which a public sewer main line constituting part of the
Township's sanitary sewer system is located shall connect to the
sanitary sewer system.
(2) Connection shall be made within 60 days of notice to such owner
from this Township to make such connection, for the purpose of
discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from such
improved property, subject to such limitations and restrictions as
shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established by this
Township from time to time.
(a) Owners required to connect may request, in writing, an
extension of the sixty-day time period for connection to the
sanitary sewer system.
200-3.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-3.5
195:166
(b) After review by the Board of Commissioners, or a delegate
thereof, the Township shall provide written notice to the
applicant property owner of the decision to grant or deny the
time extension request.
(c) Requests for extensions of time shall only be granted if the
applicant owner demonstrates extraordinary circumstances or
hardship.
(d) The filing of a request for a time extension shall not act to stay
the requirement to connect within 60 days.
(3) An owner of property may be considered for exemption from the
connection requirement if all of the following conditions are
fulfilled:
(a) The property owner shall make a written request for exemption
to the Board of Commissioners within 60 days of receiving
notice of the requirement to connect to the sewer system.
(b) The building for which connection is required is more than 350
feet from the sanitary sewer line as measured in a straight line
from the center line of the sewer to the outside face of the
building.
(c) The Township Sewer Enforcement Officer shall inspect the onlot
disposal system to determine that the system appears to be
functioning properly and that the property owner has and
continues to properly maintain the on-lot system.
(d) The property owner must provide written acknowledgment to
the Township that the property owner, and his or her heirs and
assigns, shall be responsible for an assessed cost for
installation of a sanitary sewer lateral within the Township
street right-of-way, in accordance with Township
specifications, if at some time after completion of the sanitary
main line sewer extension connection to the main line sewer is
required or requested. The costs may include, but are not
limited to, engineering design costs, permit fees, tapping fees,
and construction costs, including pavement restoration.
(e) A written agreement between the Township and the property
owner granting exemption from the connection requirement,
in accordance with the established requirements, shall be
properly attested and recorded referencing the property at the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County.
(f) No exemption will be considered for buildings within 350 feet
of the sanitary sewer line.
(4) Upon installation of a new public sanitary sewer main line, an
adjoining property owner, who has been granted an exemption to
200-3.5 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-3.5
195:167
the requirement to connect to the sanitary sewer system, shall
have the option to pay the current tapping fee for one EDU in
order for a sanitary sewer lateral to be installed to the property
line and capped for future use. The Township Engineer or Sewer
Department Manager, with input from the property owner, shall
determine the location for the installation of a sewer lateral to be
installed for future use. If at the time of development more than
one EDU is applicable, the owner would then pay for the additional
EDUs at the then-current tapping fee.
(5) The Township shall, at Township expense, install a wye in all new
sanitary main line sewer extensions, at the lowest end of all parcels
of property adjoining a sanitary main line sewer extension under
construction to which a sanitary sewer lateral is not to be installed.
Property owners of property adjoining a sanitary main line sewer
extension shall not prohibit the construction of the wye in the
sanitary main line sewer extension.
(6) The notice by this Township to make a connection to a sewer,
referred to above, shall consist of a written or printed document
requiring such connection in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and specifying that such connection shall be made within
60 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may be
given at any time after a sewer is in place which can receive and
convey sanitary sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and
disposal from the particular improved property. Such notice shall
be served upon the owner either by personal service or by
registered or certified mail or by such other method as at the time
may be provided by law.
C. Failure to connect. If the owner of any improved property located in this
Township and abutting on or adjoining any street, road, lane, alley,
court, public square or highway in which a sewer constituting a part of
the sewer system is located, after 60 days' notice from this Township in
accordance with § 200-3.1, shall fail to connect such improved property
as required, this Township may make such connection (under
Pennsylvania Municipal Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 57401 et seq.)
and may collect from such owner the costs and expenses thereof. In
such case, this Township shall forthwith, upon completion of the work,
send an itemized bill of the cost of the construction of such connection
to the owner of the improved property to which connection has been so
made, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal
by the owner of such improved property to pay said bill, this Township
shall file a municipal lien for said construction within six months of the
date of the completion of the construction of said connection, the same
to be subject in all respects to the general law provided for the filing
and recovery of municipal liens.
D. Right of Township to disconnect. The Township shall have the right to
close up or disconnect from the sewer system any lateral or building
sewer used for carrying rain, basement drainage, surface water,
200-3.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-3.5
195:168
200-3.6. Separate connections.
groundwater or objectionable matter or whenever any violations of the
rules and regulations set forth herein are committed.
E. Right of Township to refuse connection or compel discontinuance of
use. This Township reserves the right to refuse to any person the
privilege of connection of any improved property to a sewer or to
compel discontinuance of use of a sewer by any person or to compel the
pretreatment of industrial wastes in order to prevent discharge into the
sewer system of wastes which may be deemed by this Township to be
harmful to the sewer system or to have a deleterious effect on sewage
treatment process.
F. Right of access by Township. This Township shall have the right of
access at reasonable times to any part of any improved property served
by the sewer system as shall be required for purposes of inspection,
measurement, sampling and testing and for performance of other
functions relating to service rendered by this Township through the
sewer system.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property,
including duplexes, townhouses and condominiums, shall be connected
to the public sanitary sewer main separately and independently with a
lateral connected to a building sewer. Grouping of more than one
improved property on one building sewer shall not be permitted except
under special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other
good cause shown, and then only after special permission of this
Township, in writing, shall have been secured, and subject to such
rules, regulations and conditions as may be prescribed by this
Township. However, a single sewer connection may be permitted to
serve a school, factory or apartment house or other permanent multiple
structure whose individual apartments or units may not be subject to
separate ownership. A single sewer connection may also be permitted
to serve a multiple-story (multiple-unit) condominium structure, or
multiple commercial establishments within a permanent single
structure, where each individual condominium unit or individual
business establishment or enterprise is subject to single or separate
ownership.
B. Installation of sanitary sewer lateral to vacant land.
(1) An owner of vacant land bordering or adjacent to any land on which
a sanitary main line sewer extension shall be constructed may
apply for a permit to have a sanitary sewer lateral installed to the
vacant land at the time of construction of the sanitary main line
sewer extension.
(2) The permit for installation of a sanitary sewer lateral to vacant land
shall be granted if all of the following conditions are met:
200-3.5 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-3.6
195:169
200-3.7. Building sewer and sewer lateral requirements.
(a) Owners must pay the current tapping fee for one EDU to cover
the cost of installation. If at the time of development more than
one EDU is applicable, the owner would then pay for the
additional EDUs at the then-current tapping fee.
(b) The Township Engineer or Sewer Department Manager, with
input from the owner of vacant land, shall determine the
location for the installation of a sanitary sewer lateral to be
installed for future use.
(3) Owners of vacant land to which a sanitary sewer lateral has been
installed, and for which a tapping fee has already been paid, shall
not pay a tapping fee at the time the land is improved and
connected to the public sanitary sewer system, except if payment is
applicable for more than one EDU at the time of actual connection.
(4) Owners of land that was vacant at the time of installation of a new
sanitary main line sewer extension shall be responsible for any
assessed costs for installation of a sanitary sewer lateral within the
Township street right-of-way, if at some time after completion of the
sanitary main line sewer extension, connection to the main line
sewer is required or requested. The costs may include, but are not
limited to, engineering design costs, permit fees, tapping fees, and
construction costs, including pavement restoration.
(5) The Township, at its expense, shall install a wye in the sanitary
main line sewer extension at the lower end of a vacant lot to which
a sanitary sewer lateral is not to be installed.
A. Newly installed, replacement or repaired building sewers and service
laterals shall be constructed, installed, tested, inspected and connected
in accordance with the Township's Standard Construction and Material
Specifications for the Sanitary Sewer System. Building sewers shall
also meet the requirements of the International Plumbing Code;
however, the Township's requirements shall take precedence.
B. A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated
by this Township and where a lateral is provided.
C. The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection to the sewer
lateral shall be at the same or a higher elevation than the invert of the
sewer lateral. A smooth transition shall be made using an eccentric
reducer where required, and the connection of a building sewer to the
lateral shall be made secure and watertight.
D. The construction of a building sewer or service lateral, at all times, shall
be subject to supervision and inspection by the Township or its
representative and shall conform to the Township specifications. The
building sewer or service lateral shall not be covered until directed by
the Township and after inspection and testing of the piping installation
200-3.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-3.7
195:170
200-3.8. Building sewer changes, repairs or disconnection.
No person shall make or cause to be made any change or repair to or
disconnection of the building sewer of any building until he has fulfilled all
of the following conditions:
have been completed. All backfilling of trenches shall be under its
supervision and shall be thoroughly compacted by tamping in six-inch
layers to a minimum height of 12 inches above the top of the pipe. If
any part of a building sewer is covered before so being inspected and
approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection at the cost and expense
of the owner of the improved property to be connected to a sewer.
E. All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a lateral shall be
borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such
owner shall indemnify and save harmless this Township from all loss or
damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of
construction of a building sewer or of connection of a building sewer to
a lateral.
F. Building sewers, including any connection fittings, shall remain the
property of the owner. As a condition of the grant of a connection
permit, such owner shall agree to indemnify and save harmless the
Township from all loss or damage resulting from directly or indirectly
from connecting to the sewer main, including any damages to persons
or property.
G. Every excavation for a building sewer or service lateral shall be
guarded adequately with barricades and lights to protect all persons
from damage and injury. Streets, sidewalks and other public property
disturbed in the course of installation of a building sewer or service
lateral shall be restored, at the cost and expense of the owner of the
improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to this
Township.
A. He shall notify the Sewer Department Secretary of his desire and
intention to make such building sewer change, repair or disconnection.
B. He shall apply for and obtain a permit to make such building sewer
change, repair or disconnection. Copies of the required application and
permit are available at the Township Sewer Department office.
C. He shall pay a building sewer inspection fee to cover the cost of
observation by an authorized representative of the Township to insure
that proper materials and installation procedures are utilized to prevent
infiltration or inflow from entering the sewer system. The inspection fee
shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
D. He shall give the Sewer Department Secretary at least 24 hours' notice
of the time at which such work shall be performed, in order that the
200-3.7 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-3.8
195:171
200-3.9. Correction of defects in building sewers.
Whenever this Township has reason to believe any building sewer has
become defective, such building sewer shall be subject to test and
inspection. Defects found upon such test and inspection shall be corrected,
as required by this Township, in writing, at the cost and expense of the
owner of the improved property served through such building sewer.
200-3.10. Maintenance of building sewers and service laterals.
Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in
a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property. Responsibility for the maintenance of building sewers and service
laterals shall be as provided herein.
Township's authorized representative may observe the work. Shorter
notice may be acceptable in the event of an emergency.
A. This Township shall observe the installation and testing of a building
sewer. All equipment and material required for testing shall be
furnished by the owner of the improved property to be connected to a
sewer. An initial inspection fee, as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners, will be charged to the
property owner having said building sewer installed, repaired or
replaced.
B. In the event that a building sewer is not approved by this Township,
further test or tests shall be made following completion of necessary
corrections. An additional fee as shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners will be charged by the
Township for observation of each test or inspection subsequent to the
initial test or inspection.
C. Building sewers shall be tested in a manner acceptable to the Township.
D. Upon approval of the test of a building sewer by this Township, a
certificate of approval will be issued to the owner of the improved
property to be connected to a sewer by way of a field observation
report, copies of which are available at the Township Sewer
Department office.
A. Where the owner's efforts to maintain or restore service establishes
that there is a blockage in or structural failure of the service lateral,
which requires excavation of the service lateral to effect repair and/or
restoration of service, the Township will bear the cost of such
excavation and subsequent repair of the service lateral.
B. When it is determined by the Township that a building sewer is in need
of repair and/or modification, either to remove a blockage, to repair a
structural failure, to eliminate the entry of groundwater, or to eliminate
an illegal discharge, the Township shall notify the owner and specify a
period of time within which the repair must be made. If the owner does
200-3.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-3.10
195:172
200-3.11. Prohibited drainage.
No roof drainage, cellar, surface water, waste from hydrants or groundwater
from underground drainage fields shall be permitted to drain into the sewer
system. The sewer system is intended to convey sanitary sewage and liquid
wastes only.
200-3.12. Grinder pumps.
not make the repair or modification within the specified period of time,
the Township may complete the work and assess the cost of the work,
plus 10% for administrative costs, to the owner.
C. Any building sewer repair or replacement initiated by the owner that
occurs at or within three feet of the point of connection with the
Township sewer lateral shall require the installation of a new six-inch
two-way cleanout at the owner's expense.
D. Replacement of building sewers and appurtenances shall be in
accordance with the Township's Standard Construction and Material
Specifications for the Sanitary Sewer System.
E. If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice of this
Township, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with
respect to a building sewer within 60 days of receipt of such notice, this
Township may refuse to permit such person to discharge sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes into the sewer system until such
unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of
this Township.
A. Authorization for use of grinder pumps. There may be instances in
which grinder pumps are necessary for connection to the Township's
sewer system. Property owners shall submit a completed application for
connection to the sanitary sewer, as provided by the Township, together
with the current tapping fee and inspection fee, as specified in the
Township's Schedule of Fees and Charges, to the Township before such
connections are approved. Installation of grinder pumps shall be in
accordance with provisions contained in the Township's Standard
Construction and Material Specifications for the Sanitary Sewer
System. Costs for installation of such approved grinder pumps shall be
borne by the property owner or builder. Every grinder pump unit
installation shall be properly inspected and approved prior to
connection to the service lateral. This includes inspection, startup and
written certification by a manufacturer's authorized representative.
The Township shall observe the initial proper operation of the grinder
pump and alarm system. Copies of the required grinder pump startup
sheet are available at the Township Sewer Department office. The
grinder pump unit and appurtenances shall remain the property of the
owner. The owner shall be wholly and solely responsible for the cost and
expense of proper operation, repair and maintenance of the grinder
pump system serving said owner's improved property. Maintenance of
200-3.10 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-3.12
195:173
the grinder pump pressure system to the point of connection with the
service lateral shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The
Township or its representatives may periodically inspect grinder pump
installations during reasonable hours to ensure the installations are
functioning properly.
B. Replacement grinder pumps.
(1) Each developer shall deliver to the Township without charge one
core grinder pump (and externally mounted level control switch
where applicable) for every 12 (or fraction thereof) grinder pump
systems to be installed in any residential development, said core
grinder pumps (spare grinder pumps) to be owned by the Township
and retained for emergency use or purchase when a property
owner's grinder pump fails or requires maintenance. If any such
development will require less than 12 grinder pumps, the Township
shall receive one grinder pump. It shall be the developer's
obligation to provide such spare grinder pump, including the
obligation to pay the monetary sum for the purchase price of the
spare grinder pump. Said spare grinder pump(s) shall be furnished
to the Township within 30 days of satisfactory completion of all line
acceptance testing and inspection in a residential development or
approved phase thereof.
(2) One such spare grinder pump shall be available for pickup by the
property owner or his plumber from the Township, for use in
temporarily replacing or purchasing as a replacement of an on-line
grinder pump, with the following conditions:
(a) The property owner or plumber must sign for the pump at the
time of pickup.
(b) Grinder pumps obtained from the Township must be installed
by a registered plumber, manufacturer's representative, or
supplier's representative.
(c) Loaner pumps must be returned thoroughly cleaned and in
good condition within 30 days.
(d) Property owners will assume ownership of the grinder pump
and will be billed for the cost of a similar grinder pump (and
externally mounted level control switch where applicable) if it
is not returned within 30 days.
(e) Grinder pumps purchased from the Township by the property
owner shall not carry any manufacturer's warranty beyond
what was provided upon initial acquisition by the Township.
(3) If desired, the property owner may request that the Township
deliver such spare grinder pump; the Township shall deliver said
pump providing personnel are available to do so and providing the
aforementioned conditions are met.
200-3.12 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-3.12
195:174
200-3.13. Grease traps, grease interceptors and oil/water
separators.
(4) The Township reserves the right to impose a penalty if a loaner
pump is not returned as specified, and to grant an extension for
unusual circumstances. The Township reserves the right to inspect
and charge for damaged pumps (and/or externally mounted level
control switches where applicable).
A. Grease trap and interceptor applicability. Wastewater that contains
fats, oils or grease shall be discharged into the sewer system only under
the conditions of these regulations. The following facilities shall
discharge all wastewater from sinks, dishwashers, drains and any other
fixtures through which grease may be discharged into an adequately
sized, properly maintained and functioning grease trap or interceptor
before the discharge enters the sewer system:
(1) Every food establishment.
(2) All other generators discharging grease in amounts that, in the
opinion of an authorized agent, will, alone or in conjunction with
other substances from the discharges of other facilities, have a
reasonable chance to stop or impede the flow in the sewer system.
(3) All areas of intensified dwelling, including but not limited to adult
day-care facilities, assisted-living facilities, convalescent homes,
day nursing and child-care facilities, in which food preparation
occurs, homes for the mentally challenged, hotels, maternity
homes, motels in which there is a commercial food preparation
service, nursing homes, retirement and life-care communities and
homes, and truck stops with commercial food service, shall be
required to have grease traps.
(4) Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for singlefamily
residences, single-family semidetached residences, or
apartment complexes, unless an authorized agent first determines
there are discharges from the property that may create problems in
the sewer system. The determination shall be made based upon an
investigation of the improved property and a comparison of the
content and amount of discharge from the improved property with
the discharges of other improved properties similar in size and use.
Upon a determination that the discharges will create problems in
the sewer system, the authorized agent may require the installation
of sufficiently sized grease trap or grease interceptor to treat the
discharges.
B. Grease trap and interceptor discharge criteria.
(1) Where fats, oil and grease are a by-product of food preparation
and/or cleanup, reasonable efforts shall be made to separate waste
oil and grease into a separate container for proper disposal. Except
200-3.12 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-3.13
195:175
as contained in by-products of food preparation and/or cleanup,
waste oil and grease shall not be discharged to any drains or
grease interceptors or grease traps. Such waste shall be placed
in a container designed to hold such waste and either utilized
by industry or disposed of at suitable disposal sites. None of the
following agents shall be placed directly into a grease interceptor
or grease trap or into any drain that leads to the grease interceptor
or grease trap:
(a) Emulsifiers, de-emulsifiers: surface active agents, enzymes,
degreasers or any type of product that will liquefy grease
interceptor or grease trap wastes.
(b) Any substance that may cause excessive foaming in the sewer
system.
(c) Any substance capable of passing the solid or semisolid
contents of the grease trap to the sewer system.
(d) Illegal discharge items, such as hazardous wastes, including
but not limited to acids, strong cleaners, pesticides, herbicides,
paint, solvents or gasoline.
(e) Use of grease interceptor or grease trap treatment products,
including bacteria, designed to digest grease, is specifically
prohibited without prior written consent of the Township.
Acceptance of such products for use may be considered only
where a valid screening test, showing the product's ability to
treat the wastewater and to produce an influent in compliance
with these regulations, has been performed in accordance with
methods outlined and approved by the Township and/or Lower
Allen Township Authority. If a product is approved, each
generator shall obtain written permission from the Township to
use the product.
(2) The influent to grease interceptors or grease traps shall not exceed
140° F. The temperature at the flow control device inspection port
shall be considered equivalent to the temperature of the influent.
(3) Toilets, urinals and other similar fixtures shall not discharge
through a grease interceptor or grease trap.
(4) All waste shall only enter the grease interceptor or grease trap
through the inlet flow control device, then the inlet pipe.
(5) Where food-waste grinders are installed in a nonresidential
establishment, the waste from those units shall discharge directly
into the building drainage system without passing through a grease
interceptor or grease trap.
C. Grease trap and interceptor permitting.
200-3.13 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-3.13
195:176
(1) From the effective date of this regulation, all dischargers of FOG
shall be required to complete and submit a fats, oils and grease
(FOG) discharger qualification form to the Township within 60 days
of notification by the Township. Said form is available at the
Township Sewer Department office. The FOG discharger
qualification form is also required to be submitted prior to
connecting to the sewer system or prior to installing a grease trap
or interceptor. A permit fee, as established in the Township's
current Schedule of Fees and Charges, shall be submitted with the
FOG discharger qualification form.
(2) The Township shall review FOG discharger qualification forms and
determine whether a facility requires a FOG discharge permit.
(3) When required by the Township, a sampling manhole or vault may
be required and included as a requirement in the FOG discharge
permit. The sampling manhole or vault shall be constructed so that
a free flow sample may be collected for analysis, since immersion of
a sample container beneath the surface of the wastewater is not an
acceptable technique for collection of a wastewater sample for
FOG analysis. Sample collection, preservation method, holding
time and test method for FOG analysis shall be in accordance with
40 CFR 136.
(4) FOG discharge permits will be issued for a period of one year, at
which time the Township shall conduct an inspection at the
permitted facility as detailed in § 200-3.13D of these regulations.
(5) Following receipt of the annual permit fee, inspected facilities will
be reissued a FOG discharge permit.
D. Grease trap and interceptor inspections.
(1) Township staff shall inspect each facility with a FOG discharge
permit on an annual basis and record inspection findings on a food
establishment survey form, which the Township maintains at its
office and updates from time to time.
(2) Township inspection of new facilities will be conducted prior to the
issuance of a FOG discharge permit.
(3) Inspections shall include a review of housekeeping practices at the
facility, an inventory of operating hours and kitchen appliances
generating FOG, a review of trap and interceptor contents and FOG
levels, and records required to be maintained onsite.
(4) Facilities will be provided with a copy of the inspection report if
requested.
(5) Township personnel shall have the right to make periodic
inspections of the installed facilities and associated records to
ensure that proper installation, maintenance and disposal
200-3.13 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-3.13
195:177
procedures are being practiced. During these inspections, the
Township may sample and test the wastewater discharge and
observe the performance of the grease trap or interceptor.
E. Grease trap and interceptor design and sizing.
(1) The design and sizing of grease traps, grease interceptors, oil/
water separators, and holding tanks shall be in accordance with the
standards listed below and shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer prior to plan approval or
installation; all such facilities shall be inspected by the Township
during installation.
(2) The Township may require any existing food service establishment
and shall require all new food service establishments or existing
establishments which will be expanded or renovated to install
grease traps or grease interceptors subject to such terms and
conditions as deemed necessary by the Township to protect the
sewer system and the wastewater treatment plant from excessive
amounts of fats, oils and grease (FOG), and as necessary to address
public health and safety and environmental concerns. Among the
factors to be considered by the Township is whether the user's
discharge has the potential to obstruct the flow in the sewer or to
interfere with the operation of the wastewater treatment plant.
(3) Sizing of grease traps and grease interceptors shall be based on
wastewater flow and grease retention capacity in accordance with
the International Plumbing Code, Section 1003. Indoor grease
traps shall be designed in accordance with the Plumbing and
Drainage Institute Standard PDI-G101. Indoor grease traps will not
be approved for food service establishments that are equipped with
dishwashers or garbage disposals.
(4) Generally, a grease interceptor shall be placed outside the building
instead of an inside grease trap. The minimum size grease
interceptor required is 1,000 gallons. Interceptors can be installed
in series if greater capacity is needed.
(5) Grease interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight
and equipped with easily removable self-sealing waterproof and
gastight covers. Other design considerations shall include but are
not limited to the following:
(a) Minimum of two compartments, each with its own manhole,
and a center baffle to allow floating of FOG and settling of
solids;
(b) Inlet and outlet on grease interceptor shall be properly baffled;
(c) Flow control devices;
200-3.13 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-3.13
195:178
(d) Manholes finished to grade to allow easy access for proper
maintenance;
(e) Cleanout on outlet side of interceptor;
(f) Inaccessibility to insects and vermin; and
(g) Installation of sample vault with hydraulic jump on discharge
side of interceptor.
(6) Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be located in the service
lateral line between all fixtures that may introduce FOG into the
sewer system and the service connection to the Township sewer
system. Such fixtures include, but are not limited to, sinks,
dishwashers, garbage disposals, automatic hood wash units, floor
drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixture
that is determined to be a potential source of FOG. Grease traps
and grease interceptors are to be installed at a minimum distance
of 10 feet from sinks and dishwashers to allow for adequate cooling
of wastewater. All traps and interceptors shall be so located as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The
trap/interceptor size, type of construction, and the location of the
installation shall be approved by the Township prior to installation.
Approval shall be evidenced by a letter signed by the Township
Sewer Department Manager or his authorized representative.
F. Grease trap and interceptor installation and maintenance.
(1) Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as
necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not
accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor;
to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits;
and to ensure no visible grease is observed in discharge. Grease
traps and grease interceptors subject to these standards shall be
completely evacuated a minimum of every 90 days, or more
frequently when:
(a) Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease
trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the
device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating
materials, sediment, oils or greases; or
(b) The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other
pollutant levels established by the POTW; or
(c) If there is a history of noncompliance.
(2) An owner may submit a request, in writing, for an exception to the
ninety-day pumping frequency of his/her grease trap/interceptor.
The Township may grant an extension for required cleaning
frequency on a case-by-case basis when:
200-3.13 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-3.13
195:179
(a) The grease trap/interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated
that the specific trap/interceptor will produce an effluent,
based on defensible analytical results, in consistent
compliance with established local discharge limits such as
BOD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined by the
Township; or
(b) Less than 25% of the wetted height of the grease trap or
grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device
to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials,
sediment, oils or greases.
(3) For all facilities, a grease trap and grease interceptor shall be fully
evacuated, cleaned, and inspected at least once every 180 days.
(4) Even if a grease trap or interceptor is installed and maintained
properly, there is still a possibility that FOG can pass into the sewer
collection system and cause blockages. Therefore, the Township
may also require that a facility have its private sewer lateral
cleaned at the owner's expense.
(5) The use of any biological or chemical additives as a substitute for
grease interceptors or the proper maintenance of grease
interceptors is prohibited. Chemical additives, such as solvents, are
strictly prohibited from use in all cases. However, the use of
biological additives as a supplement to maintenance may be
authorized. Proper documentation of approval shall be obtained by
the owner, in writing, from the Township Sewer Department
Manager or his authorized representative.
(6) Oil/water separators shall be installed at existing automotive repair
facilities and car washes if the potential exists for petroleum oils to
be discharged to the sewer system via floor drains. New facilities of
this type are prohibited from installing floor drains that are
connected to the sewer system. The type and size of oil/water
separator shall be determined by the owner and approved by the
Township prior to installation. Approval shall be evidenced by a
letter signed by the Township Sewer Department Manager or his
authorized representative.
(7) The frequency of cleaning of the oil/water separator shall be as
required by the Township and shall be based on the trap/
interceptor/separator manufacturer and the size and type of the
establishment/facility. The Township has available grease trap/
interceptor maintenance logs at the Township Sewer Department
for facilities to record their maintenance activities on.
(8) The owner shall at all times keep grease traps, grease interceptors
and oil/water separators in good working condition. Traps,
interceptors and separators shall be inspected, cleaned and
repaired regularly, as required by the Township or as needed, by
the owner at the owner's expense. The owner shall be responsible
200-3.13 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-3.13
195:180
200-3.14. Change in ownership tenancy.
for the proper removal and disposal of the captured material from
traps, interceptors and separators and shall maintain complete
and accurate records in accordance with § 200-3.13G(1) of these
regulations. Under no circumstances shall captured materials be
allowed to enter the sanitary sewer system.
(9) The Township shall review the FOG discharger qualification form
referenced in § 200-3.13C(1) to determine the minimum inspection
and cleaning frequency for the establishment.
(10) If a grease trap or interceptor becomes inoperable for any reason,
the facility permittee shall inform the Township within 48 hours of
the grease trap or interceptor first becoming inoperative, of the
corrective measures being taken by the permittee to restore
operation of the grease trap or interceptor, and when these
corrective measures will be accomplished, which shall not exceed
10 days. The grease trap or interceptor shall not be used until it is
fully functional.
G. Grease trap and interceptor reporting and recordkeeping
requirements.
(1) The owner shall maintain complete and accurate records of the
dates and means of disposal, person performing maintenance,
estimated volume of FOG removed, hauler receipts or manifests,
disposal locations and the name and the signature of the person(s)
responsible for supervising the cleaning/maintenance and the
proper disposal of the accumulated materials. Inspection, cleaning
and repair records shall be maintained by the owner for a minimum
of three years and are subject to review by the Township.
(2) The owner of grease traps/interceptors and oil/water separators
shall submit each year a fats, oils and grease (FOG) annual report
by January 31 for the previous calendar year, including copies of all
invoices/manifests related to oil and grease removal. Copies of the
FOG annual report are available at the Township Sewer
Department office. The report will include the name of the person
who performed the cleaning, the amount removed, and where the
grease trap, grease interceptor or oil/water separator contents
were disposed of. Records of the cleaning shall be maintained for at
least three years at the site of the grease trap, grease interceptor
or oil/water separator.
A. Each owner of an improved property must give the Township written
notice of any change of ownership/tenancy of the improved property at
least 30 days prior to said change.
200-3.13 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-3.14
195:181
B. When any premises is vacated or abandoned, the owner must give
notice at the Township office, and he/she will be responsible for the
sewage charges until such notice is given.
200-3.14 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-3.14
195:182
ARTICLE IV
Extensions and Additions to Sewer System
200-4.1. Extensions made by builder or developer.
In cases where a builder or developer or other person, hereinafter referred
to as "developer," desires or is required to install collection sewers, laterals
and building sewers to any housing unit within a housing development prior
to its individual sale, he/she may do so upon meeting all conditions as set
forth in this section and in other sections of this chapter.
A. The developer shall comply with the Upper Allen Township Standard
Construction and Material Specifications for the Sanitary Sewer
System, with the latest revisions.
B. All drawings or plans (the contract drawings) pertaining to the
development project or housing unit must be submitted by the
developer to the Township for review and approval prior to any
construction. Sanitary sewer plans conforming to all current
specifications established by the Township as to type of pipe, location of
mains, size of pipe, grades and all necessary appurtenances will be
prepared by a registered professional engineer and approval obtained
from the necessary state agencies. The engineering review fees,
charges for permits, reservation of capacity (ROC) fees, and tapping
fees shall be paid by the builder or developer. In no case will lesser
standards than exist in the sewer system and as outlined in this chapter
be permitted for any future extensions. Upon approval of such plans by
the Township, the extensions may be constructed by and at the expense
of the builder or developer, but only under the inspection of a
representative designated by the Township or its Engineer. The cost of
such inspection, including salaries and expenses, shall be borne by the
builder or developer making the extensions.
C. The applicant must furnish the Township with a copy of agreements
with other utilities, highways, or railways when crossing and occupying
their easements with new sanitary sewer facilities.
D. Before construction has commenced, the applicant shall enter into a
sewer extension agreement with the Township. Said sewer extension
agreement shall require the applicant to establish an escrow account
with the Township by providing a deposit of $1,000 (or such other
amount as required by the Township) to pay for engineering review and
legal fees, provide plats and legal descriptions for sanitary sewers to be
located outside of the public rights-of-way (including streets that have
not been dedicated to the Township), provide the estimated
construction costs for sanitary sewer improvements, furnish the
required supplemental escrow amount for inspection and related costs,
and post the appropriate installation financial security for the sanitary
sewers.
200-4.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-4.1
195:183
E. Installation financial security to be posted with the Township shall be in
an amount equal to 110% of the estimated construction costs, as
approved by the Township, to insure payment of all obligations relating
to the proposed installation, including the estimated construction costs
and the estimated amount to be paid to the Township for the cost of
replacing or repairing any part of the extension that has not been
constructed in a manner satisfactory to the Township. The applicant
may also, in lieu of a performance and payment bond, provide a letter of
credit to the Township in the amount as determined above, provided the
letter of credit is satisfactory to and in a form approved by the
Township. The property owner or developer shall assume all costs
associated with the posting and release of financial security.
F. As construction of a sewer extension progresses, the developer may
request, in writing, a reduction in the financial security. The developer
must furnish the value of the work completed and the estimated value
of work remaining and submit these costs to the Township for
consideration and approval. Upon approval by the Township, new
financial security shall be provided to the Township in the amount of
110% of remaining work plus 10% of completed work. The sanitary
sewer installation financial security shall not be released in its entirety
until the improvements are completed in accordance with the
Township's Standard Construction and Material Specifications for the
Sanitary Sewer System and to the satisfaction of the Township. Final
testing and inspection shall not commence until base course paving has
been completed or, as a minimum, base course material has been
properly installed around all manholes in paved areas.
G. Upon completion, inspection and testing of the sanitary sewer
extension to the satisfaction of the Township, the developer shall cause
to be prepared, and shall deliver for review and approval, record
drawings, final plats and legal descriptions, a deed of dedication
transferring ownership of the sanitary sewer extension to the Township
and a deed of easement conveying limited rights of access to sanitary
sewers located on non-Township-owned property or outside of
Township rights-of-way. Upon acceptance of said documents by the
Township, including receipt of an executed deed of dedication and deed
of easement from the developer, and recording of the deed of dedication
and the deed of easement by the developer at the Cumberland County
Office of the Recorder of Deeds, the Township will release the developer
from all obligations to the Township with respect to the extension,
except that the developer shall guarantee the extension installation,
including materials and workmanship, for a period of 18 months from
the date of recording of the executed deed of dedication and deed of
easement.
H. The Upper Allen Township Standard Construction and Material
Specifications for the Sanitary Sewer System requires the use of
aggregate backfill material for backfilling trenches in paved areas to be
dedicated to the Township. Additionally, provisions are included in the
200-4.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-4.1
195:184
specifications that allow the use of approved on-site native backfill
material in said areas, provided that it is understood and agreed upon
by the developer that the Township shall retain installation financial
security in the amount of 15% of the actual cost to install the
improvements for an additional period of 3 1/2 years from the date
of receipt of the above documents and shall not accept dedication of
the improvements until that time. After said period of 3 1/2 years,
the Township may accept dedication of the improvements and release
the installation financial security, provided the developer causes to be
recorded the executed deed of dedication and deed of easement and
delivers to the Township a maintenance guarantee in the amount of
15% of the actual cost to install the improvements for a period of
18 months following the additional three-and-one-half-year installation
maintenance security. The same requirements shall apply to work that
is completed within PennDOT rights-of-way.
I. The financial security shall assure completion of all improvements,
which are intended to be dedicated to the Township. The acceptance of
this financial security shall in no way bind the Township to complete
these improvements. Where improvements are not completed in
compliance with the Township's Standard Construction and Material
Specifications for the Sanitary Sewer System and/or the development
plan, the Township shall pursue completion of the improvements and
enforcement of the financial security.
J. Upon approval of the above and after satisfactory completion of
sanitary sewer and manhole inspection and acceptance tests, the
Township will issue permits allowing building sewer connections to be
made to the new sanitary sewer laterals and sewer system. Thereafter,
the Engineer will recommend closing out the developer's escrow
account and returning any balance remaining to the developer.
K. The letter of credit shall contain an "Evergreen" clause which shall
cause the installation financial security letter of credit to automatically
renew for an additional one-year period if the issuing financial
institution does not request its release in writing at least 60 days prior
to its expiration date. Provisions shall be included to continually renew
the letter of credit until the work is complete. It is the responsibility of
the developer to inform the issuing financial institution of this
requirement within the prescribed time frame.
200-4.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-4.1
195:185

ARTICLE V
Sewer Use
200-5.1. Prohibited discharge standards.
A. Discharge of stormwater. No person shall discharge or cause or permit
to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian
well water, roof water, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage,
condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, building
foundation drainage, and unpolluted wastewater into any sanitary
sewer, unless specifically authorized by the Township.
B. Prohibited discharges. No user shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater that
causes pass-through or contributes to interference with the operation
or performance of the sewer system. These general prohibitions apply
to all users, whether or not the users are subject to federal categorical
pretreatment standards or any other federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. No person shall discharge the
following substances to the sewer system:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction
with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the sewer system or to the operation of the sewer
system. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion
hazard meter at the point of discharge into the sewer system (or at
any point in the sewer system) be more than 5%, nor any single
reading be over 10%, of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the
meter. At no time shall the closed-cup flashpoint of the wastewater
be less than 140°F. (60°C.) using test methods specified in 40 CFR
261.21. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, the
following substances in concentrations which cause noncompliance
with the above standard: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
ethers, alcohols, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates and
carbides.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interferences with the operation of the
sewer system, such as but not limited to grease, garbage with
particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud, and glass grinding or polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
200-5.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-5.1
195:187
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
sewer system.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other constituents of the
wastewater, which injures or interferes with any wastewater
treatment process, constitutes a hazard to humans and animals,
creates a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant, or exceeds the limitations set forth in an
applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other substances present in the sewer
system, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life
or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewer system for
maintenance and repair.
(6) Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or passthrough.
(7) Fats, oils, greases or waxes of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than a daily maximum of 200 mg/l or a
monthly average of 100 mg/l.
(8) Any substance that may cause the sewage treatment plant's
effluent or any other product of the sewage treatment plant, such
as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation or
reuse, or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall
a substance discharged to the sewer system cause the sewage
treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or state criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used.
(9) Any substance that will pass-through and, as a result, cause the
sewage treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit and/or state
collection system permit or applicable receiving water quality
standards.
(10) Any wastewater with objectionable color which will pass-through
the sewage treatment plant, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
(11) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the sewage treatment plant, resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction
into the sewage treatment plant which exceeds 104° F. (40° C.).
200-5.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-5.1
195:188
200-5.2. Special agreements.
Special agreements and/or waiver of pretreatment requirements. Nothing
contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting special
agreements between the Township and a person discharging industrial
wastes or wastewaters to the sewer system, or for the Township to
otherwise waive requirements hereunder, when conditions and
circumstances making such special agreements or waiver advisable and/or
necessary, in the opinion of the Township, are present; provided, however,
that:
(12) Any substance which results in the formation or release of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(13) Any trucked or hauled wastewater or pollutants, except those
discharged at points designated by the Township.
(14) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that will
cause interference to the sewage treatment plant or interfere with
the operation of the sewer system.
(15) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the Township or applicable state or federal regulations, cause
interference or otherwise adversely impact the sewage treatment
plant or cause or contribute to pollution.
(16) Any wastewater, alone or in conjunction with other sources, which
is incompatible with treatment processes in use at the sewage
treatment plant so as to cause interference or pass-through or to
cause the treatment plant effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(17) Any wastewater containing any compounds or salts of aldrin,
dieldrin, endrin, lindane, methoxychlor, toxaphene,
dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, trichlorophenoxyproprionic acid or
other persistent herbicides, pesticides or rodenticides.
(18) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Township
in a wastewater discharge permit.
(19) Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances that may
cause excessive foaming in the sewage treatment plant.
(20) Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
C. Unauthorized discharges. Discharge of any prohibited substance listed
under §§ 200-5.1 and 200-5.2 of this chapter shall be considered an
unauthorized discharge, and the Township may take whatever steps are
necessary to halt such a discharge.
200-5.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-5.2
195:189
200-5.3. Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
A. National categorical pretreatment standards, prohibitive discharge
standards [including the general and specific prohibitions set forth at
40 CFR 403.5(a) and (b)] and other pretreatment requirements set
forth in 40 CFR 403 shall not be waived, unless such waiver is granted
by mechanisms established under the national pretreatment
regulations (40 CFR 403 et seq.).
B. In no case shall a special agreement or waiver of local limits allow for
an industrial user to discharge any pollutant which, alone or in
combination with other regulated industrial user discharges, would
reasonably be expected to exceed the mass loadings determined by the
Township as acceptable to the sewage treatment plant based upon
considerations of, among other things, interference, pass-through and
sludge contamination. The Township may consider other factors (e.g.,
effect of the discharge on the sewer system, future expansion, etc.), as
it deems appropriate. In no event shall special agreement or waiver
allow the sum of the loadings allocated to industrial users to exceed the
values set forth in any local limits analysis submitted by the Township to
the EPA and approved by the EPA as part of the industrial pretreatment
program.
C. The Township may require an industrial user requesting a special
agreement or waiver adjusting effluent limitations to submit supporting
documentation indicating why the industrial user cannot reasonably
expect to meet the effluent limitation contained in its wastewater
discharge permit, setting forth an expeditious schedule for achieving
compliance with such limitations and including such other information
as the Township may require. In granting any special agreement or
waiver, the Township may impose time limitations upon any reduced
requirements and provide a compliance schedule for achieving
compliance. In granting any special agreement or waiver, the Township
may impose any other conditions deemed necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter.
D. If granting a special agreement or waiver would result in increased
costs to the Township (e.g., treatment, monitoring, sludge disposal
costs), the Township may condition the special agreement or waiver
upon the agreement of the industrial user to pay those costs and to
provide security adequate in the judgment of the Township to assure
payment of said costs.
E. Any special agreement and/or waiver of pretreatment requirements
under this section shall be memorialized in writing. "In writing"
includes, among other things, a wastewater discharge permit
modification, a written agreement, a letter from the Township to the
industrial user, an inspection report or any other written record which
identifies that the Township waived or otherwise modified the
requirement.
200-5.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-5.3
195:190
A. Federal categorical pretreatment standards. The federal categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
§§ 405-471 are hereby incorporated by reference.
(1) When regulated waste streams subject to a federal categorical
pretreatment standard are mixed with unregulated waste streams,
the Township may impose alternate limits using the combined
waste stream formula found in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(2) Where a federal categorical pretreatment standard is expressed
only in terms of either mass or concentration for a pollutant, the
Township may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(3) When the limits in a federal categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial
user may request that the Township convert the limits to equivalent
mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to
mass limits is within the discretion of the Township. The Township
may establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user
meets all of the conditions outlined in 40 CFR 403.6(c)(5) as set
forth below:
(a) To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user
must:
[1] Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water
conservation methods and technologies that substantially
reduce water use during the term of its individual
wastewater discharge permit;
[2] Currently use control and treatment technologies
adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standard and not have
used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
[3] Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's
actual average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based
on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device,
as well as the facility's long-term average production rate.
Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term
average production rate must be representative of current
operating conditions;
[4] Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits
are not appropriate to control the discharge; and
[5] Have consistently complied with all applicable federal
categorical pretreatment standards during the period
prior to the industrial user's request for equivalent mass
limits.
200-5.3 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-5.3
195:191
(b) An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
[1] Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the
equivalent mass limits;
[2] Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use
of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
[3] Continue to record the facility's production rates and
notify the Township whenever production rates are
expected to increase by more than 20% from its baseline
production rates determined in Subsection A(3)(a)[3] of
this section. Upon notification of a revised production rate,
the Township will reassess the equivalent mass limit and
revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions
at the facility; and
[4] Continue to employ the same or comparable water
conservation methods and technologies as those
implemented pursuant to Subsection A(3)(a)[1] and (a)[2]
of this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent
mass limit.
(c) When developing equivalent mass limits, the Township:
[1] Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es)
of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily
maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standard and the
appropriate unit conversion factor;
[2] Upon notification of a revised production rate, will
reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the
limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the
facility; and
[3] May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the
industrial user's actual average daily flow rate was
reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water
conservation methods and technologies, and the actual
average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of
the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of
dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to § 200-5.6
of this chapter. The industrial user must also be in
compliance with § 200-9.3 of Article IX of these
regulations.
[4] The Township may not express limits in terms of mass for
pollutants such as pH, temperature, radiation, or other
200-5.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-5.3
195:192
pollutants which cannot appropriately be expressed as
mass.
(4) The Township may convert the mass limits of federal categorical
pretreatment standards at 40 CFR 414, 419 and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations
applicable to individual industrial users. When converting such
limits to concentration limits, the Township will use the
concentrations listed in the applicable subparts of 40 CFR 414, 419
and 455 and document that dilution is not being substituted for
treatment as stated in § 200-5.6 of this chapter.
(5) If a federal categorical pretreatment standard contains
pretreatment standards for both daily maximum and four-day
average, the same production or flow shall be used in calculating
both daily maximum and four-day average equivalent limitations in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(8).
(6) Any industrial user subject to a wastewater discharge permit
containing equivalent concentration or mass limits calculated
based on a production standard shall notify the Township within
two business days after the industrial user has a reasonable basis
to know that the production level will significantly change within
the next calendar month. Any industrial user not notifying the
Township of such change will be required to comply with the
concentration or mass equivalent limits in its wastewater discharge
permit that are based on the original long-term average production
rate in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(9).
(7) An industrial user may obtain a variance from a federal categorical
pretreatment standard if the industrial user proves, pursuant to 40
CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA
when developing the federal categorical pretreatment standard.
(8) An industrial user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a federal
categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15. Federal categorical pretreatment standards may be
adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user's
intake water.
(9) Where there is a conflict between federal, state or local
pretreatment standards, the more stringent pretreatment standard
shall apply.
B. Removal credits. Where the sewage treatment plant achieves
consistent removal of pollutants limited by categorical standards, the
Township may, at its sole discretion, apply to the approval authority for
modification of specific limits in the categorical standards as provided
for in 40 CFR 403.7. Industrial user removal credit compensation for
overflow, if utilized, shall comply with 40 CFR 403.7(h) conditions.
200-5.3 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-5.3
195:193
200-5.4. Local limits.
C. State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those established under this chapter.
A. The Township may establish, review and revise from time to time local
limits regulating the discharge of specific pollutants by industrial users.
(1) Local limits may be established for any substance which is
discharged, or is likely to be discharged, to the sewer system.
(2) Local limits may limit concentration, mass or a combination of the
two.
(3) The procedure for the calculation of local limits may be as
recommended by the approval authority or otherwise considered
appropriate by the Township.
(4) Local limits shall be calculated for pollutants, as deemed necessary,
to prevent interference and pass-through. In addition, local limits
may be calculated to prevent the discharge of toxic materials in
toxic amounts; threats to worker health and safety; and physical,
chemical or biological damage to the sewer system; or for such
other purposes as the Township deems appropriate.
(5) Local limits are applicable to all significant industrial users and
may be included in wastewater discharge permits. Local limits may
be applied to other industrial users as deemed appropriate by the
Township.
(6) Discharge of any pollutant by a significant industrial user, or an
industrial user subject to a local limit, in excess of a local limit
established for that pollutant shall constitute an unauthorized
discharge.
(7) Local limits for industrial waste dischargers apply at the point of
discharge to the sewer system. All metals are considered "total
metal" unless otherwise indicated.
B. Table of local limits.
Local Limits
Substance
Monthly
Average
(mg/l)
Daily
Maximum
(mg/l)
MAHL1, 2
(pounds per
day)
Arsenic 0.1420 0.2840 0.6234
Cadmium 0.0908 0.1815 0.3983
Chromium 4.220 8.4439 18.5320
Copper 2.6575 5.3150 15.4752
200-5.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-5.4
195:194
200-5.5. Right of revision.
The Township reserves the right to establish through a wastewater
discharge permit more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges
to the sewer system, if deemed necessary and appropriate to comply with
the objectives presented in these regulations.
200-5.6. Dilution.
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with discharge limitations unless
expressly authorized by the applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The Township may impose mass limitations on industrial users
who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limits is
appropriate.
200-5.7. Pretreatment facilities.
Local Limits
Substance
Monthly
Average
(mg/l)
Daily
Maximum
(mg/l)
MAHL1, 2
(pounds per
day)
Cyanide 1.4077 2.8153 6.2836
Lead 0.9672 1.9344 4.2456
Mercury 0.0442 0.0883 0.1939
Molybdenum 0.5485 1.0970 2.5920
Nickel 1.5588 3.1175 6.8420
PCBs 0.0001 0.0002 0.0547
Selenium 0.3118 0.6235 1.3684
Silver 3.2657 6.5313 14.3344
Zinc 1.2145 2.4290 18.8507
Notes:
1
Based on Table 18 of the Authority's Headworks Analysis dated
January 26, 2010, using EPA Version PA 3.1.
2 Maximum allowable headworks loading based on Table 20 of the
Lower Allen Township Authority's Headworks Analysis dated
January 26, 2010, using EPA Version PA 3.1.
A. Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with these rates, rules and regulations and shall
achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in §§ 200-5.1 and
200-5.4 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-5.7
195:195
200-5.8. Additional pretreatment requirements.
Whenever deemed necessary, the Township may require an industrial user
to restrict its discharge during peak flow periods; to discharge at a
consistent flow rate; to discharge certain industrial wastewaters only into
specific sewers; to relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge; to
separate domestic wastewater from industrial wastewater; and to perform
and maintain such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
sewage system and to determine the industrial user's compliance with the
requirements of these regulations. The Township may require any person
discharging into the sewer system to install and maintain, on his/her
property and at his/her expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility
to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be
issued solely for flow equalization. Industrial users with the potential to
200-5.2 of this chapter. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater
to a level acceptable to the Township shall be provided, operated and
maintained at the industrial user's expense.
B. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Township for review and shall be
acceptable to the Township before construction of the facility. The
Township does not by its acceptance of any of the designs or installation
of the plans and equipment, or of any other information or plans
submitted by an industrial user, warrant or aver in any manner that the
industrial user's implementation of such measures will result in
compliance with the applicable pretreatment requirements.
Notwithstanding any approval of such plans by the Township, the
industrial user remains solely responsible for compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements and all other
federal, state and local requirements. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
acceptable discharge to the Township under the provisions of these
regulations. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be accepted by the
Township prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes.
C. The industrial user shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
pretreatment facilities and systems of treatment and control (and
related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the industrial
user to achieve compliance with pretreatment standards and
requirements. This includes adequate laboratory controls and
appropriate quality assurance procedures, the operation of backup or
auxiliary facilities, or similar systems which are installed by the
industrial user only when the operation is necessary to achieve
compliance. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of the industrial user's treatment facility is prohibited, except as
provided by § 200-9.3B of these regulations.
200-5.7 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-5.8
195:196
discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an
acceptable combustible gas detection meter.
200-5.9. Accidental discharge and slug load control plans.
A. Upon notification from the Township, an industrial user shall provide
protection from accidental spills and slug load discharges of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated under these regulations, or
federal or state regulations and in accordance with 40 CFR
403.8(f)(1)(iii)(B)(6). Facilities to prevent accidental spills or slug load
discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at
the industrial user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the Township for review and shall be subject to Township
approval before construction of the facility. All industrial users shall be
evaluated for the need to develop and implement an accidental
discharge/slug load control plan in accordance with requirements
found at 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi) when designated by the Township. An
accidental discharge/slug load control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following provisions:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals and material safety data sheets.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the Township of any
accidental spill or slug load discharge.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental spill or
slug load discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited
to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of
plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment
structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
(5) Such other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township.
B. PPC plans. Within 180 days of the adoption of this chapter, all existing
significant industrial users shall complete and obtain approval of a
preparedness, prevention and contingency (PPC) plan or provide
acceptable evidence that such a plan is not necessary for their facility.
No significant industrial user who commences discharge to the sewer
system after the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the sewer system until this requirement has
been fulfilled. The Township, at its discretion, may require that a PPC
plan be developed by any other industrial user. PPC plans for significant
industrial users shall, at a minimum, contain the elements specified in
the DEP's Guidelines for the Development and Implementation of
200-5.8 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-5.9
195:197
200-5.10. Hauled waste.
200-5.11. Filtration systems; privy vaults, cesspools and septic
tanks; floor drains.
Environmental Emergency Response Plans. PPC plans shall be
submitted to the Township for review and shall be accepted by the
Township before implementation of the plan or construction of any
required facilities. Review and approval of such plans, facilities and
operating procedures by the Township shall not relieve the industrial
user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet
the requirements of the industrial pretreatment program. The review
and approval of plans and procedures by the Township shall not be
considered as an approval or determination regarding their efficacy,
safety or reliability; such considerations are solely the responsibility of
the industrial user.
A. Discharge of trucked or hauled wastes shall only be made at a point
designated by the Township, and such waste shall not violate these
regulations or any other requirements established by the Township.
B. No trucked or hauled wastes may be discharged except as specifically
approved by the Township. The Township may require testing,
reporting or other specific information to be presented by the operator
or owner prior to discharge.
C. In order to implement the provisions of § 200-5.10, the Township may
establish a permit system or other means of control and may set rate,
frequency, volume or other controls on the discharges from such
vehicles.
A. Drainage of water-filtration systems. Discharge of filter backwash
water to the sewer system shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Granular media (e.g., sand) filter backwash water may be
discharged to the sewer system, subject to all of the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Diatomaceous earth filter backwash, if discharged to the sewer
system, shall be connected to the sewer system through settling
tanks with no less than three months' storage capacity of spent
diatomaceous earth, which tanks shall be accessible for removing
solid waste for disposal.
B. Privy vaults, cesspools, sinkholes and septic tanks.
(1) No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved
property which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be
required under Article III of these regulations to be connected to a
sewer.
200-5.9 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-5.11
195:198
(2) Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle in existence shall be abandoned and, at the discretion of
this Township, shall be cleansed and filled under the direction and
supervision of this Township; and any such privy vault, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if
required by this Township, cleansed and filled shall constitute a
nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated as provided by law, at
the expense of the owner of such improved property.
(3) No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall at any time be connected to a sewer.
C. Floor drains.
(1) Basement floor drains shall not be permitted to be connected to the
building sewer except where it can be shown to the satisfaction of
the Township that the connection is absolutely necessary.
(2) A permit shall be obtained from the Township before any floor drain
may be attached to the building sewer drainage system.
(3) No permit for a basement floor drain shall be granted until the
owner of the building or his/her agent has executed, signed and
filed with the Township a written statement releasing the Township
from any damage or personal injury that may result.
200-5.11 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-5.11
195:199

ARTICLE VI
Wastewater Discharge Permits
200-6.1. Waste survey.
When requested by the Township, all nonresidential users must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by
completing a waste survey within 30 days of the request. The Township
has prepared a form for this purpose and may periodically require
nonresidential users to update the survey.
200-6.2. Wastewater discharge permit requirements.
A. Discharge of any industrial waste to the sewer system without a
wastewater discharge permit, except as authorized by the Township in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, is an unauthorized
discharge and subject to the penalties provided herein.
B. The Township reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to deny the
issuance of a wastewater discharge permit or to issue such a permit
conditionally.
C. No significant industrial users (SIU) shall discharge wastewater into
the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from
the Township, except when a significant industrial user has filed a
timely permit application pursuant to Subsections B and C of this
section; then the SIU may continue to discharge for the time period
specified therein.
D. Any significant industrial user which discharges industrial wastewater
into the POTW prior to the effective date of these regulations and who
wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within 90 days
after said date, apply to the Township for a wastewater discharge
permit in accordance with § 200-6.3 of this chapter and shall not cause
or allow discharges to the sewer system to continue after 180 days of
the effective date of these regulations except in accordance with a
wastewater discharge permit issued by the Township.
E. Any significant industrial users proposing to begin or recommence
discharging industrial wastewater into the POTW must obtain a
wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing
of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit
shall be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge is expected to begin.
F. Other industrial users. Except as otherwise required by the Township
on a case-by-case basis, industrial users that are not significant
industrial users do not require a wastewater discharge permit but are
required to comply with all other provisions of these regulations. If an
industrial user makes changes to processes, flow, wastewater
concentration, wastewater characteristics or other changes which
200-6.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-6.2
195:201
200-6.3. Wastewater discharge permit application.
result in the industrial user meeting the definition of "significant
industrial user," the industrial user shall, immediately upon becoming
aware that such a change has occurred, or 90 days prior to such a
change if it is planned, notify the Township and apply for a wastewater
discharge permit. The Township, at its discretion, may modify the time
frame for submission of a permit application and may require any
nonsignificant industrial users to apply for and obtain a wastewater
discharge permit, as the Township deems appropriate.
G. The Township may require other nonresidential users to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of
these regulations. In any case, the owner or his agent shall complete a
permit application furnished by the Township when requested.
H. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subjects the
industrial user to the sanctions set out in §§ 200-9.1 and 200-9.2 of
these regulations. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve the industrial user of its obligation to comply with all federal,
state and local pretreatment standards or requirements. Compliance
with a wastewater discharge permit will not be a defense for an
industrial user's failure to comply with applicable federal, state or local
requirements.
A. Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file with the Township an application, in the form
prescribed by the Township and accompanied by the required permit
fee. In support of the application, the industrial user shall submit, in
units and terms appropriate for evaluation, information including but
not limited to the following:
(1) Name, address and location (if different from the address).
(2) NAICS number or numbers according to the North American
Industry Classification System, as defined by the current Office of
Management and Budget listing.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by the
Township, as determined by a qualified analyst.
(a) Sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g)
of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended, or as
approved by the EPA and the Township.
(b) Sample results shall be accompanied by a signed statement of
the authorized representative that the samples analyzed are
representative of a normal production day.
200-6.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-6.3
195:202
(4) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(5) Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.
(6) Time and duration of wastewater or industrial waste contribution.
(7) Each product by type, amount, process or processes and rate of
production.
(8) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any.
(9) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all floor drains, building sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.
(10) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged.
(11) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by the Township, state or national pretreatment
requirement (including local limits), prohibitive discharge standard
or categorical standards, and a statement regarding whether or not
the categorical standard, prohibitive discharge standard or
pretreatment requirements are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, how the industrial user proposes to meet the applicable
standards or other pretreatment requirements, including whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable standard or requirement. If the applicant is a categorical
industrial user, this statement shall be signed by a certified
professional.
(12) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet
categorical standards, prohibitive discharge standard or
pretreatment requirements (including local limits), the shortest
schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional
pretreatment shall be developed and submitted. The completion
date of this schedule for any categorical standard shall not be later
than the compliance date established for the applicable categorical
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable categorical standards or other pretreatment
requirements (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary
plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major
200-6.3 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-6.3
195:203
200-6.4. Signatories and certification.
components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
(b) For compliance with a categorical standard, no increment
referred to in § 200-6.3A(12)(a) of these regulations shall
exceed nine months.
(c) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
pertaining to compliance with a categorical standard and the
final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a
progress report to the Township, including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be
met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay,
and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports
to the Township.
(13) Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to
be present in the discharge based on 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2) and
§ 200-7.4 of Article VII of these regulations.
(14) Any other information as may be deemed by the Township to be
necessary to evaluate the application.
(15) The application shall be signed and attested to by an authorized
representative of the industrial user in accordance with § 200-6.4
of this chapter.
B. Applications that are incomplete or believed to be inaccurate will not be
processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision.
C. The Township will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user
and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the Township may issue a wastewater
discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein, or
may deny issuance of a wastewater discharge permit, in which case the
proposed discharge is prohibited.
A. Certification of permit applications, industrial user reports and initial
monitoring waiver.
(1) All wastewater discharge permit applications, industrial user
reports and initial monitoring waivers shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user and shall contain
the following certification statement:
200-6.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-6.4
195:204
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the
system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware
that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing
violations."
(2) If the designation of an Authorized Representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section
must be submitted to the Township prior to or together with any
reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
B. Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users. A
facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2) must annually submit the following
certification statement, signed in accordance with the signatory
requirements in 40 CFR 403.12(l) and the definition for an "authorized
representative of the user" in § 200-1.1 of these regulations. This
certification must accompany an alternative report required by the
Township:
"Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR § _____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and
belief that during the period from _____, _____ to _____, _____ [months,
days, year] the facility described as _______________ [facility name] met
the definition of a nonsignificant categorical industrial user as
described in 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2) and complied with all applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements during this reporting period.
I further certify that the facility never discharged more than 100
gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this
reporting period. This compliance information is based upon the
following information: __________________________________."
C. Certification of pollutants not present. Industrial users that have an
approved monitoring waiver based on § 200-7.4 of Article VII of these
regulations shall certify on each report, using the following statement,
that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due
to activities of the industrial user:
"Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR
§ _____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there
200-6.4 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-6.4
195:205
200-6.5. Wastewater discharge permit application confidentiality.
200-6.6. Wastewater discharge permit decisions.
The Township will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user. The
Township may request additional information, issue a wastewater discharge
permit or deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
200-6.7. Wastewater discharge permit conditions.
Wastewater discharge permits are hereby expressly subject to all provisions
of this Article and all provisions of these regulations, user charges and
fees established by the Township and all other regulations. In addition,
wastewater discharge permits may include such conditions as are
reasonably deemed necessary by the Township to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, protect ambient air quality and protect against
damage to the sewer system. Permits shall contain the conditions specified
in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii). Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but
are not limited to, the following conditions:
has been no increase in the level of _____ [list pollutant(s)] in the
wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last
periodic report under § 200-7.4 of Article VII of these regulations."
A. All information required by the Township in the permit application shall
be provided by the industrial user to the best of its ability.
B. If information regarding raw materials, processes, production rates or
other manufacturing information is regarded as confidential by the
industrial user, such information shall be clearly marked "Confidential"
on the application form. Process information and production rates to
the extent that are necessary to categorize the industrial user shall
remain public information.
C. Confidentiality shall not apply to information regarding the flow of or
the constituents in the industrial waste or other wastewater discharge.
D. Information accepted by the Township as confidential shall be handled
as detailed in § 200-7.11 of Article VII of these regulations.
A. Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards. Such BMPs shall be considered
local limits and pretreatment standards for the purposes of 40 CFR 403
and Section 307(d) of the Act.
B. List of prohibited discharges, as per §§ 200-5.1 and 200-5.2 of Article V
of these regulations.
200-6.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-6.7
195:206
C. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports,
including the information to be contained and the signatory
requirements of these reports.
D. Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include the specific
substances to be analyzed, sampling locations, frequency of sampling,
number, types and standards for tests, toxicity testing and reporting
schedules. This also includes the process for seeking a waiver for a
pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge,
or a specific waived pollutant in the case of a wastewater discharge
permit.
E. Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to
industrial waste and wastewater discharges and characteristics as
specified by the Township and affording the Township access thereto.
F. Requirements for notification to the Township of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being discharged into the
sewer system.
G. Requirements for notification of slug loads and spills as per § 200-5.9 of
Article V of these regulations.
H. Statement of duration of the wastewater discharge permit, as provided
in § 200-6.8A of this chapter.
I. Notification of the rules regarding transferability, as stated in
§ 200-6.8E of this chapter.
J. Civil, criminal and administrative penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements, any applicable compliance
schedule, or any other requirements set forth in this Article. Such
compliance schedules may not extend the time for compliance beyond
that required by applicable federal, state and local law.
K. Requirements pertaining to modification, suspension and termination
of the wastewater discharge permit and appeal procedures as found in
§§ 200-6.8C and F of this chapter.
L. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
M. Requirements for installation and maintenance of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate
containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
N. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices
and notification to the Township regarding the failure of such facilities
and equipment.
200-6.7 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-6.7
195:207
200-6.8. Wastewater discharge permit issuance process.
O. Requirements for developing and implementing special plans or
practices such as spill control plans, toxic organic management plans,
toxic reduction evaluations, special management or housekeeping
practices, or other such procedures.
P. Compliance schedules.
Q. The unit charge or schedule of charges and fees.
R. A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, effective date and expiration date.
S. Any grant of a monitoring waiver by the Township, such as for
pollutants not present as described in § 200-7.4 of Article VII of these
regulations, must be included as a condition of an industrial user
permit.
T. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer system.
U. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the industrial user of the responsibility for compliance
with all applicable pretreatment standards, including those that
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit.
V. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township to ensure
compliance with this chapter or any other applicable ordinance and
applicable federal, state and local pretreatment requirements.
W. A wastewater discharge permit, in addition to implementing
requirements as mandated by federal pretreatment regulations, may be
a means for the Township to implement other requirements in
accordance with federal, state and local law. Implementation and
enforcement of such provisions shall be at the discretion of the
Township.
A. Permit duration. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed five years. A wastewater discharge
permit may be issued for a period of less than five years or may be
dated to expire on a specific date. Except as otherwise approved by the
Township, the industrial user shall apply for reissuance of the
wastewater discharge permit a minimum of 120 days prior to the
expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge
permit.
B. Permit public notice. The Township may publish, in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction served by the sewer system, a notice to issue a wastewater
discharge permit, at least 30 days prior to issuance. The notice will
200-6.7 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-6.8
195:208
indicate a location where the draft permit may be reviewed and an
address where written comments may be submitted.
C. Permit appeals.
(1) Any person, including the industrial user that is issued or reissued
a wastewater discharge permit, may appeal the permit conditions
or requirements, in whole or in part, within 30 days of its issuance
or modification. If a wastewater discharge permit is modified
during its effective term, the industrial user may appeal only the
conditions or requirements that have been changed. Appeal
procedures applicable to these permit actions, as well as
suspension, revocation or denial of issuance of a wastewater
discharge permit, shall be as set forth in § 200-9.1E of Article IX of
these regulations.
(2) During the process of appeal, the wastewater discharge permit
shall remain in effect and shall be subject to potential enforcement
unless, upon the request of the permittee, the Township grants a
stay of specified permit condition(s) or requirement(s) pursuant to
§ 200-9.1E of Article IX of these regulations. Conditions and
requirements imposed by federal or state regulations (e.g.,
categorical standards) shall not be appealed or stayed. Conditions
or requirements which, in the opinion of the Township, may
constitute a hazard or pose a potential threat of pollution if stayed
shall not be stayed during an appeal. Grant of a stay of permit
conditions is at the discretion of the Township.
D. Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit may be subject to modification by the Township
during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as
identified in §§ 200-5.1 and 200-5.2 of Article V of these regulations are
modified or other just cause exists. Changes or new conditions in the
wastewater discharge permit may include a reasonable time schedule
for compliance as authorized by applicable law and as determined by
the Township. Causes for modification to a permit include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) Noncompliance with any term or condition of the wastewater
discharge permit and/or any requirement set forth in an applicable
pretreatment law, ordinance, regulation or rule.
(2) Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit by misrepresentation or
failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in either the permit
application or any report, including the falsification of selfmonitoring
reports or the tampering with monitoring equipment.
(3) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or pretreatment
standards or requirements.
(4) Changes in the processes used by the permittee or changes in the
volume or character of the industrial waste.
200-6.8 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-6.8
195:209
(5) Changes in the design or capability of the sewage treatment plant
or changed or new NPDES permit requirements or sludge disposal
requirements that require either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
(6) A change in any condition that requires a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the discharge.
(7) Failure to allow timely access to the industrial user's facility or
records.
(8) Failure to timely pay fines, fees or applicable sewer charges
assessed by the Township.
(9) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the sewage treatment plant, Township personnel, sludge quality
or the receiving stream.
(10) Revision of or a grant of variance from federal categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
(11) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit.
(12) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator where requested in accordance with § 200-6.8E
of this chapter.
(13) Other such conditions as determined to be appropriate by the
Township.
E. Permit transfer.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific industrial
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall
not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new
industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation
without at least 60 days' advance notice to the Township and
Township approval of the wastewater discharge permit transfer.
(2) The notice to the Township must include a written certification by
the new owner and/or operator which provides the name and
address of the facility, including the name of the new owner and/or
operator, states that the new owner and/or operator has no
immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes,
identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur and
acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
(3) Any proposed transfer shall include a written agreement between
the existing industrial user and the new industrial user regarding a
proposed date for transfer of permit responsibility, coverage and
liability between them.
200-6.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-6.8
195:210
(4) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit void on the date of facility transfer.
(5) The Township may modify or terminate a transferred permit as set
forth in this section.
(6) If such a transfer is approved by the Township, the existing owner
or operator shall provide a copy of the wastewater discharge
permit to the new owner or operator. Any succeeding industrial
user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing
wastewater discharge permit. The Township may, at its discretion,
deny the transfer of a wastewater discharge permit and require
application for a new wastewater discharge permit under the
provisions of this section.
F. Permit termination.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits shall be voided by the Township for
nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership.
(2) All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular industrial
user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge
permit to that industrial user.
(3) An industrial user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
wastewater discharge.
(4) Discharge of any industrial waste to the sewer system by a
significant industrial user without a wastewater discharge permit
or after the revocation of a wastewater discharge permit is an
unauthorized discharge, as provided in § 200-6.2A, and is subject to
the penalties provided in Article IX of these regulations and such
other remedies as allowable at law or in equity.
(5) Any industrial user notified of a revocation of its wastewater
discharge permit may be required to immediately stop or eliminate
the discharge (even if an appeal of the revocation notice is
pending). In the event of a failure of the industrial user to comply
voluntarily with the notice of revocation, the discharge shall be
considered an unauthorized discharge and the Township may take
such steps as deemed necessary, which may include immediate
severance of the connection between the building sewer and the
sewage collection system or discontinuance of water service, to
prevent or minimize damage to the sewer system or endangerment
to the environment or any property or person.
(6) The Township may revoke or terminate a wastewater discharge
permit for cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
(a) Failure to notify the Township of significant changes in the
operation or wastewater volume, constituents and
200-6.8 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-6.8
195:211
characteristics prior to discharge as required in § 200-5.7 of
Article V of these regulations.
(b) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or reports.
(c) Falsifying monitoring reports.
(d) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(e) Refusing to allow the Township or its representative timely
access to the facility premises and records.
(f) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(g) Failure to timely pay fines.
(h) Failure to timely pay sewer rentals and charges.
(i) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
(j) Failure to complete a waste survey or wastewater discharge
permit application.
(k) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility.
(l) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any
conditions of the wastewater discharge permit or these
regulations.
(m) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge.
(n) Information indicating that the permitted discharge, either
singly or by interaction with other discharges, poses a threat to
the Township's sewage treatment plant, Township personnel or
the receiving waters, or may place the Township in violation of
its NPDES permit.
G. Permit reissuance. Except as otherwise approved by the Township, an
industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days
prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater
discharge permit. Notwithstanding any other provision in these
regulations, if an industrial user filed a timely and complete application
and the Township, through no fault of the industrial user, has not
reissued the wastewater discharge permit prior to the expiration date,
the conditions of the existing wastewater discharge permit shall
continue until such time as the Township has issued another permit.
H. Authorization to issue permits. The Sewer Department Manager has the
authorization to issue permits. His/her signature shall appear on the
200-6.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-6.8
195:212
first page of each wastewater discharge permit with the issuance,
amendment and expiration dates of the discharge permit.
200-6.8 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-6.8
195:213

ARTICLE VII
Industrial Monitoring and Reporting
200-7.1. Baseline monitoring report (BMR).
Within either 180 days after the effective date of a federal categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical significant industrial users subject to such federal categorical
pretreatment standards, holding an existing wastewater discharge permit,
and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the sewer system
shall submit to the Township a baseline monitoring report (BMR) which
contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b) and in this section. At
least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and
sources that become categorical SIUs subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard, shall submit a BMR
to the Township which contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)
and in this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment
it intends to use to meet applicable federal categorical pretreatment
standards and shall also provide estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged. Categorical SIUs shall submit the
following information for a BMR:
A. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator
and owner.
B. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
C. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) number of the
operation(s) carried out by the categorical SIU. This description should
include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of
discharge to the sewer system from the regulated processes.
D. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the sewer system from regulated process
waste streams and other waste streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined waste stream formula, as established in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
E. The federal categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and the results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
federal categorical pretreatment standard or by the Township, of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations,
or mass, where required, shall be reported. At least one sample
representative of daily operations shall be provided with the BMR and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures found in § 200-7.8B of
Article VII of these regulations. Sampling shall be performed in
accordance with procedures found in § 200-7.8A of Article VII of these
regulations. The BMR shall indicate the time, date and place of
200-7.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-7.1
195:215
200-7.2. Compliance schedule progress report.
The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by
§ 200-6.3A(12) of Article VI of these regulations and § 200-7.1G of this
chapter:
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling
and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected
pollutant discharges to the sewer system.
F. A certification statement, reviewed by the industrial user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/
or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
G. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M are required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements, the categorical SIU shall
submit the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide
such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. A compliance
schedule shall meet the requirements set out in § 200-7.2 of this
chapter.
H. All BMRs shall be signed and certified in accordance with § 200-6.4 of
Article VI of these regulations.
I. In cases where the pretreatment standard or requirement requires
compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention
alternative, the industrial user shall submit documentation required by
the Township or the pretreatment standard or requirement necessary
to determine compliance status of the industrial user.
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. Such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation.
B. No increment referred to in Subsection A of this section shall exceed
nine months.
C. The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Township no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the
date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the
200-7.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-7.2
195:216
200-7.3. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline.
200-7.4. Periodic compliance reports.
reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to
return to the established schedule.
D. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the dates on
which such progress reports are provided to the Township.
A. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standards, or, in the case of a new
source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the sewer system, any industrial user subject to such federal
categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the Township a
report containing the information described in § 200-7.1D through F of
this chapter.
B. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user's longterm
production rate.
C. For all other industrial users subject to federal categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
report shall include the industrial user's actual production during the
appropriate sampling period.
D. All compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with
§ 200-6.4 of Article VI of these regulations.
E. In cases where the pretreatment standard or requirement requires
compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention
alternative, the industrial user shall submit documentation required by
the Township or the pretreatment standard or requirement necessary
to determine compliance status of the industrial user.
A. Except as specified in Subsection E of this section, all significant
industrial users subject to a federal categorical pretreatment standard
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall submit
periodic compliance reports to the Township in accordance with 40 CFR
403.12(e), (g) and (h), as applicable, during the months of July and
January, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard
or requirement or by the Township, and no later than 45 days from the
last day of June and December, indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment
standards or requirements. Both daily maximum and average
concentrations shall be reported. In addition, the report shall include a
200-7.2 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-7.4
195:217
record of the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows
for the reporting period.
B. At the discretion of the Township and in consideration of such factors as
local high and low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the
Township may agree to alter the months during which the above reports
are to be submitted.
C. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the
industrial user shall submit documentation required by the Township or
the pretreatment standard necessary to determine compliance status of
the industrial user.
D. All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in
accordance with § 200-6.4 of Article VI of these regulations. Copies of
all chain of custody forms and laboratory analytical reports from the
accredited laboratory shall be provided with each periodic compliance
report.
E. The Township may impose mass limitations on industrial users where
the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate. In such cases,
the report required by Subsection A of this section shall indicate the
mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
discharge of the industrial user. These reports shall contain the results
of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the
nature and concentration, or production and mass, where requested by
the Township, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the
applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall
be as prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard or by the
Township.
F. Categorical SIUs subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established by the Township, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c), shall
include in the periodic compliance report a reasonable measure of the
categorical SIU's long-term production rate. Categorical SIUs subject
to federal categorical pretreatment standards, which are expressed
only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or
other measure of operation), shall include in the periodic compliance
report the categorical SIU's actual average production rate for the
reporting period.
G. The Township may authorize an industrial user subject to a federal
categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant
regulated by a federal categorical pretreatment standard if the
industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical
factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present
in the discharge, or is only present at background levels from intake
water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the
industrial user, as subject to the following conditions:
200-7.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-7.4
195:218
(1) The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to
be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from a
facility, provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by
an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard and
otherwise includes no process wastewater.
(2) The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective
period of the wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer
than five years. The industrial user must submit a new request for
the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent
wastewater discharge permit.
(3) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the
facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the
facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.
(4) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with the definition of an "authorized representative of the user" in
§ 200-1.1 of Article I of these regulations, and all requests for the
waiver must include the certification statement in § 200-6.4 of
Article VI of these regulations.
(5) Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA-approved method from 40
CFR 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant
is used for the analysis.
(6) Any grant or a monitoring waiver by the Township must be included
as a condition of the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit.
The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted
by the industrial user in its request for the waiver must be
maintained by the Township for three years after expiration of the
waiver.
(7) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur with the
industrial user's operations, the industrial user must immediately
comply with the monitoring requirements of Subsection A of this
section or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed
by the Township. In such cases, the industrial user shall
immediately notify the Township.
(8) This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in federal categorical pretreatment
standards, except as otherwise specified in the federal categorical
pretreatment standard.
H. The Township may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance
reports, as outlined in Subsection A of this section, to a requirement to
report no less frequently than once a year, unless required more
frequently in a pretreatment standard or by the EPA, where the
200-7.4 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-7.4
195:219
200-7.5. Report of changed conditions.
categorical SIU's total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any
of the following conditions:
(1) Greater than 0.01% of the sewage treatment plant's design dryweather
hydraulic capacity, or 5,000 GPD, whichever is smaller, as
measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless
the industrial user discharges in batches.
(2) Greater than 0.01% of the sewage treatment plant's design dryweather
organic capacity.
(3) Greater than 0.01% of the maximum allowable headworks loading
for any pollutant regulated by the applicable federal categorical
pretreatment standard for which approved local limits are
developed, in accordance with § 200-5.4 of Article V of these
regulations.
I. Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have been in
significant noncompliance during the last two years, as defined in
§ 200-7.9 of Article VII of these regulations. In addition, reduced
reporting is not available to industrial users with daily flow rates,
production levels or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that, in
the opinion of the Township, decreasing the reporting requirement for
this type of industrial user results in data that is not representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period. The industrial users
must notify the Township immediately of any changes at its facility
causing it to no longer meet the conditions outlined in this section.
Upon notification, the industrial user must immediately begin
complying with the minimum reporting in Subsection A of this section.
J. The Township must retain documentation to support the Township's
determination that a specific industrial user qualifies for reduced
reporting requirements under this section for a period of three years
after the expiration of the term of the control mechanism.
K. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a
mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of
receipt of the report shall govern.
A. An industrial user shall notify the Township of any planned, significant
changes to the industrial user's operation or system, such as a change
in the manufacturing process, raw materials, auxiliary processes,
pretreatment processes or other changes which may result in changes
to wastewater character, composition, volume or rate of flow, at least 30
days before the change occurs, or, if the change is not planned 30 days
or more in advance, immediately upon the decision to make such a
change. The report shall include all information necessary to determine
the effect of the change on the wastewater.
200-7.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-7.5
195:220
200-7.6. Report of potential problems.
B. In the event that an industrial user discovers that changes in raw
materials, potable water quality or other factors beyond its control have
occurred so that the constituents or character of the industrial waste
discharge has changed, the industrial user shall report such
information, in writing, to the Township immediately upon such
discovery. If such a change constitutes a slug load, other reporting
requirements under § 200-5.9 of Article V of these regulations may
apply.
C. The Township may, on receipt of such a report:
(1) Continue, modify, rescind or revoke an existing wastewater
discharge permit in effect.
(2) Require application for a new wastewater discharge permit.
(3) Modify an existing wastewater discharge permit to reflect the
changed nature of the waste.
(4) Rescind and reissue an existing wastewater discharge permit in
order to make substantial changes in wastewater discharge permit
conditions.
(5) Revoke an existing wastewater discharge permit or require the
industrial user to cease or prevent the discharge.
(6) Take such other action as it deems appropriate.
D. No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s)
until and unless the Township has responded to the industrial user's
notice. The Township may require the industrial user to undertake a
compatibility study to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township
that the wastewater to be discharged is compatible with the sewage
treatment plant, will not affect any requirements imposed upon the
Township (including sludge disposal requirements), and will not
otherwise adversely affect the sewage treatment plant.
E. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of 10% or greater and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
A. Notification. In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to
accidental spills, discharges of a nonroutine episodic nature,
noncustomary batch discharges, or slug loads, which may cause passthrough
or interference or affect sludge quality at the sewage
treatment plant, the industrial user shall immediately telephone and
notify the Township of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if
known, corrective actions being taken or planned by the industrial user,
and expected duration. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial
200-7.5 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-7.6
195:221
200-7.7. Notification of hazardous waste discharge.
user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the sewer system, fish kills or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve
the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which
may be imposed by this chapter or applicable law.
B. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call (i.e., the Township) in the event of an
accidental spill or slug load discharge. Employers shall insure that all
employees who may cause, suffer or observe such a discharge to occur
are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
C. Written notice. Within five days following a discharge as described in
Subsection A of this section, the industrial user shall, unless waived by
the Township, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s)
of the discharge and the measures taken by the industrial user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which
may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewer system, natural
resources, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil
penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or
other applicable law. The written report shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user.
A. All industrial users shall notify the Township, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director and PA DEP Waste Management in
writing, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(p), of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification shall include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA
hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch,
or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of
such waste per calendar month, the notification shall also contain the
following information, to the extent such information is known and
readily available to the industrial user:
(1) An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
waste;
(2) An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and
(3) An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following
12 months.
200-7.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-7.7
195:222
200-7.8. Compliance monitoring.
B. Industrial users that commence discharge of a hazardous waste after
the effective date of this chapter shall submit the report within 180 days
of the first discharge of the hazardous waste, except as provided in
Subsection D of this section. If the new discharge constitutes a change
in the character of the industrial waste, the industrial user shall also
comply with the requirements of § 200-7.5 of this chapter. In the case of
any new regulations under 40 CFR 261 identifying additional wastes as
characteristic or listed hazardous waste, the industrial user discharging
such substances shall submit the report within 90 days of the effective
date of the new regulations.
C. The required report need be submitted only once for each hazardous
waste discharged. Industrial users regulated under categorical
standards which have already submitted such information in baseline
monitoring reports or periodic compliance reports do not have to report
this information again.
D. Industrial users that discharge less than 15 kilograms of hazardous
wastes in a calendar month do not have to comply with these reporting
requirements. This exemption does not apply to acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
E. An industrial user shall notify the Township within five days of
becoming aware of any discharges of reportable quantities of listed or
unlisted hazardous substances, as defined at 40 CFR 302.4 (CERCLA
hazardous substances). This notification shall include the time of
release; the name of the substance; the identifying CAS number, if
known; and the approximate quantity discharged. If the discharge
constitutes a spill, change in wastewater constituents or slug load,
other reporting requirements of the industrial pretreatment program
may also apply.
F. Each notification required by this section shall include a statement
certifying that the industrial user has a program in place to reduce the
volume and/or toxicity of the discharged wastes to the extent that it is
economically practical. The statement shall be signed by the authorized
representative of the industrial user.
G. The Township agrees to notify the Cumberland County Emergency
Management Director, as appropriate, of any spill or slug load relating
to a discharge of hazardous waste and substances under this section.
H. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit issued hereunder, or any applicable federal or state
law.
A. Sample collection.
200-7.7 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-7.8
195:223
(1) Samples for cyanide, oil and grease, pH, total phenols, sulfide,
temperature, toxicity and volatile organic compounds shall be
obtained using grab collection techniques. Grab samples shall also
be used for any pollutant subject to an instantaneous maximum
limitation.
(2) All other wastewater compliance monitoring samples shall be
collected using flow-proportioned composite collection techniques.
The Township may authorize the use of time-proportioned sampling
or the collection of one grab sample every two hours for the
duration of the discharge where the industrial user demonstrates
to the Township that the grab samples shall be representative of
the effluent being discharged to the sewer system. Holding time for
sample parameters begins at the time the last sample is collected in
the composite sampling bottle. The time of final sample collection
shall be recorded on the chain of custody form.
(3) The decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented
in the industrial user file for the facility or facilities. Using
protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR
136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples
collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited
prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols and
sulfide, the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the
field; for volatile organic compounds and oil and grease, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples
for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as
documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by
the Township, as appropriate.
(4) If grab samples are used for BMR reporting under § 200-7.1 of this
chapter and ninety-day compliance reports under § 200-7.2 of this
chapter, a minimum of four grab samples must be collected and
analyzed for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and
volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical
sampling data do not exist. For facilities for which historical
sampling data is available, the Township may authorize a lower
minimum number of samples. For other industrial user compliance
reports and industrial user reports not subject to federal
categorical pretreatment standards, the Township shall require the
number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance
by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(5) In general, all samples shall be collected in accordance with 40
CFR 136 protocol, which includes use of proper sampling
containers, maintenance of samples at a temperature of less than
or equal to 6° C., use of proper preservatives and adherence to
parameter holding times.
200-7.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-7.8
195:224
(6) The Township reserves the right to require that all sampling shall
be conducted by a laboratory accredited under the auspices of the
environmental laboratory accreditation program at 25 PA Code
252.
B. Analytical requirements.
(1) All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be
submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or
report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR 136, as amended, unless otherwise specified
in an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in
accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
(2) Specifically, all parameter holding times shall be adhered to, such
as the forty-eight-hour holding time for the BOD analysis, which
begins at the time the last sample aliquot is collected.
(3) All analyses shall be conducted by a laboratory accredited under
the auspices of the environmental laboratory accreditation
program at 25 PA Code 252, unless the Township approves
otherwise, such as for the analysis of pH. Such request for
permission by a nonaccredited facility to conduct analyses as
required by a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Township
shall be made in writing to the Township.
(4) The Township reserves the right to select an accredited laboratory
for industrial users.
C. Representative sampling. All wastewater samples shall be
representative of the industrial user's normal discharge occurring
during the reporting period. The industrial user shall ensure that all
monitoring and analytical equipment it uses to monitor or otherwise
analyze the pollutants discharged to the sewer system are periodically
calibrated and maintained at intervals to ensure the accuracy of
measurements. Flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated,
kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of an industrial user to keep the monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim the
sample results are not representative of the discharge.
D. Sampling frequency. The industrial user shall ensure that an adequate
number of samples are collected and analyzed to determine that the
process discharge equipment is operating properly and that the
wastewater discharge does not violate pretreatment effluent
limitations. The industrial user may monitor more frequently than
otherwise required by the Township. If the industrial user monitors any
pollutant, subject to an effluent limitation and at the location
designated for compliance monitoring, more frequently than otherwise
required by the Township using the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136
200-7.8 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-7.8
195:225
or otherwise required, the results of such monitoring shall be included
in the calculation and reporting of the data submitted to the Township.
Except as otherwise provided, significant industrial user sampling for
determining compliance shall be collected at least once every six
months and analyzed for applicable pollutants. The Township reserves
the right to require sampling more frequently than set forth herein.
E. Reporting of increased sampling results. If an industrial user subject to
the reporting requirements of this chapter or a wastewater discharge
permit monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
Township, using the procedures prescribed in Subsection B of this
section, results of this monitoring shall be included in a periodic
compliance report.
F. Repeat sampling and reporting.
(1) If, upon receipt of valid sampling and testing results, an industrial
user becomes aware that a noncompliance with discharge limits
has occurred, the industrial user shall notify the Township within
24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the Township within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. The Township may waive the
resampling or reporting requirements if the Township monitors the
industrial user's wastewater discharge at least once a month or if
the Township samples between the industrial user's initial sampling
and when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling.
(2) Each significant industrial user shall have a duty, on receipt of
validly obtained sampling and analysis results, of inspecting the
results and determining if any wastewater discharge permit
condition has been violated. Failure to examine and compare
testing results with wastewater discharge permit conditions shall
not be a valid defense for failure to comply with these reporting
conditions.
G. Toxicity monitoring. An industrial user shall undertake effluent toxicity
testing as deemed necessary by the Township using DEP and EPA
established protocol. An industrial user shall undertake a toxicity
reduction evaluation and take steps to reduce toxicity, as required by
the Township using DEP and EPA established protocol.
H. Recordkeeping.
(1) Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements of this
chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying,
all records and information obtained pursuant to any monitoring
activities required by this chapter, including documentation
associated with best management practices and any additional
records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the industrial user independent of such
requirements.
200-7.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-7.8
195:226
(2) Records shall include the date, exact place, method, time of
sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the
dates analyses are performed; who performed the analyses; the
analytical techniques or methods used and the results of such
analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at
least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for
the duration of any litigation concerning the industrial user or
where the industrial user has been notified by the Township of a
longer retention period.
I. Right of entry.
(1) The Township and its duly authorized employees and
representatives shall have the right to enter the premises of any
industrial user to ascertain whether the industrial user is
complying with all requirements of these regulations and any
wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder. Industrial users
shall allow the Township, or its representative, ready access during
all working hours to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, measurement, testing, records examination
and copying, or as necessary for the performance of any additional
duties.
(2) Areas which are subject to inspection include, but are not limited
to, areas which could result in wastewater discharge to the sewer,
such as manufacturing areas and chemical storage areas; areas
where industrial waste is generated; pretreatment facilities; spill
prevention and control facilities; hazardous waste generation
areas; industrial self-monitoring facilities; and areas where
relevant documentation is kept or stored.
(3) Where an industrial user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements
with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, the Township, or its representatives, will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing
specific responsibilities.
(4) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township or its
representatives access to the industrial user's premises shall be a
violation of this chapter.
J. Monitoring facilities. The Township shall have the right to set up on the
industrial user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering
of the industrial user's operations as follows:
(1) The Township may require the industrial user to install and
operate, at the industrial user's own expense, monitoring facilities
to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the
wastewater or industrial waste discharge. The monitoring facility
200-7.8 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-7.8
195:227
200-7.9. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
The Township may publish on an annual basis, or more frequent basis as
it deems appropriate, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides
meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the Township
sewer system, a list of the industrial users which are in significant
should normally be situated on the industrial user's premises, but
the Township may, when such a location would be impractical or
cause undue hardship on the industrial user, allow the facility to
be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located
so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles,
provided that such location is acceptable to the Township. Any
temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the
Township and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such
access shall be borne by the industrial user.
(2) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at
the expense of the industrial user.
(3) Monitoring facilities shall be constructed in a manner acceptable to
the Township. The Township may require that the monitoring
facilities be equipped with permanent flow measurement or
sampling equipment. Plans and specifications for the construction
of monitoring facilities and all required equipment shall be
submitted to and accepted by the Township prior to beginning
construction of such facilities and shall be in accordance with the
Township's requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications. All equipment used to measure
wastewater flow or quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure its
accuracy.
K. Search warrants. If the Township or its representatives have been
refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof,
and if the Township has probable cause to believe that an industrial
user has violated or may violate this chapter, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the Township designed to verify compliance with these
regulations or a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the Township may seek issuance of a search warrant
from the local Cumberland County Magisterial District Justice. Such
search warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the Township in
the company of a law enforcement officer. In the event of an emergency
affecting the public health and safety, inspections shall be made without
the issuance of a warrant.
200-7.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-7.9
195:228
noncompliance (SNC) with applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements during the previous 12 months. The Township shall not be
liable for any damages of any sort suffered by any industrial user or owner
as a result of such publication; nor shall the Township incur any liability
through publication of incorrect information where such information was
believed accurate when published or was the result of administrative or
typographical error. Significant noncompliance shall be determined using
measures of rate, magnitude and type of noncompliance as follows:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of the wastewater measurements taken during a
six-month period exceed a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined in § 200-1.1 of
Article I of these regulations and by 40 CFR 403.3(1).
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of the wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined in § 200-1.1 of Article I of
these regulations and by 40 CFR 403.3(1), multiplied by the applicable
criteria (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, oil and grease and TSS, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH).
C. Other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined in
40 CFR 403.3(1) which the Township determines has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, or
has endangered the health or safety of Township personnel or the
general public.
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment in accordance with 40 CFR
403.8(f)(2)(vii), or has resulted in the Township's exercise of its
emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent
such a discharge.
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
submitted in response to written directions of the Township for starting
construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance.
F. Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including but not limited to baseline monitoring reports,
reports on compliance with federal categorical pretreatment standard
deadlines, periodic compliance reports, reports on compliance with
compliance schedules, reports on a change in operations, and any other
report required under this chapter or by applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements.
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
200-7.9 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-7.9
195:229
200-7.10. Duty to provide information.
The industrial user shall furnish to the Township, within a reasonable time,
any information which the Township may request to determine whether
cause exists for modifying, reissuing, suspending or terminating a
wastewater discharge permit or to determine industrial user pretreatment
compliance. The industrial user shall also furnish to the Township, upon
request, copies of any records required to be maintained pursuant to these
regulations or other applicable federal, state or local laws or regulations.
If the industrial user becomes aware that it failed to submit any relevant
facts or submitted incorrect information in an application for a wastewater
discharge permit, or submitted incorrect information in an application for
a wastewater discharge permit, in a report to the Township or in any
other correspondence pertaining to its industrial wastewater discharge,
the industrial user shall promptly submit such facts or information to the
Township.
200-7.11. Confidential information.
H. Any violations, which may include a violation of best management
practices, that the Township determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the Township's industrial pretreatment
program.
A. Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater
discharge permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall
be available to the public or other governmental agencies without
restriction, unless the industrial user specifically requests
confidentiality and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Township that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the industrial user. Any such request must be
asserted at the time of submission of the information or data to the
Township.
B. When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a
report that such information shall be held confidential, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this chapter, the Township's NPDES permit, any state permit
and/or the industrial pretreatment program; provided, however, that
such portions of a report shall be available for use by the EPA, the state
or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized
as confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
200-7.9 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-7.11
195:230
C. When information accepted by the Township as confidential is
transmitted to any government agency, a notification to the industrial
user may be provided listing the confidential information transmitted
and the governmental entity requesting it. The person seeking
confidentiality protection of the information shall bear the burden of
demonstrating to the other governmental agency that such information
is entitled to confidential protection.
200-7.11 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-7.11
195:231

ARTICLE VIII
Rates, Charges and Fees
200-8.1. Establishment by resolution; responsibility for payment.
200-8.2. Sewer rents and tapping fees.
A. The Township shall establish and revise, as necessary, such rates,
charges and fees for the cost-effective operation and maintenance of
the sewer system. Such rates, charges and fees shall be established by
resolution and in conformance with local, state and federal laws and
regulations.61
B. The owner of improved property served or to be served by the sewer
system, and not a tenant or agent of the owner, shall be responsible for
the payment of all rates, charges and fees of the Township for use of the
sewer system.
A. Sewer rentals. Sewer rentals or charges are imposed upon and shall be
collected from the owner of each improved property which shall be
connected to the sewer system for use of the sewer system, whether
such use shall be direct or indirect, and shall be payable as provided
herein.
(1) Billing for sewer service begins when a building sewer installation
has been inspected, tested, approved and connected to a service
lateral, regardless of whether a new structure under construction
has been completed. Billing shall continue until the building sewer
is physically removed or until the conditions of § 200-8.3E have
been met.
(2) Sewer rentals or charges for sanitary sewage discharged into the
sewer system from any improved property constituting a
residential dwelling unit shall be on a flat-rate basis and at such
rates as shall be determined, from time to time, by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
(3) Sewer rentals or charges for sanitary sewage and industrial wastes
not subject to special charge under § 200-8.6 below which shall be
discharged into the sewer system from any improved property
constituting a nonresidential commercial, institutional or industrial
establishment shall be based upon the volume of water usage,
adjusted if appropriate, as provided in this chapter, where the
volume of water usage shall be metered in connection with the
public water system, metered private wells, or otherwise, plus the
fixed-cost base rate to be applied based on the number of EDUs
calculated in accordance with the provisions of Section
5607(d)(24)-(33) of the Pennsylvania Municipal Authorities Act, as
amended, and Act 57 of the Pennsylvania General Assembly.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fees.
200-8.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-8.2
195:233
(4) Sewer rentals or charges for sanitary sewage and industrial wastes
not subject to a special charge under § 200-8.6 below which shall
be discharged into the sewer system from any improved property
constituting a nonresidential commercial, institutional or industrial
establishment may be based upon actual metered volume of
wastewater discharge, as permitted in this chapter.
(5) In either of the foregoing cases, such sewer rentals or charges shall
be based on volume of water consumption or volume of wastewater
discharge and shall include a usage charge per 1,000 gallons, and a
base rate per EDU, calculated in accordance with the provisions of
Section 5607(d)(24)-(33) of the Pennsylvania Municipal Authorities
Act, as amended, and Act 57 of the Pennsylvania General Assembly.
Said charges shall be subject to annual adjustment and shall be set
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners, subject, however, to a
minimum sewer rental or charge per quarter annum, regardless of
the volume of water usage or of the volume of actual metered waste
discharge, said charge to be derived from the calculated number of
EDUs and the base rate per EDU in effect at the time.
(6) Each billing unit located in a multiple unit shall be billed as a
separate entity, and the foregoing sewer rentals or charges, as
appropriate, shall be used in computing the sewer rentals or
charges applicable to each such billing unit as though such billing
unit was in a separate structure and had a direct and separate
connection to the sewer system; provided, however, that this
section shall not be applicable to a combination dwelling unit and
commercial establishment as specified above.
(7) If the use classification of any improved property shall change
during any quarter-annum period, the sewer rental or charge shall
be adjusted by this Township, by proration on a monthly basis to
the nearest calendar month, with a credit or charge, as shall be
appropriate under the circumstances, being made on the statement
for the next succeeding quarter-annum period.
(8) This Township reserves the right, from time to time, to alter,
modify, revise and/or amend residential and nonresidential quarterannum
rates applicable thereto.
(9) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, this Township
shall have the right, based upon good reasons and circumstances
existing, to enter into special agreements with the owner of any
improved property with respect to terms and conditions upon
which sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes may be discharged
into the sewer system and with respect to payments to be made to
this Township in connection therewith. In such event, such service
and payments with respect thereto shall be governed by terms and
conditions of such special agreement.
200-8.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-8.2
195:234
(10) Whenever the Township shall determine that the actual cost of
providing sewer system usage or the transporting, treating and
disposing of wastes discharged thereto or the costs of collecting or
processing the charges therefor exceed the amount properly
charged under any other section or subsection of this chapter, the
Township may impose a charge equal to the actual costs of the
items set forth above.
B. Tapping fees. A tapping fee is based on all of the fee components
contained herein as applicable and as determined through a capital
charges study performed in accordance with the provisions of the
Municipal Authorities Act, as amended, and Act 57 enacted by the
Pennsylvania General Assembly. A tapping fee is assessed for each
equivalent dwelling unit to offset the capital costs associated with
constructing the Township's sanitary sewer system and treatment
facilities.
(1) Such person shall pay a tapping fee, unless such person is subject
to contractual or special agreements providing for payment of
certain sums in lieu of a tapping fee, in order to make any
connection to the sewer system in the Township, regardless of
whether such connection is direct or indirect, including changing
the type of use of property previously connected or connecting one
or more additional or separate uses of the types hereinafter
referred to through an existing connection, and regardless of
whether such property is connected separately or through one or
more existing or new lateral or sewer connections, or whether such
collection line is owned by the Township or owned by any owner
other than the Township. Each separate or additional use shall
represent an equivalent domestic unit and shall be subject to
payment of a tapping fee as stated in Subsection B(2) hereof. The
tapping fee amount shall be set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners for each equivalent dwelling unit
(EDU) located on said property. Each equivalent dwelling unit shall
be charged separately even though two or more domestic units are
or will be connected to either new or existing collection lines
through a single collection line. For nonresidential owners
(commercial, industrial or institutional establishments), the
number of EDUs to be assigned to each owner shall be determined
from the nature of the establishment and estimated according to
the actual hydraulic and/or organic loads which may be or are
discharged into said collection lines. These estimates shall be made
on the basis of the standard loadings established by the DEP for
different types of users. Whenever actual hydraulic and/or organic
loads exceed estimates, an additional tapping fee shall be charged.
Additional tapping fees may also be assessed as stated in
Subsection B(2) hereof.
(2) Where any property or building connected to said connection line
shall be converted, enlarged or remodeled or additional buildings
200-8.2 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-8.2
195:235
shall be constructed on a property and connected indirectly to
said collection line through an existing lateral so as to create or
establish additional business enterprises or uses as classified in
Subsection B(1) hereof, additional tapping fees determined herein
for each such additional use shall be payable to the Township by the
owner of said property regardless of the number of EDUs stated in
any prior approved plan and irrespective of actual metered water
consumption or measured sewage flows.
(3) The fee components included in the tapping fee, calculated by the
Township Engineer pursuant to Act 203 of 1990 and Act 57 of 2003,
are as set forth from time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners and are available for public inspection at the
Township Sewer Department office.
(4) The tapping fee imposed hereunder shall be in addition to:
(a) Any connection fee or inspection charge imposed by the
Township;
(b) Any customer facilities fee imposed by the Township; and
(c) Any rental or other charges fixed, charged or imposed by the
Township by reason of the use or availability for use of the
sewer system by such property.
(5) All tapping fees shall be payable to Upper Allen Township at the
time of application for connection of the improved property to the
sewer system and in the amount in effect at the time the tapping
fees are paid.
(6) Payment of tapping fees charged by the Township pursuant to this
Article shall be enforced by the Township in any manner
appropriate under the laws at the time in effect.
(7) The Township reserves the right, from time to time, to adopt
modifications of, supplements to or amendments of this Article and
to revise and substitute the Schedule of Fees as set forth from time
to time by the Board of Commissioners, which shall be available for
public inspection, to reflect appropriate amendments to the cost
components, design, capacity or other elements of the required
calculations of the tapping fee.
(8) The capacity portion of the sewer tapping fee shall be payable as
follows:
(a) In the event a new development sewer planning module, or a
waiver in lieu thereof, is approved by the Township, the
developer or applicant for a sewer connection or connections
shall pay to the Township the capacity portion of the sewer
tapping fee in effect at the time of submission of the
application for connection, per residence or EDU, and any
200-8.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-8.2
195:236
200-8.3. Time and method of payment of sewer rents.
applicable collection portion of the sewer tapping fee upon
application for a building and zoning permit and sewer permit
for said residence, building or other improvement.
(b) The Township shall allocate capacity to a developer or
applicant who completes an application for and enters into a
reservation of capacity agreement and pays the applicable
reservation of capacity fee, pursuant to the provisions of this
Article, or to the developer or applicant who pays in full the
capacity portion of the tapping fee per residence or EDU.
(c) The developer or applicant is required to either enter into a
reservation of capacity agreement or pay in full the capacity
portion of the tapping fee for each residence or EDU prior to
recording of an approved plan.
A. Sewer rentals or charges imposed by this Article shall be payable
quarterly.
B. All bills with respect to billing units shall be rendered each calendar
quarter on the first days of January, April, July and October of each year
for service during the preceding quarter annum.
C. Sewer rentals or charges shall be due and payable five days after
mailing or delivery by or in behalf of this Township to the person
responsible for payment thereof and shall be payable at the Township
Building, 100 Gettysburg Pike, Upper Allen Township, Pennsylvania. If
sewer rentals or charges are not paid within 30 calendar days after the
same become due and payable, an additional sum of 10% shall be added
to such net bill, which net bill, plus such additional sum, shall constitute
the gross bill. Payment received on or before the last day of such thirtycalendar-
day period shall constitute payment within such period. If the
end of such thirty-calendar-day period falls on a legal holiday or on a
Sunday, payment made on or mailed and postmarked on the next
succeeding business day which is not a legal holiday shall constitute
payment within such period. If sewer rentals and charges are not paid
within 60 calendar days after the same become due and payable, the
bill therefor, in addition to bearing the aforesaid charge of 10%, shall
also bear interest at the rate of 1/2% per month, or fraction thereof,
from the due date of payment.
D. Whenever service to any improved property shall begin after the first
day or shall terminate before the last day of any quarterly billing period,
sewer rentals or charges for such period shall be prorated equitably, if
appropriate, for that portion of the quarterly billing period during
which such improved property was served by the sewer system.
E. The Township may suspend sewer rentals or charges to owners of
unoccupied improved property not utilizing the sewer system if and
200-8.2 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-8.3
195:237
200-8.4. Delinquent sewer rents.
In the event that an owner of improved property connected to and served by
the sewer system does not pay quarterly rentals or charges on or before the
applicable billing due dates, the Township, at its discretion, may, in addition
to collecting late fees imposed under § 200-8.3, exercise any or all of the
following remedies:
only if the property owners provide the Township with advance notice
of their intention not to utilize the sewer system for a period of time and
if the public utility providing water service disconnects service to the
improved property, or the owner of the improved property not serviced
by public water service renders the owner's private water system or
sewer plumbing inoperable to the satisfaction of the Township. In the
event that a property is abandoned and the owner cannot be located
or is deceased, and the Township has verified that water service has
been terminated and/or private water system or sewer system plumbing
has been rendered inoperable, the Township may also suspend sewer
rentals or charges until such time that it has been determined by the
Township that the private sewer system is in use.
A. If an account is three or more quarters overdue, the Township shall mail
a first warning letter to the property owner via regular mail. This gives
the owner of the property 10 days to pay the balance or make payment
arrangements by signing a promissory judgment note.
B. If after 10 days of the first warning letter a delinquent account has not
been paid, or the property owner has not made suitable payment
arrangements with the Township, the Township may file a municipal
lien against the improved property so connected to and served by the
sewer system, which lien shall be filed with the office of the
Prothonotary of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, and shall be
collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and collecting of
municipal claims.
C. The Township shall ensure that the owner is not in bankruptcy
proceedings prior to filing a lien. In the event that the owner has filed
for bankruptcy, only the post-petition obligations are subject to
collection actions, as the pre-petition obligations are covered by the
automatic stay. The Township may file a lien on any post-petition past
due balance and treat it as any other delinquent account.
D. After a lien is filed, a time-stamped copy of the lien and a second
notification letter shall be sent to the property owner via certified and
regular mail, advising that the owner has 10 days to pay the balance
due or to make payment arrangements with the Township, and warning
of possible water service termination.
E. Water service termination is permitted by Pennsylvania law under the
provisions of the Water Service Act, 53 P.S. § 3102.101. If after 10 days
the owner has made no effort to reconcile his/her sewer account, a
200-8.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-8.4
195:238
200-8.5. Schedule of sewer rents and fees.
The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the Township's Schedule
of Charges and Fees, as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners and available for inspection at the Township office.
200-8.6. Waste surcharge.
water termination letter along with a copy of the Responsible Utility
Customer Protection Act of 2004 is sent via certified mail and regular
mail to the property owner explaining that he has an additional 10 days
to pay or the water service will be terminated. This letter is also posted
on the property and on the front door of the residence at the time of
posting. Said action shall result in additional charges becoming due and
payable, including any fee imposed by the water utility.
F. After the passage of 10 days without communication from the owner,
the Township will initiate water service termination. The water
company, per its policies, may terminate service Monday through
Thursday of each week, but not preceding a holiday weekend. The
water company charges a fee to terminate and reconnect service. This
fee is charged by the Township to the customer's sewer account.
G. If a delinquent property owner does not fulfill his obligations following
water termination posting, and the water to the property is shut off, the
residence may be determined uninhabitable and/or the Township may
pursue legal action through a writ of scire facias or a civil complaint.
H. Initiate civil proceedings, the costs of which shall be borne by the
owner of the improved property.
I. Initiate execution proceedings, including but not limited to securing
issuance of writ of scire fascias.
J. File a post-petition bankruptcy claim in accordance with the terms set
forth in Bankruptcy Code Section 366, Utility Service.
K. Utilize any new remedy hereinafter adopted by the Township's Board of
Commissioners relative to the collection of delinquent sewer rentals or
charges, including referring delinquent rentals or charge accounts to
an approved agency for collection, with all costs to the Township
therefor to be borne by the owner of the improved property.
L. At said time when full payment is made on a delinquent account for
which a property lien has been filed, the Township shall file a lien
satisfaction with the office of the Prothonotary of Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, with all costs related thereto to be borne by the owner of
the improved property.
A. Initial survey. The Township may make an initial survey of the discharge
from nonresidential establishments to determine the applicability of the
surcharge. The survey shall consist of suitable sampling and analysis of
200-8.4 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-8.6
195:239
the wastewaters for three consecutive days during a period of normal
industrial or commercial operation. Based on the survey results, the
Township may institute the surcharge and/or require the owner to
provide such tests, equipment and information, which will provide a
further basis for determination of the surcharge.
B. Frequency of surcharge monitoring. Following the initial survey, the
Township shall determine whether monthly monitoring shall be
conducted or whether standard waste strengths based on a waste
classification system established for similar operations may be
imposed. Site-specific monitoring shall consist of no less than three
samples per quarter, preferably one sample per month.
C. Data to determine surcharge. The surcharge shall be based on the
volume of wastewater used for billing purposes, for the appropriate
period, and the concentration of surchargeable pollutants measured in
a composite sample taken over the duration of the discharge or 24
hours, whichever is shorter. In lieu of monitoring at certain
nonresidential establishments for which waste strength characteristics
have been established, the published concentrations may be used if
agreed upon by both the Township and the industrial user. The cost of
obtaining all information required to determine the surcharge shall be
borne by the industrial user. This includes, but not by way of limitation,
the costs of sample collection, flow measurement, laboratory analysis
and engineering analysis. In establishing pollutant concentrations for
surcharge purposes, all analytical and sampling procedures shall be
conducted in accordance with 40 CFR 136, as amended.
D. Surcharge limits and calculation.
(1) Although the wastewater treatment facilities may be capable of
treating industrial wastewater in excess of typical domestic
wastewater concentrations, the actual treatment of such
wastewaters may increase the cost of operating and maintaining
the wastewater treatment facilities. Therefore, a surcharge shall be
imposed on each user discharging wastewater in excess of the
concentrations provided below:
Type
Concentration
(mg/l)
Biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD)
300
Ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) 50
Total phosphorus (Total P) 12
Total suspended solids (TSS) 300
(2) The surcharge shall be calculated according to the following
formula:
200-8.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-8.6
195:240
S = 8.34 x Q x {[(BOD-300) x TBOD] + [(NH3-N-50) x TNH3-N] +
[(P-12) x TP] + [(TSS-300) x TTSS]
Where:
S = Surcharge cost
8.34 = Constant to convert wastewater strength
expressed in mg/l to pounds
Q = Quarterly user flow, mg
BOD = User quarterly average BOD concentration, mg/l
TBOD = Cost to treat one pound of BOD; determined
annually based on actual O&M costs and
adopted by resolution of the Township
NH3-N = User quarterly average NH3-N concentration,
mg/l
TNH3-N = Cost to treat one pound of NH3-N; determined
annually based on actual O&M costs and
adopted by resolution of the Township
P = User quarterly average P concentration, mg/l
TP = Cost to treat one pound of P; determined
annually based on actual O&M costs and
adopted by resolution of the Township
TSS = User quarterly average TSS concentration, mg/l
TTSS = Cost to treat one pound of TSS; determined
annually based on actual O&M costs and
adopted by resolution of the Township
(3) When a user's quarterly average concentrations for BOD, NH3-N,
Total P and TSS are less than the surcharge levels stipulated above,
the surcharge concentration shall be used in the surcharge
formula, in effect creating no-surcharge cost.
E. Method of measuring volume.
(1) Whenever the entire water supply of an improved property, or, if
applicable, a billing unit or billing units located therein,
constituting an industrial establishment which shall be discharging
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into the sewer system is
supplied by the water system, the volume of water furnished, as
determined from meter readings of the water system, shall be used
as the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or industrial
wastes in computing sewer rentals or charges, subject to
adjustments, if appropriate, as provided in this Article.
(2) Whenever an improved property, or, if applicable, a billing unit or
billing units located therein, constituting an industrial
establishment which shall be discharging sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes into the sewer system shall have a source or
200-8.6 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-8.6
195:241
sources of water supply in addition to or other than the water
system, the owner of such improved property shall provide a meter
or meters on such additional or other source or sources of water
supply. The total volume consumed, as determined from the meter
readings of the water system and/or the meter readings of the
meter or meters on such other source or sources of water supply, as
appropriate, shall be used as the measure of discharge of sanitary
sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing the sewer rentals or
charges, subject to adjustment, if appropriate, as provided in this
Article.
(3) Whenever an improved property, or, if applicable, a billing unit or
billing units located therein, constituting an industrial
establishment shall use water from the water system and/or water
from a source or sources of supply in addition to or other than the
water system for cooling or unpolluted commercial or industrial
process purposes and all or part of the water so used shall not be
discharged into the sewer system, the volume used as the measure
of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in
computing sewer rentals or charges may be adjusted by one of the
following methods:
(a) By installing a meter or other measuring device on the
connection to the sewer system. The readings from such meter
or measuring device shall be used as the measure of discharge
of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing
sewer rentals or charges.
(b) By installing a meter or other measuring device to measure the
volume not being discharged into the sewer system. The
readings from such meter or measuring device shall be
deducted from the total water meter readings, and the
remainder shall be used as the measure of discharge of
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing sewer
rentals or charges.
(c) If it is not practical, in the opinion of this Township, to install a
meter or other measuring device to determine continuously the
volume not discharged into the sewer system, this Township
shall determine, in such manner and by such method as it may
prescribe, the percentage of metered water which is being
discharged into the sewer system. The quantity of water used
as the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals or charges shall
be the percentage so determined of the quantity measured by
the water meter or meters. Any dispute as to such estimated
percentage shall be submitted to this Township, after notice of
such estimate. The decision of the Township with respect to the
matter shall be final for the then current calendar year.
200-8.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-8.6
195:242
200-8.7. Pretreatment charges and fees.
The Township may adopt charges and fees for reimbursement of costs
for the development, implementation and operation of an industrial
pretreatment program as follows:
(4) Whenever an industrial establishment shall discharge only
industrial wastes into the sewer system, the volume of water used,
measured as herein provided, shall be used as a measure of the
quantity of industrial wastes so discharged.
F. Measuring devices. Meters or other measuring devices which shall not
be available in connection with the water system but which shall be
required or permitted under provisions of this Article shall be furnished
and installed in accordance with specifications of this Township by the
owner of the improved property at his/her expense and shall be under
the control of this Township and may be tested, inspected or repaired
by this Township whenever necessary. The owner of the improved
property upon which such meter or other measuring device shall be
installed shall be responsible for its maintenance and safekeeping; and
all repairs thereto shall be made at the expense of the owner, whether
such repairs shall be made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or
other cause. Bills for such repairs, if made by this Township, shall be
due and payable immediately upon completion of such repairs and shall
be collected in the same manner as quarterly bills for sewer rentals or
charges.
G. Meter readings. This Township, except to that extent that meter
readings are made by any other person in connection with the water
system and are made available to this Township for purposes of this
Article, shall be responsible for the reading of all meters or other
measuring devices, and the same shall be available to this Township at
all reasonable times.
H. Payment of waste surcharge. Quarterly waste surcharges shall become
due on the last day of each quarter of each calendar year.
A. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost
of processing such applications.
B. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures, including
the cost for the sampling and analysis of an industrial user's
wastewater discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by
industrial users.
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharges and
construction.
D. Fees for filing appeals.
E. Other fees as the Township may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
200-8.6 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-8.7
195:243
200-8.8. Reservation of capacity procedures and fees.
covered by these rates, rules and regulations and are separate from all
other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the Township.
A. Reservation of capacity application.
(1) Reservation of capacity in the Township's sanitary sewer system is
not required, but is offered as an accommodation of the expressed
desire of the applicant to have the Township's commitment of
capacity availability; all owners and developers desiring said
capacity reservation shall, within five days of receipt of DEP
planning module approval, submit a completed reservation of
capacity (ROC) application to the Board of Commissioners which
shall identify the site information and requested allocation to and
reservation of sanitary sewer capacity for the development in terms
of the number of EDUs applicable to said development. Copies of
the ROC application form are available at the Township Sewer
Department office.
(2) The Township shall, in its sole discretion, based upon competent
engineering advice and all other factors and conditions relating to
the sanitary sewage system existing at the time of consideration of
the application and the particular development plan, determine the
sewer capacity, if any, to be allocated to and reserved by the
applicant for the development.
(3) All owners or developers of a subdivision or land development
shall, within five days of final plan approval by the Board of
Commissioners, either pay in full the capacity portion of the
tapping fee for each EDU approved in the planning module or enter
into a reservation of capacity agreement with the Township as
provided herein, which said agreement shall set forth the sewer
capacity reserved, the calculation of the amount of the ROC fee
payment, and acknowledgement of receipt of said payment. Said
reservation of capacity agreement shall be valid for a period of five
years from the date of the agreement.
B. Assignment of capacity.
(1) Owners and developers will be required to either pay in full the
capacity portion of the tapping fee for each EDU approved in the
planning module or enter into a reservation of capacity agreement
with the Township, upon approval by the Township of the owners'
or developers' applications, and shall do so within five days of
approval of the final plan by the Board of Commissioners. Blank
copies of the ROC agreement are available at the Township Sewer
Department office.
(2) Upon receipt of full payment of the capacity portion of the tapping
fee for each EDU approved in the planning module, or upon receipt
200-8.7 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-8.8
195:244
of the capacity reservation application from the applicant, approval
of the agreement by the Board of Commissioners, execution of this
agreement, and payment of the fees specified in the applicable rate
schedule of the Township, the reservation will be effective.
(3) The applicant recognizes and acknowledges that the capacity
reservation fee addressed in this agreement is only a reservation
fee, which is not applied to or credited to the tapping fees or other
charges or fees imposed upon the applicant by the Township and is
not refundable.
(4) The applicant agrees to remit to the Township the quarterly
capacity reservation charges specified in response to the applicant
and as billed by the Township on a quarterly basis.
(5) Sewer capacity allocated to and reserved by an owner or developer
for a specific subdivision or land development shall apply to and be
valid only for such subdivision or land development, except as
provided hereinafter.
(6) Reserve capacity shall be in the nature of a covenant running with
the land, and, upon the sale or conveyance by any means of any
unimproved lot, parcel, tract or any part of a subdivision or land
development, the reserve capacity applicable to such lot, parcel,
tract or part of the subdivision or land development shall become
the property of the new owner thereof, with or without a formal
assignment of such reserve capacity. The landowner assumes
responsibility for notifying a successor owner of obligations and
responsibilities assumed under the ROC agreement.
(7) Except as provided in Subsection B(6) of this section, reserve
capacity for a subdivision shall not be sold, transferred, or assigned
to any other person for the use of any other subdivision or land
development.
(8) Capacity reservation fees are the obligation of the landowners,
successors and assigns and, in the event of nonpayment, will be
collected as a lien against the land for which the capacity is
reserved.
(9) In the event that the DEP shall fail to issue or shall cancel, revoke
or stay the effectiveness of any permit for any reason, or should it
for any reason impose a ban on connections or extensions to the
Township's sanitary sewer system or wastewater treatment plant,
or Lower Allen Township Authority's facilities, the Township shall
not as a result thereof incur any liability of any nature to a
developer for the allocated reserve capacity.
(10) Capacity reserved in accordance with the application, the
agreement, and the rates, rules and regulations of the Township is
subject to any limitation or restriction placed upon the Township by
any regulatory agency and a determination by the Township that
200-8.8 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-8.8
195:245
the regulatory requirements can be met in a manner deemed to be
in the best interests of the ratepayers.
(11) If, after five years from the date of execution of said reservation of
capacity agreement, the owner or developer has not paid all
tapping fees for all of the capacity originally reserved under said
ROC agreement, the owner or developer shall make application to
the Township for continued reserve capacity if so desired. Said
application shall be processed as a new application in accordance
with the provisions of this Article. Any portion of the capacity
reserved under the original ROC agreement which has not been
used after five years shall be guaranteed to the owner or developer,
provided that the owner or developer has submitted a completed
application for reservation of said capacity at least 30 days before
the expiration of five years from the date of execution of the
original reservation of capacity agreement, and provided that the
Township has determined in its discretion that the owner or
developer is proceeding with development and building
construction at a rate that is acceptable to the Township. Such
renewal application shall be given priority consideration over any
pending initial applications for reserve capacity.
(12) Verification of capacity reservation by the Township to the
applicant does not give the applicant a claim against assets of the
Township or transfer to the applicant an ownership interest in the
Township. However, the applicant does indemnify and hold the
Township harmless of any and all claims relating to capacity
availability and reservation.
(13) The system capacity reserved by an ROC agreement shall be
terminated or altered by the landowner only upon the occurrence
of one of the following events:
(a) Nonapproval of the plan of the development by the Township;
(b) Modification or revision of the plan of development or change
of use of the property; or
(c) Withdrawal of the plan of development documented by the
applicant to the Township with the request that the reserved
capacity be released by the Township;
(d) Tapping fees have not been paid within five years of the signing
of the ROC agreement;
(e) A period of five years from the date of signing of the ROC
agreement has expired; or
(f) As individual units of the property covered by this agreement
apply for and are issued building permits and sewer connection
permits for the respective EDUs reserved under this
agreement.
200-8.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-8.8
195:246
C. Adjustments to capacity. In the event that the reserve capacity allocated
to any owner or developer shall be determined to be in excess of or
insufficient for the subdivision or land development, and the owner or
developer desires to request additional reserve capacity or release the
capacity reserved, such request shall be processed as a new application
in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
D. Cancellation of capacity. A developer may, at any time, upon written
application to and approval thereof by the Township, cancel all or any
portion of the reserve capacity allocated to and reserved by said owner
or developer. Such cancellation shall be effective as of the beginning of
the next full month following cancellation, and any prorated unused
reservation of capacity fee will be refunded to the owner or developer.
E. Amount of reservation of capacity fee.
(1) Itemizations of the fixed operating expenses and debt associated
with the Township sewer system and the calculation of the
maximum reservation of capacity fee payable with respect to
capacity reserved by the Township for each EDU are available for
inspection at the Township Sewer Department office. The
referenced ROC fee determination indicates that the maximum
amount of the annual reservation of capacity fee, in accordance
with Act 57 of 2003, is equal to 60% of the average user fee
charged in association with the Township's sewer system. The
Township hereby fixes and imposes a reservation of capacity fee in
the amount of 60% of the then current user fee as identified in the
Township Schedule of Fees, as set forth from time to time by the
Board of Commissioners.
(2) The rates established for the reservation of capacity fee as set forth
herein may be amended hereafter from time to time by the Board
by duly adopted resolution, but in no event shall such rates be
greater than 60% of the average annual sanitary sewer bill for a
residential customer for the same billing period.
(3) The Township shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge
and collect rates, assessments and other charges in the area served
by its facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by
applicable law.
F. Adjustments to charges. Annually, after completion of the annual billing
period, an owner or developer who has reserved sanitary sewer
capacity may apply to the Township to have the reserve capacity and
annual rental charges adjusted to reflect capacity utilized by
connection to the sanitary sewage system during the preceding period.
(1) Residential subdivisions. For each dwelling unit connected to the
system during such period, the owner or developer's reserve
capacity shall be reduced by one dwelling unit, and the annual
reservation of capacity charge for the current period shall be
reduced to reflect each dwelling unit so connected.
200-8.8 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-8.8
195:247
(2) Nonresidential or other subdivisions, land developments and
projects. For the number of gallons of average daily flow connected
to the sewer system during such period, the owner or developer's
reserve capacity as calculated by EDUs shall be reduced by that
number of gallons, and the annual rental charge of the number of
EDUs for the current period shall be reduced to reflect the number
of gallons so connected.
G. Due dates and collection.
(1) The reservation of capacity fee shall become payable by an owner
or developer to the Township within five days of the date that the
final plan is approved by the Board.
(2) The reservation of capacity fee shall be paid in advance annually as
of the first day of the month of each calendar year after the
reservation of capacity agreement is approved by the Township.
(3) The reservation of capacity fee shall be payable for each EDU as
approved in the planning module.
(4) If any fee is canceled pursuant to this Article during the year, its
amount due shall be prorated and the unused charges shall be
repaid to the applicant.
H. Failure to pay charges.
(1) A penalty payable at the rate of 1% per month of the outstanding
sewer reserve capacity fee shall be added 30 days after the date
upon which an annual payment is due and remains unpaid.
(2) The Township shall not issue an occupancy or construction permit
to or for the use of an owner or developer of a subdivision or land
development for which a payment is due.
(3) All payments which shall be due and remain unpaid for a period of
90 days shall be entered as a lien pursuant to the Municipal Lien
Law against the real estate of the developer for which such charges
were unpaid.62
(4) The Township may, in its discretion, cancel all or any portion of the
remaining reserve capacity of a subdivision or land development
for which a payment shall be due and remain unpaid for a period of
90 days.
62.Editor's Note: See the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
200-8.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-8.8
195:248
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement of Industrial Waste Regulations; Remedies; Appeals
200-9.1. Administrative remedies.
A. Right to refuse. The Township reserves the right to refuse to accept
wastewater or combinations of wastewater which are discharged in
violation of the terms or conditions of this chapter or the orders of the
Township issued pursuant to the conditions of this chapter. The
Township may take such steps as it deems necessary to compel
discontinuance of use of the sewer system or pretreatment of industrial
wastes in order to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The
Township may exercise its right of refusal by denial of issuance of a
wastewater discharge permit; in such a case the discharge of the
subject industrial waste is prohibited.
B. Notice of violation. When the Township finds that an industrial user has
violated, or continues to violate these regulations, a wastewater
discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Township may issue a written notice of
violation to the industrial user. Within 30 days of the receipt of the
notice of violation (or such other time as provided by the Township), an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction
and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be
submitted by the industrial user to the Township. Submission of this
plan in no way relieves the industrial user of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in
this section shall limit the authority of the Township to take any action,
including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
C. Administrative orders. The Township may issue written directions, as
described in Subsection D of this section, without a show cause hearing
if the Township determines that such directions are necessary to
correct conditions or remedy continuing noncompliances with these
regulations or any wastewater discharge permit or other requirements
of the industrial pretreatment program or directions of the Township or
federal or state regulations. Failure of an industrial user to comply with
written directions issued pursuant to this subsection constitutes a
separate and distinct noncompliance with these regulations.
D. Show cause hearing.
(1) The Township may order any industrial user who causes or allows
an unauthorized discharge to enter the sewer system or who
violates any condition or requirement of the industrial
pretreatment program, its wastewater discharge permit or any
pretreatment standard or requirement to show cause before the
Township why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. A notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the
time and place of a hearing to be held by the Township regarding
200-9.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-9.1
195:249
the violation, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons
why the action is to be taken and directing the industrial user to
show cause before the Board of Commissioners why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may
be made on any agent or officer of a corporation if the industrial
user is a corporation.
(2) The Board of Commissioners may itself conduct the hearing and
take the evidence or may designate any of its members or any
employee, agent or representative of the Township to:
(a) Issue in the name of the Township notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(b) Take the evidence.
(c) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Township for action thereon.
(3) At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken may
be under oath and recorded electronically or stenographically. The
transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of
the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual
charges therefor.
(4) After the Township has reviewed the evidence, it may, in writing,
direct the industrial user to take certain actions to correct the
unauthorized discharge or to achieve compliance. The direction
may be in the form of a schedule for compliance, setting dates by
which certain actions shall be taken. The actions which may be
directed include, but are not limited to:
(a) Installation of pretreatment facilities or equipment.
(b) Modification or additions to existing pretreatment facilities or
equipment.
(c) Initiation of management practices which are required to alter
the nature of the industrial waste being discharged.
(d) Development or implementation of PPC plans or other
measures.
(e) Other measures found to be necessary to correct the
unauthorized discharge or other noncompliance.
200-9.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-9.1
195:250
(5) Failure of an industrial user to comply with written directions
issued pursuant to a hearing constitutes a separate and distinct
noncompliance with this chapter.
E. Right of appeal.
(1) An industrial user may appeal the enforcement actions enumerated
in this section, the denial of issuance of a wastewater discharge
permit, or conditions contained in a wastewater discharge permit.
A notice of violation or notice to appear at a show cause hearing
shall not be appealed. An appeal is subject to the following
requirements:
(a) An appeal shall be made in writing to the Township.
(b) An appeal must be made within 30 calendar days from the date
of receipt of the wastewater discharge permit or revision to a
wastewater discharge permit, notice of denial of issuance of a
wastewater discharge permit, receipt of written directions, or
notice of suspension or revocation of a wastewater discharge
permit, which action is being appealed by the industrial user.
(c) The appeal must state the specific provision(s) of a wastewater
discharge permit or the specific action(s) of the Township
which are being contested.
(d) The appeal must state the reasons for the appeal of each
provision or action.
(e) The appeal may suggest alternate or revised provisions or
actions to replace those appealed.
(f) An appeal of a wastewater discharge permit may include a
request to stay specific permit conditions pending the outcome
of the appeal. Any such request shall include all factual and
legal justification for such a request.
(2) Provisions specifically mandated by federal or state regulations
(e.g., compliance with federal categorical pretreatment standards)
shall not be appealed. Conditions which, in the opinion of the
Township, may constitute a hazard or pose a potential threat of
pollution if stayed shall not be stayed during an appeal. Grant of a
stay of permit conditions during an appeal shall be made at the sole
discretion of the Township.
(3) The appeal shall be reviewed by any designated representative(s)
of the Township, provided:
(a) The representative shall not be the Township Manager.
(b) The representative shall not be the Pretreatment Coordinator
if the Pretreatment Coordinator is the individual who took the
200-9.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-9.1
195:251
action being appealed (e.g., issuance of a wastewater
discharge permit).
(4) Within 60 days of receipt, the representative(s) reviewing the
appeal shall report in writing to the Township the results of the
review. The report shall contain, at a minimum:
(a) A summary of each item appealed, the appellant's reasons for
appeal and the appellant's proposed remedies, if any. A copy of
the appeal itself may suffice to provide this information.
(b) The finding of merit for each point of appeal and the reason(s)
for so finding.
(c) For each point of appeal found to be with merit, a proposed
remedy and a finding that the remedy is allowable under this
chapter and all applicable federal, state and local rules,
regulations and laws.
(5) Review of appeal and report.
(a) The Township or a board of appeal appointed by the Township
may, upon its own initiative or in response to a request by the
permittee, review the appeal and the report and, at one or
more regular or special public meetings, take any additional
testimony offered by the appellant, reviewer, Pretreatment
Program Coordinator or other interested party. The Township
or the board of appeal, if invested with the power to act on
behalf of the Township, may, within a reasonable time, decide
to:
[1] Grant a stay of wastewater discharge permit conditions
pending a final decision on the merits of a permit appeal
(this decision may be made at a separate meeting from the
determination of the merits of an appeal so as to provide a
timely response to the request for a stay of conditions);
[2] Grant the appeal or portions of the appeal, applying such
remedies as it deems proper; or
[3] Deny the appeal or portions of the appeal.
(b) The decision to grant, partially grant or deny an appeal
constitutes final administrative action.
(6) If the Township or any hearing board appointed by the Township
shall have as a member any person who has a financial, legal or
other proprietary interest in the industrial user bringing the
appeal, such person shall recuse himself from any vote which shall
determine the decision of the body in regard to the appeal.
(7) Action of the Township for which review had been available (e.g.,
adoption of a resolution or issuance, modification, suspension or
200-9.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-9.1
195:252
200-9.2. Judicial remedies.
revocation of a wastewater discharge permit) shall not be subject
to administrative or judicial review in any civil or criminal
proceeding for enforcement.
F. Termination of sewer service. The Township may immediately suspend
an industrial user's discharge, after notice to the industrial user,
whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
Township may also immediately suspend an industrial user's discharge,
after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with
the operation of the sewage treatment plant, or which presents, or may
present, an endangerment to the environment. Nothing in this
subsection shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any
termination of sewer service under this subsection.
(1) Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate the discharge to the sewage
treatment plant. In the event of a failure by the industrial user to
immediately comply voluntarily with the termination order, the
Township shall take steps, as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the sewage treatment plant, its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Township shall
allow the industrial user to recommence its discharge when the
industrial user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Township that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the
termination proceedings set forth in § 200-6.8F of Article VI of
these regulations are initiated against the industrial user.
(2) An industrial user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a
detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence to the Township within five days of the date of
occurrence as stipulated in § 200-7.6 of Article VII of these
regulations or prior to the date of any show cause hearing under
Subsection D of this section, whichever date is earlier.
A. Injunctive relief. When the Township finds that an industrial user has
violated or continues to violate these regulations or a wastewater
discharge permit issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, or determines that the discharge from an industrial
user presents imminent or substantial harm to the sewer system or the
public, the discharge from the industrial user causes the sewage
treatment plant to violate any condition of its NPDES permit, or the
industrial user has shown a lack of ability or intention to comply with a
pretreatment standard, the Township may petition the Court of
Common Pleas for Cumberland County, through the Township Solicitor,
200-9.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-9.2
195:253
200-9.3. Affirmative defenses.
for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, or other requirement imposed by these
regulations, on the activities of the industrial user.
B. Civil remedies. When the Township finds that an industrial user has
violated or continues to violate these regulations or a wastewater
discharge permit issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Township may recover costs for reestablishing the
operation of the sewage treatment plant, cost for reasonable attorneys'
fees, court costs and other expenses associated with the enforcement
activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of
any actual damages incurred by the Township.
C. Criminal prosecution. Any industrial user that has willfully or
negligently violated or continues to violate these regulations or a
wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, may be subject to criminal
liability under federal, state and/or local law.
D. Falsifying information. Any industrial user who knowingly makes any
false statements, representations or certifications in any application,
record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to these regulations or wastewater discharge
permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under these regulations, may
be subject to criminal liability under federal, state and/or local law.
E. Civil/criminal penalties for industrial users. Any person who violates
any of the terms, provisions or requirements of the pretreatment
program or any of the applicable rules and regulations or whoever
refuses or neglects to comply with any notice given pursuant to the
pretreatment program to such person or whoever obstructs or
interferes with any person in the enforcement of the pretreatment
program shall, upon conviction thereof, severally for each and every
such violation or noncompliance, respectively, be fined $1,000 and/or
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each twenty-four-hour
period during which a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense and punishable as such.
A. Treatment upsets.
(1) For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with federal categorical pretreatment standards
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial
user.
200-9.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-9.3
195:254
(2) An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.
(3) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with federal categorical pretreatment
standards if the requirements of this section are met. An industrial
user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of "upset"
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:
(a) An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset.
(b) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable
operation and maintenance procedures.
(c) The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the Township within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset.
If this information is provided orally, a written submission must
be provided within five days from the date the industrial user
became aware of the upset. The written submission shall
include the following information:
[1] A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
[2] The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and
times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue.
[3] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(4) In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
An industrial user will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action
brought for noncompliance with federal categorical pretreatment
standards. The industrial user shall control production of all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with
federal categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or
failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
B. Treatment bypasses. For the purposes of this section, "bypass" means
the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user's treatment facility. "Severe property damage" means
200-9.3 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-9.3
195:255
substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment
facilities, which causes them to be inoperable, or substantial and
permanent loss of natural resources, which can reasonably be expected
to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does
not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. An industrial
user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential
maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system.
These types of bypasses are not subject to the following provisions:
(1) Industrial users anticipating a bypass must submit notice to the
Township at least 10 days in advance, if possible. Industrial users
shall provide oral notice to the Township within 24 hours of
discovery of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards. Industrial users shall submit a written
report to the Township within five days of becoming aware of the
bypass. The written report shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause, the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated
time it is expected to continue, and steps being taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The
Township may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if
the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
(2) A bypass of the treatment system without Township approval is
prohibited and the Township may take an enforcement action
against an industrial user for a bypass unless all of the following
conditions are met:
(a) The bypass is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage.
(b) There is no feasible alternative to the bypass, including the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastewater, or maintenance during normal periods of
equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate
backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance.
(c) The industrial user properly notifies the Township as described
in this section.
(3) The Township may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the Township determines that the
industrial user will meet the conditions in this section.
200-9.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-9.3
195:256
ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous Provisions
200-10.1. Fee schedules.
The Township Schedule of Fees and Charges, as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners and in effect as of the date of
adoption of these rates, rules and regulations, shall remain in full force and
effect and are adopted hereby by reference thereto.
200-10.2. Reservation of rights.
Notwithstanding any other pretreatment provision to the contrary, nothing
in these rates, rules and regulations shall be deemed to be a legally binding
commitment under the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), the Clean
Streams Law, (35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.) and applicable regulations (e.g., 40
CFR 403, Title 25 Pa. Code) for the Township to undertake pretreatment
implementation or enforcement activities beyond the minimum otherwise
required by federal and state laws and regulations. Township
implementation of pretreatment provisions for significant industrial users
will be reflected in a wastewater discharge permit, as provided for by
§ 200-6.2 of these rates, rules and regulations. Nevertheless, the Township
maintains its discretionary authority to undertake pretreatment activities
beyond the minimum required.
200-10.3. Amendments.
The Township reserves the right to change or amend, from time to time,
these rates, rules and regulations in accordance with law. No officer or
employee of the Township can vary these rates, rules and regulations
without action of the Township Board, and the Township may not be bound
by any agent or employee's act or representation, except when authorized
in writing by an executive officer of the Township Board.
200-10.4. Severability.
If any word, sentence, paragraph, provision, section or part of these rates,
rules and regulations is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction,
the remaining words, sentences, paragraphs, provisions, sections or parts
shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
200-10.5. Repealer.
All other rates, rules and regulations and resolutions and parts of other
rates, rules and regulations and resolutions inconsistent with or conflicting
with any part of these rates, rules and regulations are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
200-10.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-10.6
195:257
200-10.6. Conflicts with other legislation.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance
or code of this Township existing on the effective date of this chapter,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case
where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision
of any other ordinance or code of the Township existing on the effective
date of this chapter which establishes a lower standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinance or codes are
hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found to be
in conflict with this chapter.
200-10.7. Right of Township to refuse connection or compel
discontinuance of use.
This Township reserves the right to refuse to any person the privilege
of connection of any improved property to a sewer or to compel
discontinuance of use of a sewer by any person or to compel the
pretreatment of industrial wastes in order to prevent discharge into the
sewer system of wastes which may be deemed by this Township to be
harmful to the sewer system or to have a deleterious effect on sewage
treatment process.
200-10.8. Right of Access by Township.
This Township shall have the right of access at reasonable times to any
part of any improved property served by the sewer system as shall be
required for purposes of inspection, measurement, sampling and testing
and for performance of other functions relating to service rendered by this
Township through the sewer system.
200-10.9. Nonliability of Township.
The Township shall not be liable for a deficiency or failure of service when
occasioned by emergency or required repairs or for any cause beyond its
control. The Township reserves the right to restrict the use of sewer service
whenever the public welfare may require it.
200-10.10. Adoption of additional rules and regulations.
This Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a sewer and the sewer system, which additional rules and
regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be construed as
part of this chapter.
200-10.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-10.11
195:258
200-10.11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be liable, upon summary
conviction for a first offense and upon summary conviction for each
subsequent offense, to a fine of not more than $1,000, together with costs
of prosecution in each case. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be
deemed and shall be taken to be a separate offense and shall be punishable
as such.
200-10.12. Recovery of fines and costs.
Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this chapter shall be
enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by
applicable law.
200-10.13. Effective date.
These rates, rules and regulations shall take effect on March 19, 2014.
200-10.11 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-10.13
195:259

ARTICLE XI
Special Sewer Districts
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 741; amended 8-16-2017 by Ord. No.
767; 4-4-2018 by Ord. No. 777]
200-11.1. Creation of Special Sewer Districts.
200-11.2. Rates and fees
A. Spring Run Interceptor Special Sewer District. There is hereby created
a Special Sewer District known as the "Spring Run Interceptor Special
Sewer District," composed of a portion of drainage basin LS-06 and all
of drainage basins LS-07, LS-08, LS-09 and LS-10 as set forth in the
plan attached hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit A.63 The Special
Sewer District consists of those properties located within Upper Allen
Township whose sanitary sewer flows are conveyed to the Lower Allen
Township Authority Wastewater Treatment Plant through the Spring
Run interceptor line.
B. Lisburn Trunk Special Sewer District. There is hereby created a Special
Sewer District known as the "Lisburn Trunk Special Sewer District,"
composed of a portion of Township drainage basin G01 and all of
drainage basins G02, G13 and G14, as set forth in the plan attached
hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit B.64 The Special Sewer
District consists of those properties located within Upper Allen
Township whose sanitary sewer flows are conveyed to the Grantham
Wastewater Treatment Plant through the Lisburn trunk and Grantham
interceptor sewer lines.
C. Grantham Interceptor Special Sewer District. There is hereby created a
Special Sewer District known as the "Grantham Interceptor Special
Sewer District," composed of a portion of Township drainage basin G01
and all of drainage basins G03, G04, G05, G06, G07, G08, G09, G10,
G11, G12, G16, G17 and G18, as set forth in the plan attached hereto
and made a part hereof as Exhibit C.65 The Special Sewer District
consists of those properties located within Upper Allen Township whose
sanitary sewer flows are conveyed to the Grantham Wastewater
Treatment Plant through the Grantham interceptor sewer line.
A. Spring Run Interceptor Special Sewer District. Those properties
located within the Spring Run Interceptor Special Sewer District and
connected to the public sanitary sewer system that require an increase
in sewer capacity will be required to pay a reimbursement component
of $1,641.80 per EDU in addition to a tapping fee of $2,805. The fees for
those properties located within the Special Sewer District and
connected to the public sanitary sewer system shall be billed in
63.Editor’s Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
64.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
65.Editor's Note: Exhibit C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
200-11.1 RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF 200-11.2
195:261
200-11.3. Compliance.
Those properties located within the Special Sewer Districts are responsible
for complying with all codes and ordinances of Upper Allen Township,
including Chapter 200, Sewer and Sewage Disposal.
accordance with Upper Allen Township's duly adopted rate schedule, as
may be amended from time to time.
B. Lisburn Trunk Special Sewer District. Those properties located within
the Lisburn Trunk Special Sewer District and connected to the public
sanitary sewer system that require an increase in sewer capacity will be
required to pay a reimbursement component of $914.38 per EDU in
addition to a tapping fee of $2,805. The fees for those properties
located within the Special Sewer District and connected to the public
sanitary sewer system shall be billed in accordance with Upper Allen
Township's duly adopted rate schedule, as may be amended from time
to time.
C. Grantham Interceptor Special Sewer District. Those properties located
within the Grantham Interceptor Special Sewer District and connected
to the public sanitary sewer system that require an increase in sewer
capacity will be required to pay a reimbursement component of $325.06
per EDU in addition to a tapping fee of $2,805.00. The fees for those
properties located within the Special Sewer District and connected to
the public sanitary sewer system shall be billed in accordance with
Upper Allen Township's duly adopted rate schedule, as may be
amended from time to time.
200-11.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE 200-11.3
195:262
Chapter 204
(RESERVED)
Chapter 205
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 317.
§ 205-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated herein. (Note: The definitions contained in Chapter 205 have been
amended to correspond to the definitions contained in the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.66)
DRIVEWAY — A minor vehicular right-of-way providing access between a
street and a parking area or garage within a lot or property.
PERSON — One or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees in bankruptcy
or receivers.
PRIVATE OR NONPUBLIC STREETS — All streets which are not public,
including but not limited to streets maintained by private agreements,
by private owners, or for which no maintenance responsibility has been
established.
PUBLIC STREET/ROAD — A street ordained or maintained or dedicated and
accepted by the Township, county, state, or federal government and open to
public use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for
other special use, including a public or private thoroughfare for vehicular
traffic and/or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, land or however
designated.
SIDEWALK/WALKWAY — An area designed for pedestrians constructed to
the standards set forth in the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Subdivision and Land Development.
200-11.3 (RESERVED) § 205-1
204:263
STREET — Street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway,
lane, alley, viaduct, and any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, its Board of Commissioners (Township Commissioners), its
agents or authorized representatives.
§ 205-2. Removal from sidewalks.
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant, jointly and severally, of
every property or parcel of real estate fronting upon or alongside any of
the streets within Upper Allen Township to remove all snow, slush, and
ice along the full width of the sidewalks and across driveways adjoining
said real estate or property within 24 hours after such snow or slush has
ceased to fall or ice to form thereon. Snow, slush and ice shall be removed
in accordance with the following conditions:
§ 205-3. Removal from fire hydrants.
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant, jointly and severally, of
every property or parcel of real estate fronting upon or alongside any of
the streets within Upper Allen Township to remove or cause to be removed
all snow, slush, and ice, or any accumulation and/or impediment which
would limit access to, from, and/or around all of the fire hydrants which are
located on said property, so as to provide immediate access by fire rescue
personnel in cases of emergency. In cases involving a storm, fire hydrants
shall be cleared of all snow, ice, slush, or any combination thereof within 24
hours following the storm; in any event, any accumulation shall be removed
not less than once in every twenty-four-hour period.
A. Fire hydrants shall not be covered.
B. In the event that snow, slush and ice on a sidewalk have become
hardened and cannot be removed without the likelihood of causing
damage to the sidewalk, the person, business or entity charged with
their removal shall, within the time prescribed in this section, cause
sufficient sand or other abrasive to be put on the sidewalk to make
travel thereon reasonably safe. The person, business or entity shall, as
soon as weather permits, cause said sidewalk to be thoroughly cleaned.
C. No snow, slush, ice or a combination thereof shall emanate from a
property or be deposited or pushed from a property onto a street or
right-of-way at any location creating a hazard, including the impairment
of visibility from or to a street or roadway.
D. No person shall damage any Township property, including but not
limited to traffic signs, culverts, etc., while removing snow, ice, slush or
a combination thereof. Any damage to Township property shall be
repaired or replaced in accordance with the requirements of the
Township at the expense of the property owner and/or snow removal
agency.
§ 205-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 205-4
204:264
§ 205-4. Removal from private or nonpublic streets.
It shall be the duty of any person who owns or has a legal duty to maintain
a private or nonpublic street to keep that street passable and drivable by
clearing snow and ice from the street in a timely and reasonable manner
in order to allow for access by emergency service vehicles and personnel.
In order to meet this duty the person shall comply with the following
conditions:
§ 205-5. Removal by Township.
If snow, ice or slush is not removed by an owner or occupant of property in
accordance with §§ 205-2, 205-3 and/or 205-4, the Township shall remove
the snow and ice in accordance with the following conditions:
A. The owner or maintainer of a private or nonpublic street shall not allow
more than four inches of snow or slush to accumulate, or allow ice to
accumulate to a degree which renders the street impassable or unsafe
for travel at any time.
B. The owner or maintainer of a private or nonpublic street shall apply
sufficient amounts of ice melt and/or anti-skid material to the roadway
during icy conditions and/or during freezing temperatures to ensure
that the street is safely passable to all vehicles and pedestrians.
A. The Township shall provide a written notice to the owner or occupant of
the property that the accumulation of snow and ice must be removed
within 24 hours or the Township may remove the snow and ice and
assess the cost of such removal to the owner or occupant.
B. If the accumulation of snow, slush or ice is not removed within 24 hours
of the written notice, the Township may remove the accumulation of
snow, slush or ice.
C. Following the completion of the removal of such snow, slush or ice by
the Township, the Township shall send a report of costs of said snow, ice
or slush removal, together with a notice of payment of costs, to the
party deemed to have violated this chapter by failing to remove the
accumulation of snow, slush or ice.
D. Costs will be based upon the labor and hourly pay rate of the Township
officials or on the prevailing fair market costs, whichever is greater.
E. If such costs are not paid within 10 days from the date of receipt of the
report of costs and notice, the Township shall send a notice of
delinquency to the responsible party with no more than five days to
make payment in full to the Township. If the owner or occupant fails to
respond, the Township may initiate a complaint before the district
justice to enforce compliance with this chapter and recover costs.
F. In no case can the Township be held liable if it does not exercise the
Township option to remove snow, ice, or slush, as enumerated above.
§ 205-4 (RESERVED) § 205-6
204:265
§ 205-6. Administration and penalties.
Chapter 210
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 151.
Junk and junkyards — See Ch. 160.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 189.
A. The Township Zoning/Codes Enforcement Officer or other designated
Township official shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
B. Any person who violates any provisions of § 205-2 or § 205-3 shall be
guilty of a summary offense, and upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $25, plus costs of prosecution of the
violation, and not more than $100, plus costs of prosecution of the
violation. The fine and costs of prosecution of the violation are not
related to any costs assessed under § 205-5.
C. Any person who violates any provisions of § 205-4 shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $100, plus costs of prosecution of the violation, and
not more than $500, plus costs of prosecution of the violation. The fine
and costs of prosecution of the violation are not related to any costs
assessed under § 205-5.
§ 205-6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 205-6
210:266
ARTICLE I
Dumping
[Adopted 2-4-1969 as Ord. No. 127]
§ 210-1. Prohibited disposal practices.
No person, association, firm or corporation shall keep or suffer to remain
on his or her premises or on any private property any garbage, ashes,
rubbish or other refuse or cast the same upon any lot or piece of ground
within the township or upon the shores or margin of any stream or body of
water or upon any street or sidewalk in the township, nor may any person,
association, firm or corporation use or permit to be used any spot or place
within the township as a public or private dump for garbage, ashes, rubbish
or other refuse.67
§ 210-2. Violations and penalties.68
A. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.) and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more
than thirty (30) days, provided that each day's continuance of a
violation of this Article shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In addition to the above penalties, the act in violation of this Article may
be declared by the Commissioners of Upper Allen Township to be a
nuisance and subject to abatement as such, and a violator shall be
subject to all other remedies provided by law.
67.Editor's Note: Original Sections 2 and 3, which contained provisions regarding the
licensing and operation of sanitary landfills within the township, were deleted at time of
adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Article I.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 210-1 SOLID WASTE § 210-2
210:267

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling
[Adopted 7-19-1990 as Ord. No. 433]
§ 210-3. Short title.
This Article shall be known as the "Upper Allen Township Municipal Solid
Waste and Recycling Ordinance."
§ 210-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to provide for the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Township of Upper Allen by regulating the collection,
storage, transportation, removal, dumping, deposit, disposal and recycling
of solid waste by instituting a comprehensive solid waste management
program and establishing a mandatory recycling program pursuant to the
requirements of Act 10169 and amendments thereto.
§ 210-5. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this Article shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this
section:
ALUMINUM CANS — Clean, non-aerosol and empty all-aluminum beverage
and food containers.
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — A person, firm or corporation licensed or
contracted by Upper Allen Township to handle municipal waste and
recyclables in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
BIMETALLIC CONTAINERS — Clean, non-aerosol and empty beverage and
food containers composed of steel and aluminum.
BULKY WASTE — Items of solid waste which due to their size, shape
or weight cannot be collected as a part of the normal weekly municipal
waste collection and, therefore, require special handling. For example,
large household appliances such as stoves and refrigerators, plumbing
fixtures, furniture, large crates, tires, tools, machinery or parts thereof and
similar items in size shall be considered "bulky waste."
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — An entity and the property on which
it operates engaged primarily in activities for commercial or industrial
purposes, including but not limited to stores, markets, office buildings,
restaurants and shopping centers.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Lumber, roofing material,
sheathing, rubble, broken concrete, macadam, plaster and brick, conduit,
pipe, insulation and other materials which result from a construction,
demolition or remodeling process.
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 210-3 SOLID WASTE § 210-5
210:269
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Paper boxes constructed in a corrugated
manner and used as containers for business and consumer applications.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a building
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one (1)
family.
EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT — An agreement entered into by Upper Allen
Township with a private person or corporation for the collection and
disposal of all municipal waste and/or recyclables within the township to the
extent provided by this Article and the agreement.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Clean, non-aerosol and empty steel or tincoated
steel containers for food or beverages.
GLASS — Plain, uncolored or colored glass bottles and jars. Expressly
excluded from this definition of "glass" are blue glass, lead crystal,
porcelain, ceramic products and tempered or plate glass.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper or computer
paper used in commercial, industrial, institutional and municipal
establishments and in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaged in
service to persons, including but not limited to nursing homes, retirement
centers, orphanages, schools and colleges.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar materials, but not including grass clippings.[Added 6-16-2005
by Ord. No. 597]
MULTIFAMILY ESTABLISHMENTS — Rental housing apartment buildings
or apartment complexes which have ten (10) or more dwelling units and
condominium associations and homeowners' associations of ten (10) or
more dwelling units which are established and organized in such a manner
that the association provides common services for the residents of the
housing development. This definition shall also include apartment buildings
and apartment complexes owned and operated by institutional
establishments if the institutional establishment charges a rental fee for the
dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any public facility operated by the
township or other governmental or quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPALITY — Upper Allen Township.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and any other material, including solid waste, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous materials, resulting from the operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous
waste in the Solid Waste Management Act70 from a municipal, commercial
70.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 210-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 210-5
210:270
or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant
or air pollution control facility (Act 101, Section 103).71
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint" and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions
and containing advertisements and matters of public interest, excluding
magazines and glossy advertising inserts often included with newspapers.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTIC BOTTLES — Empty and clean consumer product containers made
of polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polypropylene (PP), high-density
polyethylene (HDPE) and low-density polyethylene (LDPE), most commonly
but not limited to plastic bottles used as containers for soda, milk and other
consumer food products or for household cleaning products or for personal
care products.
RECYCLABLES/RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by
the township for separation, collection, processing, recovery or reuse as
part of a recycling program.
RECYCLING — The program or system of separation, collection, processing,
recovery or reuse of recyclables.
RESIDENTIAL MUNICIPAL WASTE — Municipal waste, as herein defined,
that is generated at a dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — See "dwelling unit."
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and
any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials. (Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, Section
10372)
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials separated at
the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STEEL CANS — Clean, non-aerosol and empty ferrous metal or bimetal
beverage and food containers.
TOWNSHIP — The government jurisdiction and legal entity of Upper Allen
Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
71.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.103.
72.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 6018.103.
§ 210-5 SOLID WASTE § 210-5
210:271
WASTE — Materials whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed, but
it does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
§ 210-6. Duty of property owner and occupants to provide
containers and ensure proper disposal of waste.
It shall be the duty of every owner of property and every person occupying
a dwelling unit, premises or place of business within the township where
municipal waste is generated and accumulated, by his/her own expense
and cost, except as otherwise specified in this Article, to provide and keep
at all times a sufficient number of containers to hold all municipal waste
accumulated between intervals of collection of such waste by an authorized
collector; and to ensure the sanitary and legal disposal of such waste in
accordance with this Article and all other applicable township, state and
federal laws and regulations.
§ 210-7. Storage on residential property.
§ 210-8. Storage on commercial, institutional and industrial
properties.
A. Containers. All municipal waste accumulated by owners of residential
property and/or the occupants of residential properties shall be placed
in containers for collection by an authorized collector. The containers
shall be durable, watertight and made of rust-resistant metal or plastic.
The size of each container shall not exceed a thirty-five-gallon capacity
unless bulk (dumpster-type) containers are used. Containers for
curbside recyclables will be as specified by the township or as provided
by the township directly or through exclusive contract for collection of
recyclables. Use of bulk containers at multifamily establishments shall
be permitted, but they shall comply with the provisions of § 210-8A
below.
B. Location of containers. Each municipal waste container and curbside
recyclable container shall be placed for collection so as to be accessible
to the collector at ground level and at a point immediately behind the
curbline of the street, within no more than ten (10) feet of the cartway
of the street or alley from which the collection with a vehicle is made, if
there is no curbing, or at a location mutually agreeable between the
resident, the township and the collector. Failure to place containers at
such locations may result in waste not being picked up. The location for
collection of uncontainerized recyclable material shall be as specified
by the township. The location of bulk containers at multifamily
establishments shall be in accordance with § 210-8B below.
A. Containers. Storage of municipal waste on commercial, institutional
and industrial properties shall be done in the same type of containers as
required for residential properties except where the accumulation of
solid waste for such commercial, institutional or industrial property
§ 210-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 210-8
210:272
§ 210-9. Unauthorized collection and transport prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation other than persons or
corporations authorized by license or contract by the township to collect
and/or transport solid waste of any nature as a regular hauling business
within or from the township. If the township decides to enter into an
exclusive contract for the collection of residential municipal waste in the
township, said contractor shall be required to collect municipal waste in
the township exclusive of other private haulers and collectors subject to
exceptions to the exclusive township contract. If the township decides to
enter into such an exclusive contract, the township shall not issue a license
to any private hauler or collector for the collection of residential municipal
waste other than the hauler or collector having the exclusive contract with
the township. Authorization to collect, transport and dispose of municipal
waste for persons other than oneself may be given only by the township
through the issuance of a contract or license. All applicants for licensing
shall be reviewed by the township and shall be approved in accordance with
reasonable standards therefor and public bidding requirements developed
therefor by the Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 210-10. Transportation of solid waste.
Any person transporting solid waste within the township shall prevent or
remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the transport of
such solid waste. The vehicles used to transport or convey solid waste shall
be leakproof and enclosed to the extent necessary to ensure no loss or
spilling of waste from the vehicles. The township shall have the authority
to inspect the vehicles used for the transport of solid waste as it deems
necessary.
§ 210-11. Disposal of municipal waste.
All municipal waste produced, collected and transported from within the
jurisdictional limits of the township shall be disposed of at a landfill or
other disposal facility licensed or permitted by the Commonwealth of
precludes their use, in which case such owner or occupant shall make
special arrangements with the authorized collector for the storing of
such additional quantities. Special arrangements shall include the
number and type of special bulk containers to be furnished by the
collector as may be approved by the township.
B. Location of containers. Containers for collection at commercial,
institutional or industrial properties shall be located on the owner's or
occupant's premises at a place agreed upon by the owner or occupant
of the commercial, institutional or industrial property and the
authorized collector and shall not be unsatisfactory to the township.
Such locations shall not interfere with public or private sidewalks,
walkways, driveways, roads, streets, highways or alleys or entrances
and exits of public or private buildings.
§ 210-8 SOLID WASTE § 210-11
210:273
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources or other state
government. However, the township reserves the right to designate a state
permitted facility of its choice and to require that all municipal waste
generated in the township be disposed of at this designated facility. If the
township designates a disposal facility as provided for above, all authorized
(licensed) collectors or collectors operating under contract with the
township for collection of municipal waste shall be informed by the
township of the location, regulations and other information pertaining to
the designated disposal facility. The township reserves the right to make
inspections of authorized collectors to ensure that waste generated within
the township is being disposed of in an authorized or designated facility and
to limit the use of a designated facility only to waste generated within the
township. Any authorized collector found to be in violation of this section
shall have his/her license to collect or haul municipal waste in the township
revoked.
§ 210-12. Unlawful disposition of waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit for collection any solid waste
including bulky items not generated at the address from which collection
is made or to bring any solid waste into the township or from one address
to another in the township for the purpose of taking advantage of the
collection service or to avoid the cost of collection.
§ 210-13. Bulky waste.
Bulky waste which is not collected by the normal or weekly residential
collection shall not be stored outside of a building or accessory building on
any land in the township, except for a period not exceeding fourteen (14)
days pending the special handling for disposal of the bulky waste. However,
brush, tree trimmings, yard clippings, leaves, grass or other waste from live
plantings may be stored for longer periods of time if necessary until the
next scheduled collection for such items or for the purpose of composting or
burning such materials in accordance with the township ordinances, unless
such storage violates other ordinances or regulations of the township. It
shall be unlawful for any person to place bulky waste on any property other
than on the property at which it was generated or directly associated with.
Bulky waste shall be disposed of at a state permitted or licensed disposal
facility, a facility especially designated by the township to take such bulky
items or a legitimate salvage dealer that is in the business of disposing of or
recycling such items.
§ 210-14. Construction and demolition waste.
All waste materials resulting from the building, structural alteration, repair,
construction or demolition of buildings or structures shall be disposed of
as permitted by the regulations of the State Department of Environmental
Resources or pertinent ordinances or regulations of the township. It shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure the disposal of such
waste in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
§ 210-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 210-15
210:274
§ 210-15. Exclusions.
§ 210-16. Duty of owner and occupants to pay service fee.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner of property and every
person occupying a dwelling unit, premises or place of business within the
township where municipal waste is produced and is accumulated to pay a
service fee for the collection and disposal of this waste, except as otherwise
provided by this Article, to a licensed hauler or exclusive contractor or
to the township. A licensed hauler, exclusive contractor or the township
may discontinue service for nonpayment of service fees by a residential,
commercial, institutional or industrial establishment. Discontinuance of
service due to nonpayment of service fees shall not relieve the resident or
establishment from abiding by all of the requirements of this Article.
§ 210-17. Service charges to be based on volume of waste collected.
To encourage and maximize recycling, all municipal waste service charges
for the collection and disposal of municipal waste paid either to a licensed
hauler, an exclusive contractor or the township shall be based upon the
volume of waste collected at the commercial, institutional or industrial
establishment. At multifamily residential units, service charges shall be
based on volume to the extent that any amount over five (5) cans or bags
per week or the equivalent is exceeded on a volume basis.
§ 210-18. Service fees to be established by contract.
All service fees established under an exclusive contract for the collection
of waste in the township shall be established and adjusted by contract
awarded by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to public bidding.
A. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person not
regularly engaged in the business of collecting municipal waste from
hauling his/her own municipal waste on an irregular or unscheduled
basis to a state permitted disposal facility or to the disposal facility as
designated by the township in accordance with the regulations of the
disposal facility.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out
normal farming operations, including composting or spreading of
manure or other farm-produced agricultural waste not otherwise
prohibited or regulated for land applications.
C. The provisions of this Article do not apply to anything but the storage,
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste and do not
apply therefore to hazardous or residual waste as defined by the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act and its amendments.73 All
hazardous or residual waste must be disposed of in compliance with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
73.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 210-15 SOLID WASTE § 210-19
210:275
§ 210-19. Authorization to recycle.
The township, recognizing that reclaiming of recyclable materials is an
important method for addressing the growing solid waste disposal problem
through conserving landfill space and that recycling conserves natural
resources, reduces energy consumption and promotes the general interest
and to be in compliance with Act 101,74 does hereby authorize and
encourage collection, processing, storage, transportation and recycling of
materials in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
§ 210-20. Recyclables not to be considered solid waste.
Recyclables separated for the purpose of materials recovery rather than
disposal and collected by the township or its designated agent or contractor
shall not be considered solid waste, as defined under this Article, and
shall not be subject to the provisions of this Article which require the
disposal of waste at designated facilities unless such recyclables become
unmarketable.
§ 210-21. Establishment of mandatory recycling program.
The township hereby established a program for the mandatory separation
of recyclables from municipal waste by persons residing in single-family
dwellings and multifamily establishments and by commercial, institutional
and industrial establishments.
§ 210-22. Items to be separated and recycled.
A. At residential units (including multifamily establishments), the
following items shall be separated and recycled:
(1) Newspapers.
(2) Glass.
(3) Aluminum and steel cans.
(4) Plastic bottles.
(5) Leaf waste.
B. At commercial, institutional and industrial establishments, the
following items shall be separated and recycled:
(1) Newspapers.
(2) High-grade office paper and corrugated paper.
(3) Aluminum and steel cans.
(4) Glass.
74.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 210-19 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 210-22
210:276
§ 210-23. Items excluded from recycling.
Newspapers that are used for secondary purposes, such as wrapping other
waste or for cleaning which renders them unusable for recycling, shall not
be required to be recycled.
§ 210-24. Recycling plans to be filed and approved by township.
Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments and residential
establishments conducting their own recycling programs not in conjunction
with an agent of the township or under an exclusive contract as may
be established by the township for the collection of municipal waste and
recyclables shall file with the township and have approved by the township
individual recycling programs which provide for, at minimum, the recycling
of items listed in § 210-22B above, as provided in Section 1501(c) of Act
101.75
§ 210-25. Establishment of regulations.
The township or its authorized agent shall establish and promulgate
regulations on the manner, days and time of collection of recyclable
materials and for the bundling, handling, location and time of placement
of such materials for collection. Regulations shall be promulgated for each
of the programs undertaken, including but not limited to the residential,
multifamily and commercial sources of recyclable materials.
§ 210-26. Separation of recyclables and placement for collection.
[Amended 6-16-2005 by Ord. No. 597]
Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curb or other designated areas,
separated from solid waste, for collection or taken to dropoff sites at such
times, dates, manner, and places as may be established or authorized by the
Township, provided that curbside pickup of newspapers, glass, aluminum
and steel cans and plastic bottles shall occur weekly and curbside pickup of
leaf waste and brush shall occur at a minimum of two times per year.
§ 210-27. Collection by unauthorized persons prohibited.
From the time of placement of recyclable items at the curb or designated
location or at a dropoff center as designated or authorized by the township,
the recyclable items shall become the property of the township or its
authorized agent or contractor. It shall be a violation of this Article for
any person unauthorized by the township to collect or pick up or cause
to be collected or picked up any such items. Any and each collection in
(5) Plastic bottles.
(6) Leaf waste.
75.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501(c).
§ 210-22 SOLID WASTE § 210-27
210:277
violation hereof from one (1) or more locations shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereafter provided.
§ 210-28. Unlawful disposal of recyclables.
Upon and after the effective date of this Article, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to dispose of any recyclable item as established
in § 210-22 above commingled with other solid waste not required to be
recycled or to dispose of such items in other places that will not ensure
that items are recycled unless the material is so contaminated that it is
unacceptable for recycling.
§ 210-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-17-1993 by Ord. No.
474]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction by a District Justice, be subject to a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.), together with the cost of prosecution, or to
imprisonment in the Cumberland County Jail for a period of not more than
thirty (30) days. Every violator of the provisions of this Article shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense each and every day such violation
continues and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this section for
each and every separate offense.
§ 210-30. Additional remedies.
In addition to the foregoing penalty, the township also may exercise any
other remedies available to it under the First Class Township Code76 or
other applicable laws to carry out its responsibilities under Act 101,77 this
Article and other pertinent ordinances of the township.
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 210-27 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 210-30
210:278
Chapter 213
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 200. Stormwater management — See Ch. 214.
§ 210-30 SOLID WASTE § 210-30
210:279

ARTICLE I
Illegal Discharges and Illicit Connections
[Adopted 7-16-2014 by Ord. No. 721]
§ 213-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. NPDES Stormwater Phase II permits will be required for
construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more.
Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 213-5 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the municipality.
B.
§ 213-1 SOLID WASTE § 213-1
210:281
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPALITY — Upper Allen Township.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by EPA [or by DEP
under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)] that authorizes
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 213-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 213-2
210:282
§ 213-2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system of
the municipality generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted by the municipality.
§ 213-3. Responsibility for administration.
The municipality shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the municipality
may be delegated, in writing, by the governing board of the municipality to
employees, agents or designees of the municipality.
§ 213-4. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 213-5. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipality's storm drain system or watercourses any materials,
including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water
quality standards, other than stormwater. Any discharge in violation of
this section shall be considered "illegal discharges."
B. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to
the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains
(not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl
space pumps, air-conditioning condensation, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, residential car washing (only
permitted if a cleaning agent is not utilized), natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, and firefighting activities. [Amended
1-18-2017 by Ord. No. 762]
(2) Discharges specified, in writing, by the municipality as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the municipality prior to the time of the test.
(4) Any nonstormwater discharge permitted under a NPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of DEP, provided that the
§ 213-2 SOLID WASTE § 213-5
210:283
§ 213-6. Prohibition of illicit connections.
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
§ 213-7. Suspension of MS4 access.
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge
to the storm drain system.
A. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the
time of connection.
B. A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
A. Suspension due to illegal discharges in emergency situations. The
municipality, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States
of America may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to
a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension
order issued in an emergency, the municipality may take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or United States, or to minimize
danger to persons, including, without limitations, entering the property
for the purpose of disconnecting and/or performing emergency
maintenance or repairs to storm sewers. In the event the municipality
must disconnect or perform emergency maintenance and/or repairs,
the municipality may file and attach a municipal lien on the property
which is causing illegal discharge.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illegal discharge or illicit
connection. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this
article may have his/her MS4 access terminated if such termination
would abate or reduce an illegal discharge or illicit connection. The
municipality will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4
access. The violator may petition the municipality for a reconsideration
and hearing.
C. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
§ 213-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 213-8
210:284
§ 213-8. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the municipality prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 213-9. Monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The municipality shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to regulation under this article as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger
has security measures in force which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall
make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the municipality.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the municipality ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and
federal law.
(3) The municipality shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
municipality to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The municipality has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.
All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
municipality and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such
access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit
and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a
§ 213-8 SOLID WASTE § 213-9
210:285
§ 213-10. Prevention, control, and reduction of stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
The municipality will adopt requirements identifying best management
practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain
system, or waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United
States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at his/her own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises which is, or may be, the source of an illegal discharge
may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with
all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge
of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs
shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary
for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
§ 213-11. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse,
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity commits an offense if the person denies the municipality
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
(7) If the municipality has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the municipal
representative is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized
enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from
any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 213-9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 213-12
210:286
§ 213-12. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system, or water of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United
States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release
of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency
response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In
the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify
the authorized enforcement agency, in person or by phone or facsimile, no
later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be
confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the municipality within
three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 213-13. Enforcement; notice of violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or illegal discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator or assessed as a municipal lien on the property.
§ 213-12 SOLID WASTE § 213-14
210:287
§ 213-14. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the municipality. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days
from the date of the notice of violation. A hearing on the appeal before
the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the
municipal authority or his/her designee shall be final.
§ 213-15. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 15
days of the hearing representative's decision upholding the decision of the
municipality, then representatives of the municipality shall enter upon the
subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the municipality or designated contractor to
enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
§ 213-16. Cost of abatement of violation.
§ 213-17. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the municipality may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
A. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may thereafter file a written
protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 30 days. If the
amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the
decision of the municipality or by the expiration of the time in which to
file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against
the property and shall constitute a municipal lien on the property for
the amount of the assessment.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become
liable to the municipality by reason of such violation. The liability shall
be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of up to
12% per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first
day following discovery of the violation.
§ 213-14 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 213-18
210:288
§ 213-18. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this article, the municipality may impose upon a violator alternative
compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 213-19. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 213-20. Criminal prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall
be subject to a criminal penalty of $5,000 per violation per day and/or
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90 days.
§ 213-21. Recovery of expenses.
The authorized municipality may recover all attorney's fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, either criminal
or civil, including sampling and monitoring expenses or other costs of
investigation.
§ 213-22. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the municipality to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 213-18 SOLID WASTE § 213-22
210:289
Chapter 214
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
On-lot sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
199.
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 217.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
RELATED PUBLICATIONS
PA DEP Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual
Cumberland County Stormwater Management
Plan (Act 167 Plan)
PA DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual
NRCS National Engineering Handbook, Part
630: Hydrology
USDA, NRCS. 1986, Technical Release 55:
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
§ 213-22 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 213-22
210:290
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 214-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Allen Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 214-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 214-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 214-2 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
E. Nonstormwater discharges to storm sewer systems can contribute to
pollution of the waters of the commonwealth.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
§ 214-1 SOLID WASTE § 214-3
210:291
§ 214-4. Statutory authority.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs)
that are implemented within the municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
I. Meet general water quality and soil disturbance goals by implementing
measures to:
(1) Minimize disturbances to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes over
15%, and existing native vegetation.
(2) Preserve and maintain trees and woodlands whenever feasible.
Maintain or extend riparian buffers and protect existing forested
buffer. Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(3) Establish and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural flow
pathways.
(4) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(5) Direct runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible.
(6) Incorporate the techniques for low-impact development practices
described in the most current version of "The Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual" (SWM Manual).
(7) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
A. Primary authority:
(1) The municipality is empowered to regulate these activities by the
authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S.
§ 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act"
and the First Class Township Code.
(2) Hereafter, all earthmoving activities and land development within
this Township, including without limitation, the location, design
and construction within the watershed of stormwater management
systems, obstructions, flood control projects, subdivisions and
§ 214-3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-4
210:292
§ 214-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter as is reasonably necessary to prevent injury
to health, safety or other property. The following activities are defined as
"regulated activities" and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
(unless otherwise exempted by § 214-12):
§ 214-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
major land developments, highways and transportation facilities,
facilities for the provision of public utility services and facilities
owned or financed in whole or in part by funds from the
commonwealth, shall be in full compliance with the requirements
of this chapter and shall be conducted in a manner consistent
therewith.
B. Secondary authority: The municipality also is empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.78
A. Land development and/or redevelopment.
B. Subdivision.
C. Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious surfaces
(driveways, parking lots, etc.).
D. Construction of structures or additions to existing structures, as
determined by the municipality.
E. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
F. Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
G. Forest management/timber operations that include logging road
construction and timber harvesting.
H. Earth disturbance.
78.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 214-4 SOLID WASTE § 214-7
210:293
§ 214-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 214-8. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 214-9. Waiver procedure.
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The Board of
Commissioners may waive any mandatory provision of these
regulations to the benefit of the applicant, provided the waiver:
(1) Is consistent with the purpose of the chapter as described in
§ 214-3;
(2) Will remove or reduce an unreasonable standard or undue hardship
as it applies to the particular property, which is grossly
disproportionate to any benefit derived from the standard, or when
an alternative standard provides equal or better results.
(3) Is consistent with § 214-11C when involving water quality
requirements.
B. It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate compliance with
the above conditions.
§ 214-7 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-9
210:294
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 214-10. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other similar entity.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained or arranged to be used, occupied or
maintained."
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activity and the natural
processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops, pasturing and raising of livestock, and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
also, the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be
more or less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
§ 214-10 SOLID WASTE § 214-10
210:295
promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Cumberland County Conservation
District (CCCD).
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works, which carries a
stream under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year-storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return
period."
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
DETENTION DISTRICT — Those subareas in which some type of
detention is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of
Act 167.79
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
then infiltrated, evaporated, reused, or released into the waters of this
commonwealth at a controlled rate.
79.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 214-10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-10
210:296
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface which has its stormwater runoff disconnected
from any stormwater drainage or conveyance system and is redirected
or directed to a pervious area which allows for infiltration, filtration,
and increased time of concentration.
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract or parcels of land being developed located such that all
overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include
streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township governing body
after the SWM site plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior
to or with the final Township approval.
DRAINAGE PLAN — See "SWM site plan."
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs or exposes the underlying soil, including, but not
limited to, clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments;
road maintenance; building construction; the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is
undeveloped land, the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless
the natural land cover is proven to generate lower curve numbers or
rational "C" value, such as forested lands.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers and other waters of this commonwealth.
§ 214-10 SOLID WASTE § 214-10
210:297
FLOODPLAIN — The lowland and relatively flat areas adjoining inland
and coastal waters, including, at a minimum, that area subject to a onepercent-
or-greater chance of flooding in any given year.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is
assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends
from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GOVERNING BODY — The Upper Allen Township Board of
Commissioners.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground
specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. (To) grade
to finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of
excavation.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually
broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to
conduct surface water from cropland.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Refers to soils grouped according
to their runoff-producing characteristics. The chief consideration is
the inherent capacity of soil bare of vegetation to permit infiltration.
Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface
permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into
four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration
rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS
defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the
United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of the
development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be
obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS80).
80.Editor's Note: In adopting this chapter, Ord. No. 689 provided general references that
included NRCS National Engineering Handbook, Part 630: Hydrology, and USDA, NRCS,
1986, Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds.
§ 214-10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-10
210:298
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that has
been compacted or covered with material to the extent that it is highly
resistant to infiltration by water, including but not limited to
conventional impervious surfaces, such as paved streets, roofs,
compacted stone, and sidewalks. In addition, the following shall be
considered impervious surfaces when used by motor vehicles: graveled
areas, paver blocks, bricks and cobblestone.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground (e.g., infiltration drains, pits, and trenches).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the
diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage and caves. Karst topography is formed on
carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Inclusive of any of the following activities:
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Cedar Run hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more buildings, whether proposed initially or
cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups, or other features;
(b)
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.81
(3)
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 214-10 SOLID WASTE § 214-10
210:299
MUNICIPALITY — Upper Allen Township, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a watery
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined or discrete conveyances.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act, which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals
and pipes flowing partly full.
OUTFALL — A point where the storm sewer system discharges to
surface waters of the commonwealth.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater
or artificial drain.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (CALIBRATED) — A computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not identified as impervious, and in which
water may infiltrate.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Upper Allen
Township.
PMF (PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD) — The flood that may be
expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorologic
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
§ 214-10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-10
210:300
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by the chapter.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Shall include, but not be limited to any
earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration
or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff
as specified in § 214-5.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 92,
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.82
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of
runoff from a site or subarea to which the post-development peak rate
of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored
and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released
from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design
storm.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material
transported by water.
82.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 214-10 SOLID WASTE § 214-10
210:301
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth,
occurring from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, artificial channels or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the Soil
Conservation Service into four runoff-potential groups. The groups
range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff,
to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more
runoff.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin, which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.83
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See
"return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES —
Is abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design or construction, conveys,
stores or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
83.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 214-10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-10
210:302
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and
retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, infiltration
structures, water quality BMPs and groundwater recharge BMPs.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Cumberland County
Stormwater Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff
adopted by the County of Cumberland as required by the Act of October
4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and known as the "Storm
Water Management Act."84
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer, municipality, or other entity indicating how stormwater
runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with this
chapter. Stormwater management site plan will be designated as "SWM
site plan" throughout this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length, upstream to downstream, which encloses a
regulated water of this commonwealth.
SUBAREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or
building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision
by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than
10 acres not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwellings shall be exempt. As defined in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.85
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land, which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total
of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TR-20 — The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted
to the Cedar Run Watershed for the Act 167 Plan. The model has been
"calibrated" to reflect actual recorded flow values by adjoining key
model input parameters.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
84.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 214-10 SOLID WASTE § 214-10
210:303
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas, and that
has been identified and delineated as a wetland by a qualified design
professional.
§ 214-10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-10
210:304
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 214-11. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of a SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 214-12:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with
§ 214-27, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. The municipality, after consultation with DEP, may approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law, including but not limited to the Clean
Streams Law.86
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under the Pennsylvania Code Title
25 and the Clean Streams Law.87 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Environmental Protection, No. 363-2134-008 (2000), as
amended and updated.
E. For all regulated activities not exempted by § 214-12, implementation of
the volume controls in § 214-13 is required.
F. For all new development projects, the measurement of impervious
areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total proposed
development even if development is to take place in stages. Similarly,
for new development projects taking place in stages, the entire
proposed new development plan must be used in determining
conformance with this chapter.
G. Stormwater flows/direct discharges onto adjacent property shall not be
created, increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without
86.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
87.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 214-11 SOLID WASTE § 214-11
210:305
§ 214-12. Exemptions.
approval of the affected downstream property owner(s). Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
H. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects in accordance with the
procedures outlined in Section 7.4 (Special Management Areas — Karst
Areas) of the most current version of the SWM Manual.88
I. Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and
rate control capacities within 72 hours from the end of the design storm
subject to site conditions.
J. The design storm precipitation depth estimates to be used in the
analysis of peak rates of discharge should be obtained from the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2,
U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland,
20910. NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
K. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,89 and the Storm
Water Management Act.90
L. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
December, 2006 (SWM Manual), is hereby referenced as guidance in
meeting the requirements contained within this chapter.
A. Regulated activities resulting in less than or equal to 1,000 square feet
of new impervious surface are exempt from Article IV SWM site plan
preparation requirements, including §§ 214-13 and 214-14 of this
chapter. Regulated activities greater than 1,000 square feet and less
than or equal to 5,000 square feet of new impervious area may be
exempt from the SWM site plan preparation requirements, including
§§ 214-13 and 214-14 of this chapter, when justification is provided that
stormwater impact is minimal. The applicant shall complete
requirements as defined by the Township's Simplified Approach in
Appendix C.91 The Township's Simplified Approach shall be amended
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 1-18-2017 by Ord. No. 762]
88.Editor's Note: See, e.g., the list of related publications at the beginning of this chapter.
89.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
90.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
91.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 214-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-12
210:306
§ 214-13. Volume controls.
Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm
Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below for
all regulated activities not otherwise exempted by § 214-12. For regulated
activity areas equal to or less than one acre that do not require hydrologic
routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no
preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select
either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic
limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated with
each methodology, and other factors.
B. Regulated activities meeting the following parcel size and square
footage requirements are exempt from the peak rate control
requirements, but not the volume control or SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter. These criteria shall apply to the total
proposed development even if development is to take place in phases.
The date of the municipal ordinance adoption shall be the starting point
from which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which future
subdivisions and respective impervious area computations shall be
cumulatively considered.
New Impervious Area Exemption Criteria for Peak Rate Control
Total Parcel Size
(acres)
Total Parcel Size
(square feet)
New Impervious
Area Exemption
(square feet)
<0.25 <10,890 1,000
0.25 to 0.5 10,890 to 21,780 2,500
>0.5 >21,780 5,000
C. Agricultural plowing and tilling are exempt from the SWM site plan
requirements, including §§ 214-13 and 214-14 of this chapter, provided
the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102.
D. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this chapter,
provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
A. The Design Storm Method (See Section 8.7 of the most current version
of the SWM Manual.) is applicable to any size of regulated activity. This
method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation.
§ 214-12 SOLID WASTE § 214-13
210:307
(2) For modeling purposes: Calculate existing (pre-development)
stormwater runoff and infiltration volumes based on existing site
conditions, as verified through design phase soil infiltration testing.
B. The Simplified Method (See Section 8.7 of the most current version of
the SWM Manual.) provided below is independent of site conditions and
should be used if the Design Storm Method is not followed. This method
is not applicable to regulated activities greater than one acre or for
projects that require design of stormwater detention or rate control
facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall be sized to capture at least the first two
inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first 1.0 inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces
shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not
be released into the surface waters of this commonwealth. Removal
options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.
(3) Infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate
infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in
all cases, at least the first 0.5 of the permanently removed runoff
should be infiltrated.
(4) The second 1.0 inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces should
be detained using structural and nonstructural BMPs (as outlined
in the most current version of the SWM Manual) and released at a
controlled rate.
C. Design of stormwater management facilities shall provide infiltration to
compensate for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the
ground surface is paved and roofed over. A detailed geologic evaluation
of the project site shall be performed to determine the suitability of
infiltration facilities. The evaluation shall be performed by a qualified
engineer, geologist or soil scientist, and at a minimum, address soil
permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation, and
subgrade stability. Where pervious pavement is permitted for parking,
construction specifications shall be noted on the plan.
D. Whenever a basin will be located in an area underlain by limestone, a
geological evaluation of the proposed location shall be conducted to
determine susceptibility to sinkhole formation. The design of all
facilities over limestone formations shall include measures to prevent
groundwater contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole formation.
If the developer can prove through analysis that the site is in an area
underlain by limestone and such geologic conditions may result in
sinkhole formations, then the site is exempt from infiltration
requirements. Requirements of this section may then be met by use of
alternate BMPs as outlined in the SWM Manual.
E. It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the site is underlain
by limestone. A note shall be attached to all SWM site plans and signed
§ 214-13 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-13
210:308
§ 214-14. Stormwater management districts; rate controls.
§ 214-15. Stormwater management district implementation
provisions (performance standards).
and sealed by the developer's registered design professional, certifying
the presence or absence of subsurface limestone on the site and citing
the source of such determination.
A. The municipality has been divided into two stormwater management
districts as shown on the Upper Allen Township Release Rates Map in
Appendix B.92
B. Standards for managing runoff from each subarea for the two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year design storms are shown
below. Development sites located in each of the districts must control
post-development runoff rates to predevelopment runoff rates for the
design storms as follows:
District Control Criteria
100% Post-development peak discharge for all design storms must
be no greater than predevelopment peak discharges
75% Post development peak discharge for all design storms must
be no greater than 75% of the predevelopment peak
discharges
A. General. Post-development rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development
for the design storms specified on the Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate
Districts Map, Appendix B,93 and § 214-14B of this chapter.
B. District boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater management
districts are shown on an official map, which is available for inspection
at the municipal office. A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is
included in the adoption of the ordinance as Appendix B.94 The exact
location of the stormwater management district boundaries as they
apply to a given development site shall be determined by mapping the
boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours (or most accurate
data required) provided as part of the SWM site plan.
C. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
located within two or more release category subareas, the peak
discharge rate from any subarea shall be the predevelopment peak
discharge for that subarea multiplied by the applicable release rate.
The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether the
grading plan changes the drainage area by sub area. An exception to
92.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
93.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
94.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 214-13 SOLID WASTE § 214-15
210:309
the above may be granted if discharges from multiple sub areas
recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak discharge in any
direction may be a one-hundred-percent release rate, provided that the
overall site discharge meets the weighted average release rate.
D. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed
to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.
E. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area shall be subject to the release rate criteria.
F. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream hydraulic
capacity analysis conducted in accordance with this chapter shall use
the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased
peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon
criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP, Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable), and,
at a minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period
runoff.
G. Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas, it may be more costeffective
to provide one control facility for more than one development
site than to provide an individual control facility for each development
site. The initiative and funding for any regional runoff control
alternatives are the responsibility of prospective developers. The
design of any regional control basins must incorporate reasonable
development of the entire upstream watershed. Regional detention
facilities shall meet all volume and rate control requirements of this
chapter.
H. Waiver of rate control requirement. For certain development sites in
close proximity to stream channels, the municipality may consider a
waiver of the detention requirement, upon recommendation of the
Municipal Engineer. The developer is responsible to demonstrate "no
harm" by providing engineering analysis in accordance with the
following:
§ 214-15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-15
210:310
§ 214-16. Riparian buffer requirements.
§ 214-17. Design criteria for stormwater conveyance and
stormwater management facilities.
(1) The developer must demonstrate that discharge without detention
will improve drainage conditions by draining the development site
prior to peak stream flows from the upstream drainage area.
(2) The developer must demonstrate that all drainage facilities
downstream from the site have adequate capacity to safely convey
the undetained increased peak flows for the storm events listed in
§ 214-14B. This analysis may be required for any drainage facility
between the development site and the discharge point at the
receiving watercourse.
(3) If the developer is granted a waiver of the rate control
requirement, the developer must still meet the volume control
requirements as outlined in this chapter.
A. General requirements for mandatory riparian buffers.
(1) Persons proposing or conducting earth disturbance activities when
the activity requires a permit under DEP Chapter 102 regulations
may not conduct earth disturbance activities within 150 feet of a
perennial or intermittent river, stream, or creek, or lake, pond or
reservoir when the project site is located in an exceptional value or
high quality watershed attaining its designated use as listed by the
Department at the time of application and shall protect any existing
riparian buffer in accordance with this section.
(2) Persons proposing or conducting earth disturbance activities when
the activity requires a permit under DEP Chapter 102 regulations
where the project site is located in an exceptional value or high
quality watershed where there are waters failing to attain one or
more designated uses as listed in Category 4 or 5 on Pennsylvania's
Integrated Water Quality Monitoring and Assessment Report, as
amended and updated, at the time of the application, and the
project site contains, is along or within 150 feet of a perennial or
intermittent river, stream, or creek, lake, pond or reservoir shall, in
accordance with the requirements of this section do one of the
following:
(a) Protect an existing riparian forest buffer.
(b) Convert an existing riparian buffer to a riparian forest buffer.
(c) Establish a new riparian forest buffer.
B. All earth disturbance activities shall conform with all of DEP Chapter
102, Section 102.14 requirements.
§ 214-15 SOLID WASTE § 214-17
210:311
A. Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin) designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment or regulated
by this chapter shall be designed to provide an emergency spillway to
handle flow up to and including the one-hundred-year post development
conditions. The height of the embankment must be set as to provide a
minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard above the maximum pool elevation
computed when the facility functions for the one-hundred-year post
development inflow. Should any stormwater management facility
require a dam safety permit under DEP Chapter 105, the facility shall
be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations
of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety, which may be required to pass
storms larger than one-hundred-year event.
B. Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges,
outfalls or stream enclosures), and any work involving wetlands as
directed in DEP Chapter 105 regulations (as amended or replaced from
time to time by DEP), shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105
and will require a permit from DEP. Any other drainage conveyance
facility that doesn't fall under Chapter 105 regulations must be able to
convey, without damage to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff
from the twenty-five-year-design storm with a minimum 1.0 foot of
freeboard measured below the lowest point along the top of the
embankment along the edge of the roadway. Any facility that
constitutes a dam, as defined in DEP Chapter 105 regulations, may
require a permit under dam safety regulations. Any facility located
within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT minimum design
standards and permit submission requirements.
C. All storm sewer pipes, open channels, culverts and bridges (excluding
detention and retention basin outfall structures) conveying water
originating only from within the boundaries of the project site shall be
designed for a twenty-five-year storm event. Storm sewer networks
shall be designed to contain the peak flow from the one-hundred-year
storm event below proposed inlet grate, and manhole rim elevations or
drainage easements shall be provided to contain and convey the onehundred-
year frequency flood through the project site. Easements shall
begin at the furthest upstream property line of the proposed
development in a watershed.
D. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels
and at all points of discharge.
E. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices. The municipality shall
reserve the right to disapprove any design that would result in the
occupancy or continuation of an adverse hydrologic or hydraulic
condition.
F. The SWM site plan shall include calculations indicating velocities of
flow, grades, sizes and capacities of water-carrying structures, debris or
§ 214-17 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-17
210:312
sedimentation basins, and detention ponds, and sufficient design
information pertaining to construction of such facilities.
G. Maximum permitted velocities are as follows:
(1) Three feet per second where only sparse vegetation can be
established.
(2) Four feet per second under normal conditions where vegetation
can be established by seeding.
(3) Five feet per second under normal conditions where vegetation can
be established by seeding.
Channel Lining
(rock rip-rap)
Maximum Velocity
(feet per second)
3-inch 6.5
6-inch 9
9-inch 11.5
12-inch 13
15-inch 14.5
(4) Six feet per second where well established sod is in existence.
(5) For lined water-carrying channels, the following velocities are
permitted.
H. Energy dissipaters/erosion control devices shall be placed at the outlets
of all pipes where flow velocities exceed maximum permitted channel
velocities.
I. Vertical pipes, inlets and other surface water-receiving structures shall
be installed with trash racks, or so designed to control trash
accumulation.
J. Stormwater runoff channels shall be designed and installed to avoid
trapping excess sediment, except if structures are so designed to trap
sediment.
K. Where stormwater detention basins are also intended for sediment
control, they will be designed to meet the requirements of DEP Chapter
102.
L. Basic construction criteria. Construction standards of stormwater
management and erosion control facilities shall be in accordance with
the approved plans and accompanying specifications. The construction
details and standards of the following publications in their most recent
revision shall control, or as modified by the Township Engineer:
(1) PennDOT, Form 408, Specifications.
§ 214-17 SOLID WASTE § 214-17
210:313
§ 214-18. Calculation methodology.
Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or a Soil-Cover Complex Methodology.
(2) PennDOT, RC Series, Roadway Construction Standards.
M. Inlets shall be placed on both sides of the street at low spots, at a
maximum of 600 feet apart; at points of abrupt changes in the
horizontal or vertical directions of storm sewers, and at points where
the flow in gutters exceeds three inches in depth, based on a twentyfive-
year storm event. Inlets shall normally be along the curbline at or
beyond the curb radius points. For the purpose of inlet location at
corners, the depth of flow shall be considered for each gutter. At
intersections, flow shall be considered for each gutter. At intersections,
the depth of flow across through streets shall not exceed a one-inch
depth, based on a twenty-five-year storm event. Inlets shall be
depressed two inches below the grade of the gutter or ground surface.
Manholes may be substituted for inlets at locations where inlets are not
required to handle surface runoff.
A. Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas greater
than 200 acres, including on- and off-site areas, shall use a generally
accepted calculation technique that is based on the NRCS Soil-Cover
Complex Method. Table 305-1 summarizes acceptable computation
methods. It is assumed that all methods will be selected by the design
professional based on the individual limitations and suitability of each
method for a particular site. The municipality may approve the use of
the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas
that contain less than 200 acres.
Table 305-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed by Applicability
TR-20 or commercial
package based on TR-20
USDA - NRCS When use of full model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55 or commercial
package based on TR-55
USDA - NRCS Applicable for plans within
the model's limitations
HEC-HMS U.S. Army
Corps of
Engineers
When use of full model is
desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State
University
When use of full model is
desirable or necessary
§ 214-17 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-18
210:314
Table 305-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed by Applicability
Rational Method or
commercial package
based on Rational
Method
Emil Kuiching
(1889)
For sites less than 200
acres
Other methods Various As approved by the
Municipal Engineer
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil-Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms presented in Table A-1 in Appendix A of
this chapter.95 If a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1
is used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall
shall be 24 hours. The NRCS "S" curve shown in Figure A-1, Appendix A
of this chapter,96 shall be used for the rainfall distribution.
C. For the purposes of predevelopment flow rate determination,
undeveloped land shall be considered as "meadow" good condition,
unless the natural ground cover generates a lower curve number or
rational "C" value (i.e., forest).
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times of concentration for overland flow
and return periods from the Design Storm Curves from Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Rainfall Curves (1986) (Figure
A-2).97 Times of concentration for overland flow shall be calculated
using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to
time by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall
be computed using Manning's Equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil-Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from
Table A-2 in Appendix A of this chapter.98
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table A-3 in Appendix A
of this chapter.99
95.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
96.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
97.Editor's Note: In adopting this chapter, Ord. No. 689 provided general references that
included the PA DEP Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual and
the PA DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual.
98.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
99.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 214-18 SOLID WASTE § 214-18
210:315
§ 214-19. Erosion and sediment control requirements.
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning Equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table A-4 in Appendix A of the
chapter.100
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the storageindication
method. For drainage areas greater than 20 acres in size, the
design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method
that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality may approve the use
of any generally accepted full hydrograph approximation technique that
shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a
method that produces a full hydrograph.
J. All stormwater detention pond design and calculations shall be
accompanied by the following:
(1) Either singular or composite inflow hydrographs.
(2) Stage-storage data.
(3) Stage-discharge data.
(4) Storage-routing calculation.
(5) Other data as required by the Township Engineer.
K. The municipality has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations and conditions. If the
designer can substantiate through actual physical calibration that more
appropriate runoff and time-of-concentration values should be utilized
at a particular site, then appropriate variations may be made upon
review and recommendation of the Municipal Engineer. Calibration
shall require detailed gauge and rainfall data for the particular site in
question.
A. Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such
activity must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources,
Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102, "Erosion Control," and in
100. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 214-18 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-19
210:316
§ 214-20. BMP operations and maintenance requirements.
accordance with the Cumberland County Conservation District and the
standards and specifications of the municipality.
B. No regulated activities shall commence until an erosion and sediment
control plan consistent with this chapter is approved by the
municipality.
C. Evidence of any permits required by DEP or CCCD must be provided to
the municipality.
D. Plan review, approval and permitting functions under this section may
be delegated by the municipality to another entity, if the municipality
enters into such agreement.
E. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
include the following: areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be
protected from sedimentation and compaction during the construction
phase so as to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity; infiltration
BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the entire
contribution drainage area to the infiltration BMP has received final
stabilitation.
F. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any
required permits shall be available at the project site at all times.
A. No regulated activities shall commence until a BMP operations and
maintenance plan (O&M plan) consistent with this chapter is approved
by the municipality.
B. The SWM site plan content requirements are applicable to the O&M
plan, and are incorporated herein by reference. O&M plan
requirements can be shown concurrently in the plan set with the SWM
site plan requirements.
C. The O&M plan shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater facilities and
BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater facilities and
BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality.
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single owner, or
if sewers and other improvements are to be privately owned and
maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater
facilities and BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner.
D. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
§ 214-19 SOLID WASTE § 214-20
210:317
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater facilities and BMPs.
E. The property owner shall execute a stormwater facilities and BMP
maintenance and monitoring agreement with the municipality covering
all stormwater facilities and BMPs that are to be privately owned. The
agreement shall be in the form provided in Appendix A, Exhibit 1.101
Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the municipal solicitor and governing body.
F. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with
the land.
G. The operation and maintenance plan shall be recorded as a restrictive
deed covenant that runs with the land.
H. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
I. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the SWM
BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and maintenance
Agreement (See the sample operations and maintenance agreement in
Appendix A.102), the municipality may perform the services required
and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result
in a lien against the property or other judicial action.
101. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
102. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 214-20 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-20
210:318
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 214-21. General requirements.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
§ 214-22. SWM site plan contents.
The SWM site plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sedimentation control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of
the computations and erosion and sedimentation control plan shall refer to
the associated maps by title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat,
and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be disapproved and
returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included in the SWM
site plan:
A. Appropriate sections from the Municipal Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,103 and other applicable local ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM site plans.
B. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission, or, in the case of minor deficiencies, the
municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. Provisions for permanent access and maintenance easements as
determined necessary by the municipality for all physical SWM BMPs,
such as ponds and infiltration structures, to implement the operation
and maintenance plan discussed in § 214-22A(10) below.
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the site
assessment procedures outlined in Chapter 4 of the most current
version of the SWM Manual. A site assessment shall be completed
for projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography.
(3) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 214-21 SOLID WASTE § 214-22
210:319
(4) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations and
documentation for the design of all stormwater management
facilities required by this chapter.
(5) Expected project time schedule.
(6) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(7) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and adjacent aquatic
features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that
may be affected by the project.
(8) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(9) The locations of existing and proposed on-lot wastewater facilities
and water supply wells.
(10) An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan for all proposed
physical stormwater management facilities. This plan shall address
long-term ownership and responsibilities for operation and
maintenance as well as schedules for O&M activities.
B. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted. The contents of the
map(s) shall include but not be limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(15% or greater), five-foot contour intervals may be used. Spot
elevations at significant points are required. [Amended
2-20-2013 by Ord. No. 704]
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(4) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and waterlines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(7) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be
added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
§ 214-22 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-22
210:320
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes (15%
or greater), five-foot contour intervals may be used. Spot elevations
at significant points are required. [Amended 2-20-2013 by Ord.
No. 704]
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(11) The date of submission and any subsequent revision dates.
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(17) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(18) Overland drainage paths.
(19) Stormwater management easements a minimum of 20 feet in width
around all stormwater management facilities and permanent
BMPs.
(20) A twenty-foot-wide access easement to provide access for
inspection and maintenance of all stormwater management
facilities and permanent BMPs.
(21) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(22) A construction detail of any improvements made to sinkholes and
the location of all notes to be posted, as specified in this chapter.
(23) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management facilities and BMPs to be permanent
fixtures that can be altered or removed only after approval of a
revised plan by the municipality.
(24) The following signature block for the design engineer: "I, (design
engineer's name), on this date (date of signature), have reviewed
and hereby certify that the SWM site plan meets all design
§ 214-22 SOLID WASTE § 214-22
210:321
§ 214-23. SWM site plan submission.
For all activities regulated by this chapter, the steps below shall be followed
for submission. For any activities that require a DEP joint permit application
and are regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of DEP's Rules and
Regulations, require a PennDOT highway occupancy permit, or require any
other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s)
shall be part of the plan.
§ 214-24. SWM site plan review.
standards and criteria of the Upper Allen Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
(25) An erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with § 214-19.
(26) A BMP operations and maintenance plan in accordance with
§ 214-20.
C. Stormwater management facilities and BMPs.
(1) All stormwater management facilities and permanent BMPs must
be located on a plan and described in detail.
(2) When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches are used, the locations of existing and proposed on-lot
sewage disposal systems and infiltration areas and water supply
wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities and BMPs must be shown.
A. The SWM site plan and application shall be submitted by the developer
as part of the submission for the regulated activity.
B. If the SWM site plan is incorporated in plans submitted as a subdivision
or land development (SLD) plan, the SWM site plan may be reviewed
and approved as part of those plans.
C. If the SWM site plan is submitted independently for a regulated activity,
two complete copies of the SWM site plan must be submitted.
D. Two (2) copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted for review.
A. The Municipal Engineer or designee shall review the SWM site plan for
consistency with the adopted Cedar Run Watershed Act 167 stormwater
management plan and this chapter. The municipality shall require
receipt of a complete plan, as specified in this chapter.
B. The Municipal Engineer or designee shall review the SWM site plan for
any submission or land development in accordance with the municipal
§ 214-22 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-24
210:322
§ 214-25. Modification of plans.
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance104 provisions not
superseded by this chapter.
C. Should the SWM site plan be determined to be inconsistent with this
chapter, whether submitted as a part of a land development/subdivision
plan or independently, the Municipal Engineer will forward a
disapproval letter to the developer with a copy to the Township
Manager citing the reason(s) for the disapproval. Any disapproved
SWM site plan may be revised by the developer and resubmitted
consistent with this chapter. In lieu of a disapproval letter, the
Municipal Engineer may provide a list of comments that will bring the
plan into an approvable format if adequately addressed.
D. For regulated activities requiring a DEP joint permit application, the
Municipal Engineer shall notify DEP whether the SWM site plan is
consistent with this chapter and forward a copy of the review letter to
the Township Manager and the developer. DEP may consider the
Municipal Engineer's review comments in determining whether to issue
a permit.
E. The municipality shall not approve any subdivision or land development
for regulated activities specified in § 214-5 of this chapter if the SWM
site plan has been found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as
determined by the Municipal Engineer. All required permits from DEP
must be obtained prior to approval or as a condition of approval.
F. The Municipal Building Official and/or Zoning Officer shall not issue a
permit for any regulated activity specified in § 214-5 of this chapter
until the Municipal Engineer has approved a SWM site plan. All
required permits from DEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a
permit.
A. A modification to a submitted SWM site plan for a development site that
involves a change in stormwater management facilities, BMPs or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities or BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or
other conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan, as determined
by the Municipal Engineer, shall require a resubmission of the modified
SWM site plan consistent with § 214-23 of this chapter and be subject to
review as specified in § 214-24 of this chapter.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved SWM site plan
shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by the applicable
municipal review fee. A waiver to a SWM site plan, for which the
municipality has not taken a formal action, shall be submitted to the
municipality, accompanied by the applicable municipal review fee.
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 214-24 SOLID WASTE § 214-26
210:323
§ 214-26. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented in writing, to
the Municipal Engineer in accordance with § 214-23 of this chapter and be
subject to review as specified in § 214-24 of this chapter. The applicable
municipal review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved
SWM site plan.
§ 214-27. Authorization to construct; term of validity.
The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity of
five years following the date of approval. Terms of validity shall commence
on the date the municipality signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If
an approved SWM site plan is not completed according to §§ 214-29 and
214-30 within the term of validity, then the municipality may consider the
SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits issued
by the municipality. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 214-26 of this
chapter.
§ 214-28. Recording of documents.
The owner of any property upon which stormwater management facilities or
permanent BMPs will be placed, constructed or implemented, as described
on the SWM site plan, shall record or cause to have recorded the following
documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Cumberland County
prior to the start of any site construction:
§ 214-29. As-built plans; completion certificate; final inspection.
A. The approved SWM site plan.
B. The BMP operations and maintenance plan, if such is not included in a
recorded SWM site plan.
C. Stormwater facilities and BMP maintenance and monitoring
agreement.
A. The applicant shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans
shall be submitted to the municipality.
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the
construction plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the
completion certificate.
§ 214-26 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-29
210:324
C. After receipt of the as-built plan, the municipality may conduct a final
inspection.
§ 214-29 SOLID WASTE § 214-29
210:325

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 214-30. Inspections.
§ 214-31. Right-of-entry.
A. The Municipal Engineer or his designee shall be permitted to inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater management
facilities and BMPs.
B. The Municipal Engineer or his designee shall be permitted to inspect all
phases of the site development work in progress, to insure compliance
with erosion and sediment control requirements. Inspection functions
under this section may be delegated by the municipality to another
entity, if such agreement is entered into by the municipality.
C. During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities or BMPs are not
being installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the
municipality shall revoke any existing municipal permits and/or issue a
stop-work order until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and
approved, as specified in this chapter.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition or operation of the stormwater management facility and
stormwater BMPs in regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater management facility and BMP owners and operators shall
allow persons working on behalf of the municipality ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of determining compliance with
this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater management facility or BMP in
the municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the discharges from such BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
stormwater management facility or BMP is a violation of this article.
§ 214-30 SOLID WASTE § 214-31
210:327

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 214-32. General.
The fee required by this chapter is the municipal review fee. The municipal
review fee shall be established by the municipality to defray review costs
incurred by the municipality and the Municipal Engineer. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant.
§ 214-33. Municipality SWM site plan review fee.
The municipality shall establish a fee schedule by resolution of the
municipal governing body. The municipality shall periodically update the fee
schedule to ensure that costs are adequately reimbursed.
§ 214-34. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
§ 214-35. Additional costs.
The developer will be invoiced for any additional costs incurred by the
municipality in the course of reviewing the SWM site plan. These costs may
include, but are not limited to, special studies by qualified engineers or
surveyors, field reconnaissance and testing.
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the SWM site plan by the municipality and the Municipal
Engineer.
C. Fees and expenses to record plans at the office of the County Recorder
of Deeds.
D. Preconstruction meetings and site inspections.
E. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and BMPs during
construction.
F. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and BMPs presented in the SWM site plan.
G. Work required to monitor and enforce provisions of this chapter, to
correct violations, and to assure proper completion of remedial actions.
§ 214-32 SOLID WASTE § 214-35
210:329

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 214-36. Municipal stormwater maintenance fund.
§ 214-37. Post-construction maintenance and monitoring
inspections.
A. If stormwater facilities are accepted by the municipality for dedication,
persons installing stormwater facilities or BMPs shall be required to
pay a specified amount to the municipal stormwater BMP operation and
maintenance fund to help defray costs of operations and maintenance
expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
(1) If the stormwater facility or BMP is to be owned and maintained by
the municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
operation and maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the
municipality.
(2) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values.
B. If a stormwater facility or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ball field, lake), the municipality may reduce or
waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the
value of the land for public recreation purpose.
A. Stormwater facilities and permanent BMPs must be inspected in
accordance with the O&M plan. The property owner has two options to
accomplish this:
(1) Employing a qualified registered professional to conduct the
inspections and prepare reports; or
(2) Entering into an agreement with the municipality for the
municipality to conduct the inspections and prepare reports. This
can be included in the stormwater facilities and BMP maintenance
and monitoring agreement (§ 214-20E).
B. If Option One is chosen, the entity conducting the inspection shall be
required to submit a report to the municipality within one month
following completion of the inspection. The report will present
documentation regarding the condition of the facility and
recommending necessary repairs, if needed. Any needed repairs shall
be implemented by the owner within one month of the report issuance
date.
C. If Option Two is chosen, the owner will be responsible for reimbursing
the municipality for the costs involved, such reimbursement to be
specified in the stormwater facilities and BMP maintenance and
monitoring agreement.
§ 214-36 SOLID WASTE § 214-37
210:331
D. Basins should be inspected on the following basis:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a one-hundred-yearor-
greater storm event.
§ 214-37 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-37
210:332
ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 214-38. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system which are not composed
entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in Subsection B below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
B. Discharges which may be allowed, based on a finding by the
municipality that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to
pollution to surface waters of the commonwealth, are:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washing which does not use detergents
or other cleaning agents.
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Residential car washing is only permitted if a cleaning agent is not
utilized. [Amended 1-18-2017 by Ord. No. 762]
(7) Springs.
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundation or footing drains and crawl
space or basement sump pumps.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(12) (Reserved)105
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
C. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
105. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(12), regarding swimming pool discharges, was
repealed 1-18-2017 by Ord. No. 762.
§ 214-38 SOLID WASTE § 214-38
210:333
§ 214-39. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 214-38B
above:
§ 214-40. Roof drains.
§ 214-41. Alteration of BMPs.
of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
municipality, to cease the discharge, consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater and wash water, to enter the separate storm sewer system
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks; and
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial use
to the separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in
plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the municipality.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside swales, except as provided in § 214-38B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect roof drains directly to streets,
storm sewers or roadside swales, such connections may be permitted
by the municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance program,
without written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP without written approval of the
municipality.
§ 214-38 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-41
210:334
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 214-42. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the municipality shall provide written notification of the
violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply
within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provision
of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall
not prevent the municipality from pursuing any and all other remedies. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any
regulated activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to
comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 214-43. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the SWM site plan shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Engineer
or other qualified persons designated by the municipality.
A. A copy of the SWM site plan approved by the municipality shall be on
file at the site throughout the duration of the construction activity.
Periodic inspections may be made by the municipality or designee
during construction.
B. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to undertake any regulated activity under § 214-5 on any
property except as provided for in the approved SWM site plan and
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
alter or remove any control structure required by the SWM site plan
pursuant to this chapter or to allow the property to remain in a
condition that does not conform to the approved SWM site plan.
C. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the final
approval, the owner or his representatives shall provide the following in
accordance with § 214-29:
(1) A certification of completion from an engineer, architect, surveyor
or other qualified person verifying that all permanent facilities have
been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan, plans
and specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) A set of as-built drawings.
D. After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final inspection
shall be conducted to certify compliance with this chapter.
E. Suspension and revocation of permits.
§ 214-42 SOLID WASTE § 214-43
210:335
§ 214-44. Public nuisance.
§ 214-45. Enforcement generally.
(1) Any municipal permit issued under this chapter may be suspended
or revoked or a stop-work order may be issued by the municipality
for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the permit.
(b) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the
project.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution, or which endangers
the life or property of others, or as outlined in Article IX of this
chapter.
(2) A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the municipality when:
(a) The municipality or its designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control BMPs, or the elimination of the hazard or
nuisance; and/or
(b) The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance,
law or rule and regulation has been corrected.
(c) A permit that has been revoked by the governing body cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
F. Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued
unless all requirements of this chapter have been met.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a "public
nuisance."
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations;
§ 214-43 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-45
210:336
§ 214-46. Violations and penalties; enforcement remedies.
§ 214-47. Appeals.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the municipality or designee and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500 for each violation, plus court costs and attorney fees.
Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the municipality, through its solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the municipal
governing body within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipal governing body
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the County
Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place
within 30 days of the governing body's decision.
§ 214-45 SOLID WASTE § 214-47
210:337
Chapter 217
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. A250.
§ 214-47 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 214-47
210:338
ARTICLE I
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 6-19-2019 by Ord. No. 786106]
§ 217-1. Definitions.
§ 217-2. Permit and plans required.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person who applies for a permit.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of
the Township or his/her authorized representative.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEER — The duly appointed Township Engineer of the Township
or his/her authorized representative.
EXCAVATE — Any activity within the right-of-way of any street or
public way which involves cutting, breaking, drilling, grading, digging,
scooping or removing earth or other material, or disturbing the surface
thereof. In this article, "open" shall have essentially the same meaning
as excavation.
OPEN — To cut, drill, dig or otherwise penetrate through the surface of
any street, including boring underneath any street.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
organization, company, corporation, or municipality.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, lane, court,
cul-de-sac, public way, public square, highway or other public place
located in the Township and established for the use of vehicles.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of
any kind in any of the streets or the street right-of-way in the Township
without first securing a permit therefor from the Township and
satisfying the other applicable requirements consistent with the
regulations as hereinafter provided.
B. No permit for opening or excavating in a street for the purpose of
laying, constructing, extending, replacing, or relocating a water line,
gas line, sanitary sewer line, storm sewer line, electrical or
106. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Street Openings and
Excavations, adopted 9-7-2016 by Ord. No. 786, as amended.
§ 217-1 SOLID WASTE § 217-2
210:339
§ 217-3. Permit application.
communication cable or conduit or other similar facility shall be issued
until a plan showing the proposed location thereof has been approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer. Such a permit, when issued, shall
require the applicant to furnish, upon completion of the work, as-built
plans showing the exact location of the facilities. The furnishing of such
plans shall be a condition of the bond required under § 217-10 hereof.
A. Any person desiring to open or excavate in any street in the Township
shall file an application with the Code Enforcement Officer on forms
provided by the Township. Such application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The exact location of the proposed opening or excavation.
(3) The approximate size and depth of the proposed opening or
excavation.
(4) The proposed dates and times of commencing and completing the
work, and proposed date of completion for any permanent patches
or overlay paving as required herein.
(5) The method and progression of performing the work.
(6) The purpose of the proposed opening or excavation.
(7) Such other information as the Code Enforcement Officer may deem
pertinent.
B. Such application shall contain a statement, which shall be subscribed to
by the applicant, to the effect that the applicant will comply with all
relevant ordinances of the Township (including this article) and laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and that the applicant will protect
and save harmless the Township in accordance with Subsection C.
C. Every person to whom a permit is issued or by whom any opening or
excavation is made shall assume all risks and be liable for all injuries or
damages occasioned by the opening or excavation of the street or by
the failure to properly protect the same, to backfill the same, to restore
the surface or to maintain the surface or by any other action or
inactions in connection therewith. Such person shall indemnify and
save harmless the Township, its officials and employees of and from any
such liability. In addition, such person shall submit to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the time of applying for a permit, a certificate or
certificates of insurance for public liability and property damage,
including blasting insurance, where applicable, in the minimum
coverage amount of $1,000,000. A satisfactory certificate of insurance
confirming such liability insurance coverage must be filed with the
§ 217-2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 217-3
210:340
§ 217-4. Issuance of permit; applicability.
§ 217-5. Permit fee.
The fee for each permit shall be as set, from time to time, by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners.107
§ 217-6. Emergency situations.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface
pipe, line, conduit, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the
Township before any work shall be commenced pursuant to the issued
permit.
A. Upon being satisfied that the application is in proper form and upon
receipt from the applicant of the fee prescribed by § 217-5 hereof, the
performance bond prescribed by § 217-10 hereof and the certificates of
insurance prescribed by § 217-3 hereof, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a permit. Permits shall be issued by the Township only to
persons furnishing public utility services or the owner or owners of the
real property adjoining the location where such opening or excavation
is to be made. Such permit shall apply only to the specific work
described in the application, shall expire on the date and time when the
work is proposed to be completed and may contain such conditions or
limitations as the Code Enforcement Officer deems necessary for the
protection of persons and property.
B. Any person who receives a permit may be required, at the discretion of
the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide visual proof of the condition of
the street or streets subject to excavation prior to the commencement
of the excavation. Proof of condition of the area subject to excavation
shall be in the form of photographs or video of the entire area.
C. A permit may be issued to the applicant after all of the requirements
therefor have been satisfied. If the application is disapproved, written
notice of disapproval together with reasons therefor shall be given by
the Township to the applicant.
D. Responsibility to contact utilities. The work authorized by any permit
issued hereunder is subject to all the provisions of the Underground
Utility Line Protection Law, Act of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No.
287, § 1 et seq., as amended or supplemented from time to time. It shall
be the applicant's responsibility to contact the utilities that have
recorded their facilities in compliance with said Act. A partial list of
utilities providing services in the Township and their office addresses
may be obtained from the Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania. The applicant shall also be responsible for providing the
serial number from the Pennsylvania One Call System to the Township.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fees.
§ 217-3 SOLID WASTE § 217-6
210:341
person owning or responsible for such pipe, line, conduit, construction or
apparatus to commence an opening or excavation to remedy such condition
before securing a permit, provided that application for a permit shall be
made immediately and not later than the next business day thereafter
and that all other provisions of this article are fully complied with. If
any such emergency condition shall not be immediately attended to by
the owner or person responsible for such pipe, line, conduit, construction
or apparatus, the Township, after such notice as it shall deem necessary
under the circumstances of the particular case, may proceed to have the
work necessary and required by such emergency done and charge the cost
thereof to such owner or person.
§ 217-7. Requirements for overlaying traffic lane(s) and entire
disturbed area; limiting number of patches and pavement joints.
§ 217-8. Construction requirements.
The following construction requirements shall apply to all openings or
excavations in streets of the Township:
A. All surface street cut openings shall be restored with a minimum patch
area of 10 linear feet by the full width of the travel lane by means of
milling and bituminous overlay. The patch length shall be extended to
provide a minimum of one-foot cutback beyond the street opening.
Restoration of the subsurface opening with bituminous base course
shall be extended one foot beyond the physical opening in all directions.
B. When two or more transverse trench openings are made in the street
pavement less than 100 feet apart, the applicant shall mill and place
bituminous pavement over the entire width of the traffic lane(s) in
which the openings were made for the entire length of the street
between such openings.
C. For any case where the street cut opening extends beyond the roadway
center line, the surface restoration requirements listed above shall be
extended for both disturbed travel lanes.
D. When the opening is to be closer than three feet to the edge of the
existing pavement, the opening shall be extended to the edge of
pavement.
E. When the permitted opening is to be closer than five feet to the edge of
an existing patch or patches in the pavement, the restoration shall be
extended to include said patch.
F. When the permitted opening is located in a street 16 feet wide or less,
then the applicant shall mill and place bituminous pavement over the
entire width of the street for the entire length of the opening.
G. The overlay conditions within this section may be waived by the Board
of Commissioners if the Township is scheduled to perform full road
paving within the next 12 months from date of application.
§ 217-6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 217-8
210:342
A. Any person who shall open or excavate any street or public right-of-way
area in the Township shall thoroughly and completely refill the opening
or excavation in such a manner as to prevent any settling thereafter,
and shall restore the surface to the same condition or better as it was
before the opening or excavation. This includes any regrading and
reseeding of nonpavement areas within the right-of-way.
B. Unless otherwise set forth in this article, all construction processes and
material specifications shall be in accordance with Township Standard
Construction and Material Specifications and Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation Publication 408, as amended.
C. No work shall begin until all utility companies having facilities in the
area have been notified. The work shall be conducted so as not to
interfere with water mains, sewers or their connections with the house
or any other subsurface lines or construction until permission of the
proper authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or
construction shall have been obtained. Any damage to such lines or
construction shall be repaired immediately and shall be reported to the
owner thereof.
D. The surface shall conform to the proper grade and be of the same
surface covering as the part of the street immediately adjoining the
opening.
E. Any applicant test boring or drilling into any Township street for
location of leaks or venting of leaks shall be required to backfill in
accordance with § 217-8L herein.
F. The applicant shall be responsible to replace all pavement markings
that are removed or damaged. All material shall be in conformance with
Township Standard Construction and Material Specifications and
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 408, as
amended.
G. Temporary paving shall be placed and maintained for a minimum of 60
days and a maximum of 120 days. Temporary paving shall be thoroughly
bound and compacted, installed flush with the surface of the adjoining
paving. Such temporary paving material and thicknesses shall be in
accordance with Township Standard Construction and Material
Specifications and Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 408, as amended. An alternate temporary paving consisting
of two inches of cold patch or two inches of superpave binder (19 mm)
may be used on a case-by-case basis if approved by the Township.
Trenches shall be restored with temporary paving at the close of each
business day unless otherwise directed by the Township.
H. Permanent paving shall be thoroughly bound and compacted, installed
flush with the surface of the adjoining paving within 10 business days
after receiving authorization from the Township. Bituminous pavement
material shall be placed with a paver. Application of permanent
bituminous material by hand is not acceptable. Such permanent paving
§ 217-8 SOLID WASTE § 217-8
210:343
material and thicknesses shall be in accordance with Township
Standard Construction and Material Specifications and Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 408, as amended. All
temporary paving material shall be removed from trenches prior to
placement of the permanent paving base course.
I. Wherever practicable, tunneling shall be used as a construction method
in preference to disturbing the surface of the street, and the Code
Enforcement Officer may so specify on the permit. No tunneling shall be
used unless the express direction or approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer is endorsed on the permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation
shall be made only in the presence of the Township, its engineers or
inspector designated by it, and shall be done only in a method approved
by the Township, its engineers or by the inspector designated by the
Township.
J. The use of steel plates to cover open excavations shall be prohibited at
all times between the dates of October 15 and April 15. Between the
dates of October 15 and April 15, stone backfill shall be required. The
applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the stone backfill in a
manner acceptable to the Township.
K. Openings shall be made in the street surface by sawing to neat lines.
Excavated material shall be immediately placed in trucks and removed
from the construction site.
L. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled with PennDOT 2A
modified stone aggregate compacted in maximum eight-inch layers if
vibratory compaction equipment is used. Backfill stone aggregate to a
level not to exceed the existing pavement depth or to a level necessary
to accommodate the required bituminous pavement trench restoration
section. Provide a minimum of one-foot cutbacks in existing pavement
around the limits of the excavated area. The Township may require
limits of cutbacks to exceed one foot at its discretion as necessary to
achieve satisfactory restoration in the best interest of the Township.
The bituminous pavement restoration shall consist of 1 1/2 inches of
superpave wearing course, 9.5 mm and a minimum of five inches of
superpave binder course, 25 mm. The depth of superpave binder course
shall be increased to match the existing depth of bituminous pavement
if the overall depth exceeds 6 1/2 inches. The maximum placement
thickness per lift of superpave binder course, 25 mm, shall be 5 1/2
inches. Equivalent Marshall mixes may be substituted, when approved
by the Township. All pavement joints shall be sealed, rubberized jointsealing
material. When wearing course is placed adjacent to curb to
form bituminous gutter, seal with hot bituminous material of the class
and type designated for wearing course and extend to six inches from
the curb, applied evenly. The use of PG 64-22 is permitted.
M. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the street a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line of
§ 217-8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 217-8
210:344
§ 217-9. Degradation fee.
the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street restored
to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
N. Street shoulders shall be backed up with suitable backfill material per
the Township Standard Construction and Material Specifications.
O. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
P. Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision, or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey
benchmark within the Township shall not be removed or disturbed or
caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first
obtained in writing from the Township. Permission shall be granted only
upon condition that the applicant shall pay all expenses incident to the
proper replacement of the monument.
Q. When the work performed by the applicant interferes with the
established drainage system of any street, adequate provision shall be
made by the applicant to provide proper drainage to the satisfaction of
the Township.
R. Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working
hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access.
The applicant shall be responsible for notifying property owners whose
driveway access will be inhibited. Free access must be provided at all
times to fire hydrants.
S. In the excavation or opening of any street, the applicant shall take all
necessary and reasonable precautions to ensure that the street remains
in a safe and passable condition for the traveling public at all times.
Such precautions may include, but are not limited to the use of signs,
barriers, guards, lanterns and all other warning devices sufficient to
alert the traveling public of possible dangers relative to the excavation
both day and night.
T. The applicant shall be responsible for contacting the Code Enforcement
Officer to obtain all necessary inspections. Work shall not proceed until
the Code Enforcement Officer has inspected and given his approval of
the following work: when excavation is ready for backfilling and before
backfilling is done, when backfilling work is completed, when the
temporary paving has been installed and when the street is ready for
permanent paving.
U. In the case where a bituminous pavement overlay is warranted, the
applicant shall remove existing wearing surfaces by milling to a
minimum depth of 1 1/2 inches to accommodate placement of a oneand-
one-half-inch bituminous wearing course.
§ 217-8 SOLID WASTE § 217-9
210:345
§ 217-10. Maintenance of disturbed area; bonding requirements.
The applicant shall maintain the portion of the street disturbed by the
opening or excavation for a period of 18 months from the date the
backfilling is completed at a proper grade and condition free from ridges
and depressions. Such maintenance work shall be done as often as may
be necessary to guarantee proper restoration of the surface and proper
maintenance of the disturbed area. The applicant must deposit with the
Code Enforcement Officer, prior to issuance of the permit, a bond in an
amount of 110% of the cost of the improvements, with corporate surety
guaranteeing the proper performance of the work and the proper
maintenance of the disturbed area for the period of time required above.
Utilities and other persons who open or excavate in streets on a regular
basis may, with the permission of the Code Enforcement Officer, keep on
deposit a single bond in an amount set by the said officer and applying to
the work included in all of the permits at any time outstanding.
§ 217-11. Responsibility for correction of unsatisfactory or
incomplete work; responsibility for defects occurring within 18
months.
A. A degradation fee for a street opening or excavation shall be charged in
addition to the permit fee. The fee amount shall be set, from time to
time, by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.108
B. The Township will give timely notice to all persons owning property
abutting on any roadway or any utilities with facilities located within
the Township's public right-of-way for roads that are scheduled for
improvements as part of the Township's roadway management plan.
The degradation fee may be waived if the street opening or excavation
work is completed at least 12 months prior to the roadway being
improved.
A. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Township or its engineers, be unsatisfactory and
where that work is not corrected in accordance with the Township's
instructions within the time fixed by it, or in the event that the work for
which the permit was granted is not completed within the time fixed by
the Township, the Township may proceed to correct such unsatisfactory
work or complete any such work not completed, and charge the cost of
the work and materials to the applicant.
B. When any earth, gravel, or other excavated material is caused to roll,
flow, or wash upon any street, the applicant shall cause the same to be
removed from the street within 24 hours after deposit. In the event the
earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is not removed,
the Township shall cause the removal, and the cost incurred shall be
paid by the applicant.
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fees.
§ 217-9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 217-11
210:346
§ 217-12. Opening of newly paved surfaces.
All such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas, sewer or
other connections as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate
the opening or excavation of said street within 90 days from the giving of
such notice, unless such time is extended, in writing, by the Engineer or
Code Enforcement Officer. New paving shall not be opened for a period
of five years after the completion thereof, except in case of emergency
only, the existence of which emergency and the necessity for the opening
of such paving to be determined by the Engineer or Code Enforcement
Officer. If any person seeks to open or excavate a street within five years
after the completion of the paving thereof for any reason other than an
emergency as above stated, the applicant shall make written application
to the Board of Township Commissioners, and a permit shall be issued
only after express approval of the Board of Township Commissioners and
only upon submission of the required bonding and payment of a permit
fee as shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.109 The applicant will be responsible for paying 200% of the
degradation fee value for opening of newly paved surfaces within the fiveyear
period.
§ 217-13. Conditions for laying and extending utility lines.
No new water, sewer, steam or gas main or electric, telephone or other
utility line shall hereafter be laid or constructed, and no such existing main
or line shall be extended, in any of the streets of the Township until the plan
therefor shall have been first filed with the Township and such plan, and
the exact location of such main or line, is approved by the Township. The
Township shall not approve the location of any such main or line at a depth
of less than 30 inches from the surface of the street unless it is clear to the
Township that locating the same at a depth of more than 30 inches from the
surface is impossible or impractical.
C. If, within 18 months after the restoration of the surface as herein
provided, defects shall appear therein resulting from defective
backfilling by the applicant or its contractor or otherwise related to the
applicant's work, then the applicant shall reimburse the Township for
the cost of all necessary repairs to the permanent paving.
D. Payment for all work done by the Township under the provisions hereof
shall be made by the person made liable therefor within 30 days after a
bill therefor is sent to such person by the Township. Upon failure to pay
such charges within such time, the same shall be collectible by the
Township by an action at law or in the manner provided by law for the
collection of municipal claims.
109. Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fees.
§ 217-11 SOLID WASTE § 217-14
210:347
§ 217-14. Remedies.
In the event any person violates the provisions of this article or the terms
and conditions of any permit issued hereunder, the Code Enforcement
Officer or the engineer may order a cessation of the work, order the
performance of additional or corrective work by or on behalf of the
applicant and at the applicant's expense, revoke the permit, institute such
legal or equitable actions as may be appropriate, institute an action for the
imposition of a fine under § 217-15 hereof or take such other actions as may
be deemed necessary under the circumstances. The above remedies may be
pursued simultaneously or consecutively. No person who has violated the
provisions of this article and has failed or refused to remedy such violation
shall be eligible for the issuance of any other permit hereunder until such
violation has been remedied.
§ 217-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, who shall violate
or assist in the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 and in default of the payment of such fine and the costs of
prosecution shall be sentenced to not more than 30 days' imprisonment in
the Cumberland County Jail.
§ 217-15.1. Construal of Township actions.
A. Neither the issuance of a permit hereunder nor the taking of any other
actions hereunder shall be construed as an express or implied
acceptance by the Township of the dedication of any street.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the installation of utility
poles.
§ 217-14 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 217-15.1
210:348
ARTICLE II
Sidewalk, Curb and Driveway Construction
[Adopted 8-18-2010 by Ord. No. 678; amended in its entirety
12-18-2019 by Ord. No. 790]
§ 217-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation. The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall
include the singular. The masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
§ 217-17. Responsibility of property owners.
It shall be the duty of every property owner in Upper Allen Township, at his
own expense, within 30 days after notice from the Board of Commissioners,
to construct, reconstruct or repair, as such notice shall require, a sidewalk
and/or curb, which shall conform to all the applicable provisions of this
article, in front of and/or alongside such property.
§ 217-18. Conformance required.
Every sidewalk, curb and driveway shall be constructed, reconstructed and
repaired strictly in accordance with the provisions of this article and in
conformity with the lines and grades shown on the official street plans as
approved by the Board of Commissioners. All public areas shall be designed
barrier free in accordance with applicable federal and state standards,
including but not limited to the Rehabilitation Act110 and Americans with
Disabilities Act.111
§ 217-19. Sidewalk requirements and specifications.
In the construction, reconstruction and repair of sidewalks, the following
specifications and requirements shall apply:
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of
the Township Standard Construction and Material Specifications, as
amended.
B. Modification to the sidewalk requirements and specifications may be
approved by the Board of Commissioners.
C. Sidewalks located within the public right-of-way are defined as
"deteriorated" and subject to a repair notice from the Township
requiring replacement of the damaged section if the sidewalk contains
any of the following:
110. Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C.A. § 701 et seq.
111. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq.
§ 217-16 SOLID WASTE § 217-19
210:349
§ 217-20. Curb requirements and specifications.
In the construction, reconstruction and repair of curbing, the following
specifications and requirements shall apply:
(1) A horizontal gap between individual sidewalk sections of one inch
or more.
(2) Adjoining sections or portions thereof whose edges differ vertically
by more than 1/4 inch.
(3) Ramping, where there is a rise or depression of more than one inch
within eight inches in conjunction with a vertical separation.
(4) A hole or opening in the concrete of 3/4 inch or more.
(5) Cracks of more than 1/8 inch in width.
(6) Spalling of concrete with a minimum depth of more than 1/4 inch or
where 25% of the surface area of an individual sidewalk section has
any spalling, cracking, or irregular surfaces.
(7) Depressions, reverse cross slopes (sloping away from the street), or
with an adjoining wall or other indentations that collect mud or
water.
(8) Sidewalks that have been repaired with bituminous material
patching.
(9) Any other condition determined by the Township that creates a
hazardous condition for pedestrian traffic.
A. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
Township Standard Construction and Material Specifications, as
amended.
B. Curb radius shall be as shown on the plans and profiles.
C. Modifications to the curb requirements and specifications may be
approved by the Board of Commissioners.
D. Curbs located within the public right-of-way are defined as
"deteriorated" and subject to a repair notice from the Township
requiring replacement or repair of the damaged section if the curb
contains any of the following:
(1) Less than four inches of exposed vertical facing on the public
street.
(2) Exposed aggregate.
(3) Material (asphalt, concrete, mortar, etc.) added to the gutter so as
to impede normal drainage flow.
§ 217-19 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 217-20
210:350
§ 217-21. Driveway requirements and specifications.
In the construction, reconstruction and repair of driveways, the following
specifications and requirements shall apply:
§ 217-22. Determination of need for reconstruction or repairs.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Township Engineer or Township
Manager or the designee of either to determine, in the case of any individual
sidewalk, curb or driveway, whether the same shall be reconstructed or
repaired and, if so, the specific part or parts thereof to be reconstructed or
repaired, as the case may be.
§ 217-23. Work at property owners' initiative.
Any property owner, upon his own initiative and without notice from the
Township, may reconstruct or repair the sidewalk or curb abutting his
property or the driveway serving his property, provided that he shall first
make application to the Township and that, in the reconstruction or repair
of such sidewalk, curb or driveway, he shall conform in all respects to
the provisions of this article applicable to such work. The fee for said
application shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners.
§ 217-24. Failure to comply; work done by Township.
If any property owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to construct, reconstruct
or repair any sidewalk, curb or driveway, as the case may be, after notice
from the Township, within the time limit specified by such notice, the
Township may cause such work of construction, reconstruction or repair to
(4) A horizontal gap between individual curb sections of one inch or
more.
(5) Adjoining sections or portions thereof whose edges differ vertically
by more than 1/2 inch.
(6) Horizontal cracks causing spalling or the breaking away of the curb
section.
(7) Vertical face of curb that has an offset angle to the public street of
less than 85° or greater than 110°.
A. Every driveway shall be constructed of plain cement concrete, Class A,
conforming to the requirements of the Township Standard Construction
and Material Specifications, as amended, wherever the sidewalk
crosses and shall be of a minimum depth of six inches.
B. Driveways shall be placed on an approved subgrade.
C. Every driveway shall be in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Zoning and Subdivision Land Development Ordinances, as amended.
§ 217-20 SOLID WASTE § 217-24
210:351
be done and shall collect the cost thereof, and 10% additional, from the
owner and may file a municipal claim therefor or collect the same by action
in assumpsit.
§ 217-25. Remedy of defects.
If any property owner shall hereafter construct, reconstruct or repair any
sidewalk, curb or driveway otherwise than in strict conformity with all the
applicable provisions and requirements of this article, the Township may
notify such property owner to correct all such defects by whatever means
is necessary to do so, within 10 days of notice, in default of which the
Township may cause such defects to be corrected and may collect the cost
thereof, with 10% additional, from the owner and may file a municipal claim
therefor or collect the same by action in assumpsit.
§ 217-26. Program of regular and continuing inspection and
maintenance.
The Township Manager is hereby vested with authority to institute a
program of regular inspection of sidewalk, curb and driveway conditions
in any area or areas of the Township as he, in his discretion or by specific
direction from the Board of Commissioners, may determine, on an annual
basis, so that it shall be expedient for the Board of Commissioners to
let a contract or contracts for replacement, repair, root removal, etc., to
the end that the citizens who are given notice to repair pursuant to such
program shall have the benefit of reasonable costs in making such repair
and replacement if they choose to use the contractor(s) so designated by
the Township.
§ 217-27. Assessment and payment.
A. The Township's cost of the materials, labor and related work with
respect to each property owner utilizing the Township's designated
contractor shall be assessed on a lineal-foot or other equitable basis,
and the Township Engineer or Township Manager or the designee of
either shall calculate and ascertain the assessment assessable upon
such property and shall prepare assessment bills or certificates and
certify to the Township the correctness of the same, which assessment
bills or certificates, duly certified under the Seal of Upper Allen
Township and attested by the President of the Board of Commissioners
and by the Secretary, shall be collected from the owner or owners of
such property.
B. Said assessment bills or certificates, when executed as provided in
Subsection A hereof, shall be served upon the owner or owners of such
property either personally or by leaving the same with an adult member
of the family with whom said owner or owners reside if the owner or
owners cannot be found within Upper Allen Township. If said owner or
owners of said property have no residence or cannot be found in Upper
Allen Township, the bill shall be posted upon the premises or a copy
§ 217-24 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 217-27
210:352
§ 217-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person who or which violates or permits a violation of this article,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article.
No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the
violation by the Magisterial District Justice and/or court. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate
officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable
relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
thereof left with the occupant, if there is one, and shall further be
mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner or owners or his
or their agent or attorney at his or their last known address. If the
owner of said property is a corporation, said bill may be served upon
the president or secretary or other person in charge if it has an office or
place of business in Upper Allen Township. If, however, said corporation
shall have no office or place of business in Upper Allen Township, then
said bill or bills shall be posted on the premises and a copy left with the
occupant, if there is one, and shall further be mailed by registered or
certified mail to said corporation at its last known address. In all cases
where said bill shall be sent by registered or certified mail, the time
herein provided shall be computed from the date said letter shall be
mailed or registered, provided that a bill has been previously posted on
the premises.
C. Said assessments shall be payable forthwith at the office of the
Treasurer of the Township, and the Township Engineer and the
Township Secretary, as soon as possible after the assessment shall have
been approved by the Board of Commissioners, shall certify a complete
duplicate copy thereof to the Township Treasurer. Should an owner or
owners of said property against which an assessment shall have been
made refuse or neglect to pay such assessment within 120 days after
notice of the same, as provided in Subsection B hereof, the Township
shall immediately file a claim therefor, together with 10% as penalty
added and legal interest thereon, against the property upon which such
assessment or assessments have been made, and it is hereby made the
duty of the Township Treasurer that he shall certify to the Township
Solicitor all unpaid assessments or assessment bills. It shall be the duty
of the Township Solicitor, when any such assessments or assessment
bills shall have been certified to him or her as aforesaid, to file a claim
in the proper office of the County of Cumberland therefor against the
property or properties upon which such assessments or assessment
bills shall have been made. The Township Solicitor shall thereupon
proceed to collect the same under the general law relating to the
collection of municipal claims.
§ 217-27 SOLID WASTE § 217-28
210:353
Chapter 220
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 217-28 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 217-28
210:354
ARTICLE I
Short Title, Purpose, Authority and Jurisdiction
§ 220-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Township of Upper
Allen Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 220-2. Purpose.
The purpose of these subdivision and land development regulations is to
provide for the harmonious development of the Township by:
§ 220-3. Authority and jurisdiction.
No subdivision and land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be made, no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or
other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed,
opened, or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common use of
occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The authority for the control and regulation of
subdivision and land development within the Township shall be as follows:
A. Assisting in the orderly and efficient integration of land developments
within the Township.
B. Ensuring conformance of land development plans with public
improvement plans and programs.
C. Ensuring coordination of intermunicipal public improvement plans and
programs.
D. Securing the protection of water resources and drainageways.
E. Facilitating the efficient movement of traffic.
F. Securing equitable handling of all land development plans by providing
uniform standards and procedures.
G. In general, promoting greater health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of the Township.
H. Securing adequate sites for recreation, conservation, scenic and other
open space purposes.
I. Achieving general consistency with the statement of community goals
and objectives as contained in the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan.
A. Review by the Township Planning Commission. The Township of Upper
Allen Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the "Planning
Commission," shall be vested with the review of subdivision and land
development plans.
§ 220-1 SOLID WASTE § 220-3
210:355
B. Review by the County Planning Commission. Plans for subdivision and
land development located within the Township of Upper Allen shall be
forwarded upon receipt by the Township to the Cumberland County
Planning Commission for review and report. The Township of Upper
Allen Board of Commissioners shall not give final approval to such plans
until the County report is received or until the expiration of 30 days
from the date the application was forwarded to the County.
C. Approval by the Township Board of Commissioners. The Township of
Upper Allen Board of Commissioners, hereinafter referred to as the
"Board of Commissioners," shall be vested with the authority to approve
or disapprove all subdivision and land development plans.
D. The Planning Commission shall be vested with the authority to approve
or disapprove lot add-on plans. [Added 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
§ 220-3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-3
210:356
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 220-4. Definitions; word usage.
A. General definitions and word usage. In this chapter when not
inconsistent with the context:
(1) Words in the present tense imply also the future tense.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The male gender includes the female gender.
(4) The word "person" includes a partnership or corporation as well as
an individual.
(5) The term "shall" or "must" is always mandatory.
(6) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
(7) The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied."
(8) The word "erected" shall be construed to include the words
"constructed, altered or moved."
(9) The word "building" shall include any structure or part thereof.
B. Specific words and phrases. The following words are defined in order to
facilitate the interpretation of the chapter for administrative purposes
and in the carrying out of duties by appropriate offices and by the
Township Board of Commissioners.
ABUTTING — Having property or district lines in common.
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or
pedestrian physical entrance and exit to a property.
ACCESS DRIVE — A paved surface or other surface, other than a street,
which provides vehicular and/or pedestrian access from a street or a
private road to a lot. Access drives shall be located and constructed
so as to provide safe ingress and egress with respect to the lot. If the
access drive provides access to a state highway, issuance of a highway
occupancy permit by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
shall be required prior to the issuance of any permit under this chapter.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — See definition of "structure, accessory."
ACT — The latest version of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (MPC), as amended.
ADJUSTED TRACT AREA APPROACH — One of two methods of
determining the maximum number of permitted dwelling units in
conservation subdivisions where the adjusted tract area of the site
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:357
equals the gross tract area minus the constrained land on the site. The
actual methodology is outlined in the Upper Allen Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended.112 The other method is the yield plan.
AGENT — Any person other than the developer who, acting for the
developer, submits to the Planning Commission and Township
Commissioners land development plans for the purpose of obtaining
approval thereof.
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking
spaces.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare other than a side street which affords
only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not
intended for general traffic circulation.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application for development, including his or her personal
representatives, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to the
start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plot
or plan, or for the approval of a development plan.
APPROXIMATED FLOODPLAIN — Those portions of land within the FPFloodplain
District subject to inundation by the one-hundred-year flood
where a detailed study has not yet been performed but where a onehundred-
year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Where the
specific one-hundred-year flood elevation cannot be determined for this
unique area using other sources of data such as the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers' Floodplain Information Reports, U.S. Geological Survey
Flood Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed
use, development, and/or activity shall determine this elevation in
accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Only
professional engineers, or others of demonstrated qualifications, shall
undertake hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Township.
In addition, information from other federal, state and other acceptable
sources shall be used to determine a floodway area, if possible.
ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL — Regulations governing the appearance
or architectural style of buildings or structures.
AREA — The total outside surface of anything, as measured in square
feet.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of
individual parcels of land shown on a subdivision plan, excluding
(1)
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245.
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:358
AVERAGE GROSS RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling
units per acre in a planned residential development, computed by
dividing the number of dwelling units which the applicant proposes to
construct by the number of acres in the development which are not
planned to be devoted to commercial use. If the developer is required
to dedicate land for sites for schools or other public facilities, such land
shall be included in the total land area used in computing maximum
permissible average gross density. If he is required to set aside land for
such purposes, it shall not be included in the computation of average
gross density. If such land is not acquired by the appropriate body by
the date of the sale or rental of 51% of the dwelling units in the planned
residential development, then, at the option of the developer, the land
may be used for residential purpose, subject to the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance.113
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 or
more of its height (measured from floor to ceiling) above the average
level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story
for the purpose of height measurement if the vertical distance between
the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than
five feet or if used for business or dwelling purposes, other than a game
or recreation room.
BERM — A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to obstruct
views.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded on one side by a street and on
the other sides (normally three) by streets, railroad rights-of-way,
waterways, unsubdivided areas and other definite barriers.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Upper Allen.
BUFFER AREA — A strip of land which is planted and maintained in
shrubs, bushes, trees, grass or other landscaping material and within
which no structure is permitted except a wall or fence.
BUFFER YARD — An open area whose dimensions normally exceed
the normal building setback or yard requirement used to protect lowdensity
uses and zoning districts from adjacent higher-density uses and
districts.
BUILDING — Any structure on a lot having a roof supported by columns
or walls and designed and/or intended for the shelter, housing or
any area within a street right-of-way and including the area of any
easement or future street right-of-way.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane
at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps
(gross living area).
(2)
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245.
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:359
enclosure of persons, animals or chattel and including covered porches,
bay windows and chimneys.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal area measured within the
outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and
accessory buildings on a lot.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building
nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and
covered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed but does not include
steps.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The mean grade at the front of the structure
to the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line set
so as to provide the required yard.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A structure enclosed within exterior walls
or fire walls, built, erected, and framed of component structural parts,
designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure, and support of individuals,
animals, or property of any kind; the main structure on a given lot; a
building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is
situated.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE (SETBACK) — The line within a property
defining the required minimum distance between any enclosed
structure and the adjacent right-of-way and the line defining side and
rear yards, where required.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six inches
above ground level for trees up to four inches in diameter and 12 inches
above ground level for trees over four inches in diameter.
CARTWAY or ROADWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way which is
paved, improved, designated or intended for vehicular traffic.
CELLAR (BASEMENT) — A story partly underground having more than
1/2 of its clear height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
A cellar shall not be considered in determining the required number of
stories.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by the center lines of the streets and by a line of
sight between points on their center lines at a given distance from the
intersection of the center lines.
COMMISSION — The Upper Allen Township Planning Commission,
unless otherwise noted.
COMMISSIONERS — Upper Allen Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:360
COMMON AREA — The area in a subdivision or planned residential
development, including common open space, owned or leased and
maintained by an association or other combination of persons for the
benefit of the residents of the planned residential development and, if
owned under the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act, including all common
elements designated for the use of all dwelling unit owners.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Means and includes:
COMMON FACILITIES — When referring to a development, these
facilities are common or community open space, recreational facilities,
community sewage facilities, community water supply facilities,
stormwater management facilities, common parking areas and
driveways, preservation areas, private streets, or other community
facilities.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area
of water or a combination of land and water within a development
plan designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of
the development plan and, where designed, the community at large.
Common open space does not include rights-of-way, off-street parking
areas, and areas set aside for public facilities. Common open space
shall be substantially free of structures but may contain such
improvements as approved in the development plan that are
appropriate to recreational and other open-space uses of the land
and shall not include playground, athletic field or other open space
areas of any schools or churches to be included within the proposed
development.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature from two or more lots, and the treatment and/or disposal
of the sewage or industrial waste on one or more of the lots or at any
The land on which a building is located and portions of the building
which are not included in a unit;
(1)
The foundations, structural parts, supports, main walls, roofs,
basements, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairways and entrances and
exits of a building;
(2)
(3) The yards, parking area and driveways;
Portions of land and building used exclusively for the management,
operation or maintenance of the common elements;
(4)
(5) Installations of all central services and utilities;
All other elements of a building necessary or convenient to its
existence, management, operation, maintenance and safety or
normally in common use; and
(6)
(7) Such other facilities as are designated as common elements.
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:361
other site, and which shall comply with all applicable regulations of the
PA Department of Environmental Protection.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A public or private utility
system designated to transmit potable water from a common source
to multiple users. Such systems shall be in compliance with the
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) or the Township,
whichever is more stringent.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official public document prepared in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of
July 31, 1968, P. L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted, consisting
of maps, charts, and textual material, that constitutes decisions about
the physical and social development of the Township of Upper Allen, as
amended.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary presentation and attendant
documentation of a proposed subdivision or site plan of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification.
CONSERVATION AREAS — Undeveloped and undisturbed areas set
aside for the preservation and/or continuation of the natural
environment, to promote recreational use, agricultural use and
retention of open space and undeveloped floodplain areas, and to
provide areas of wildlife habitat.
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION — A land development process that
seeks to identify and permanently protect special natural and/or
environmental features and open space in designated conservation
areas, greenway areas, or preserves.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
CONSTRUCTION, NEW — For the purpose of complying with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, new
construction shall be identified as structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after January 30, 1980, and includes any
subsequent improvements thereto.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
residential development or conservation subdivisions.
COUNTY — County of Cumberland, Pennsylvania.
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same
lot with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls
of such building.
COURT, INNER — A court which does not extend to a street, alley, yard,
or outer court.
COURT, OUTER — A court which extends to a street, alley, yard, or
other outer court.
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:362
COVERAGE — That portion or percentage of the plot or lot covered by
the building area.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and having the other
end for the reversal of traffic movement.
CURB — The raised edge of a pavement to confine surface water to the
pavement and to protect the abutting land from vehicular traffic.
CURBLINE — The outside edge of the cartway.
DEDICATION — An act transmitting property or interest thereto.
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DESIGN FLOOD — The relative size or magnitude of a major flood of
reasonable expectancy, which reflects both flood experience and flood
potential and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway, the flood
hazard area, and the water surface elevations.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Standards that set forth specific improvement
requirements.
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural water-collector facility
designed to collect surface and subsurface water in order to impede
its flow and to release the same gradually at a rate not greater than
that prior to the development of the property into natural or man-made
outlets.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or land development or submits a development plan
under the terms of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — A planning or construction project involving
substantial property improvement and, usually, a change of land-use
character within the site; the act of using land for building or extractive
purposes.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of land under
the provisions of this chapter, including a plat of subdivision; all
covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other
structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways
and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The
phrase "provisions of the development plan" when used in this chapter
shall mean both the written and graphic materials referred to in this
definition.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT — A zoning and/or building permit
authorizing the construction, repair, demolition, relocation and
reconstruction of a structure, or any other permit requested or issued
in connection with any of the activities defined under "development"
herein.
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:363
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Zoning, subdivision, site plan, official
map, floodplain regulation, or other governmental regulation of the use
and development of land.
DISTURBANCE OF VEGETATIVE COVER — Removal, destruction or
damaging of plants, including trees, shrubs, herbaceous growth, by
methods including but not limited to cutting, bulldozing, plowing,
regrading, digging, or intensive use of herbicides (in which selective
species are intended to be eradicated or which the intent is to
defoliate).
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot fronting on two streets, other than a
corner lot.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, pipe, culvert, storm sewer
or other structure designed, intended or constructed for the purpose
of diverting surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets,
public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas or any part of any land
development or contiguous land areas.
DRIVEWAY — A minor vehicular right-of-way providing access between
a street and a parking area or garage within a lot or property.
DRIVEWAY/ACCESS ROAD — A cartway or traveled path, improved
or unimproved, by means of which ingress and egress to and from
private property is gained and which intersects with a Township, state
or county right-of-way.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOUSING — Any structure designed
primarily for residential occupancy, which is wholly or in substantial
part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities
for installation or assembly and installation on the building site in such
a manner that all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot
be inspected at the site without disassembly, damage or destruction.
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION — A legal agreement a property owner
makes to restrict the type and amount of development that may take
place on his or her property. The easement spells out the rights the
landowner retains and the restrictions on use of the property.
EASEMENT, UTILITY — A right-of-way granted for the limited use of
land for public, quasi-public or private purposes.
ENGINEERING LAND SURVEYS — Surveys for: 1) the development
of any tract of land including the incidental design of related
improvements, such as line and grade extension of roads, sewers and
grading, but not requiring independent engineering judgment;
provided, however, that tract perimeter surveys shall be functions of
the professional land surveyor; 2) the determination of the
configuration or contour of the earth's surface or the position of a fixed
object thereon or related thereto by means of measuring lines and
angles and applying the principles of mathematics, photogrammetry
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:364
or other measurement methods; 3) geodetic or cadastral survey,
underground survey and hydrographic survey; 4) sedimentation and
erosion control surveys; 5) the determination of the quantities of
materials; 6) tests for water percolation in soils; and 7) the preparation
of plans and specifications and estimates of proposed work as described
in this subsection.
ENGINEER, REGISTERED — See definition of "professional engineer."
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — A professional engineer, licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for
the Township.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS — Features, natural resources or
land characteristics that are sensitive to improvements and may require
conservation measures or the application of creative development
techniques to prevent degradation of the environment, or may require
limited development, or in certain instances may preclude
development.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT — An assessment of the
impact of a use on the: 1) natural environment, i.e. geology, topography,
soils, hydrology, vegetation, wildlife, wetlands, and air quality; and
2) the cultural environment, i.e. lot use, utilities, traffic, population,
economics, services, historic assets and general character of the
neighborhood. The assessment of traffic impact must include a
complete traffic analysis prepared and sealed by a professional traffic
engineer, identifying the impact of the proposed development on
existing traffic and circulation patterns and proposing solutions to
problems which may arise as consequence of the proposed
development.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — An area with one or more
of the following environmental characteristics: floodway, rock
outcroppings, steep slope, one-hundred-year floodplain or
wetlands.[Amended 2-20-2013 by Ord. No. 704]
ESCROW — A deed, a bond, money or a piece of property delivered to a
third person to be delivered by him to the grantee only upon fulfillment
of a condition.
EXACTION — A contribution or payment required as an authorized
precondition for receiving a development permit.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
FLAG LOT — See definition of "lot, flag."
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR (BASE FLOOD) — A flood which is
likely to be equaled or exceeded once every 100 years (i.e., that has
a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year). A
study by the Federal Insurance Administration, the United States Army
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:365
Corps of Engineers, the United States Department of Agriculture's
Soil Conservation Service, the United States Geological Survey, the
Susquehanna River Basin Commission, the Department of
Environmental Protection, or a licensed professional registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such a study is necessary to
define this flood.
FLOOD, FIVE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood which is likely to be equaled
or exceeded once every 500 years (i.e., that has a 1/5 of 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A study by the Federal
Insurance Administration, the United States Army Corps of Engineers,
the United States Department of Agriculture's Soil Conservation
Service, the United States Geological Survey, the Susquehanna River
Basin Commission, the Department of Environmental Protection, or a
licensed professional registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
to perform such a study is necessary to define this flood.
FLOOD BOUNDARY, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The outer boundary of
an area of land that is likely to be flooded once every 100 years
(i.e., that has a 1% chance of being flooded each year). A study by
the Federal Insurance Administration, the United States Army Corps
of Engineers, the United States Department of Agriculture's Soil
Conservation Service, the United States Geological Survey, the
Susquehanna River Basin Commission, the Department of
Environmental Protection, or a licensed professional registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such a study is necessary to
define this boundary.
FLOOD BOUNDARY, FIVE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The outer boundary of
an area of land that is likely to be flooded once every 500 years (i.e.,
that has 1/5 of 1% chance of being flooded each year). A study by
the Federal Insurance Administration, the United States Army Corps
of Engineers, the United States Department of Agriculture's Soil
Conservation Service, the United States Geological Survey, the
Susquehanna River Basin Commission, the Department of
Environmental Protection, or a licensed professional registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such a study is necessary to
define this boundary.
FLOOD ELEVATION, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The water surface
elevations of the one-hundred-year flood.
FLOOD ELEVATION, FIVE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The water surface
elevations of the five-hundred-year flood.
FLOOD OF RECORD — The flood which has reached the highest flood
elevation above mean sea level at a particular location.
FLOODPLAIN — A floodplain may be either or a combination of: 1) a
relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete
inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse,
during a one-hundred-year design frequency storm; or 2) any area
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:366
subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface
waters from any source.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map indicating that an official
flood hazard may be issued or approved by the Federal Insurance
Administrator.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A land area adjoining a river,
stream, watercourse, ocean, bay or lake which is likely to be flooded.
Floodplain area with special flood hazards means that maximum area
of the floodplain that, on average, is likely to be flooded once every 100
years (i.e., that has a 1% chance of being flooded each year).
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduces or
eliminates flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. With regard to
nonresidential structures, the term "floodproofing" shall also mean that
the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
be designed so that any space below the regulatory flood elevation
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydromatic loads and effects of buoyancy.
FLOODWAY — The areas identified as floodway in the Flood Insurance
Study prepared by the FEMA. The term shall also include floodway
areas which have been identified in the other available studies or
sources of information for those floodplain areas where no floodway has
been identified in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — Those portions of land within the FP-Floodplain
District subject to inundations by the one-hundred-year flood beyond
the floodway in areas where detailed study and profiles area available.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING (GROSS) — The sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of a building and its accessory
buildings on the same lot, excluding cellar and basement floor areas
not devoted to residential use, but including the area of roofed porches
and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior
faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA RETAIL, NET — All that space relegated to use by the
customer and the retail employee to consummate retail sales and to
include display area used to indicate the variety of goods available for
the customer, but not to include office space, storage space and other
general administrative areas.
FLOOR, LOWEST — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:367
FRONTAGE — The horizontal or curvilinear distance along the street
line upon which a lot abuts.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way width required for the
expansion of existing streets to accommodate anticipated future traffic
loads; a right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Upper Allen, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY — Any federal, state or local agency
having authority over health factors such as sewers, water and other
related matters.
GREENWAY — A greenway may be any one or combination of the
following: 1) a linear open space established along either a natural
corridor, such as a riverfront, stream valley or ridge line, or over land
along a railroad right-of-way converted to recreational use, a canal,
a scenic road, or other route; 2) a natural or landscaped course for
pedestrian or bicycle passage; 3) an open space connector linking
parks, natural reserves, cultural features, or historic sites with each
other and with populated areas; and 4) strip or linear parks designated
as a parkway or greenbelt.
GROSS BUILDING AREA — The total area of a building available
for construction or use, as measured from the exterior walls of the
building. Gross building area should be used in computing all square
footage measurements for buildings as well as dimension requirements.
GROUND FLOOR — The floor of a building nearest the mean grade of
the front of the building.
HIGHWAY — See definition of "streets."
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — That area of the lot covered by impervious
surface.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that does not absorb rain,
including all buildings and other structures, parking areas, driveways,
roads, sidewalks, storage areas and areas of concrete, nonporous
asphalt and stone and other such areas as shall be determined to be
nonporous by the Board of Commissioners and/or Township Engineer.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions, installations and
changes required to render land suitable for the use intended, including
grading, paving, curbing, streetlights and signs, fire hydrants, water
mains, electric service, gas service, sanitary sewers, storm drains,
sidewalks, crosswalks, driveways, culverts, and other public utilities
and street shade trees.
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — Any street for which Township, county,
or commonwealth has maintenance responsibility and which is paved
with an approved hardtop surface.
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:368
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC — Streets, pavements, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, grading, street
signs and plantings, and other items required for the welfare of the
property owners and the public.
INDIVIDUAL ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system of piping,
tanks, or other facilities serving a single lot and collecting and
disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil and any waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by means of conveyance to
another site for final disposition, and which is located upon the lot
which it serves.
INTERIOR WALK — The right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from
a street into a block or across a block to another street.
INTERSTATE SYSTEM — That portion of the national system of
international and defense highways located within Pennsylvania, as
officially designated or as may hereafter be designated by the Secretary
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and approved by the
United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the provisions of
Title 23, United States Code, "Highways."
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LANDFILL — See definition of "sanitary landfill."
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any other purpose, involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominium, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Land development shall not include:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium; or
(a)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building.
(b)
(3)
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:369
not such option or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee if
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner; or
other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE PLAN — A component of a development plan, if required,
on which is shown proposed landscape species (such as number,
spacing, size at time of planting, and planting details), proposals for
protection of existing vegetation during and after construction,
proposed treatment of hard and soft surfaces, proposed decorative
features, grade changes, buffers and screening devices, and any other
information that can reasonably be required in order that an informed
decision can be made by the Board of Commissioners.
LAND-USE CONTROLS — A term generally referring to the use of
police power techniques to control and guide land use and
development.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space on the same lot with a building
or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of
a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials, and which abuts on or has access to a street.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT, AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot
as shown on a subdivision plan, excluding space within any street
but including the area of any easement.
(1)
LOT, CORNER — A lot with two adjacent sides abutting on streets,
which has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection
of the two street lines. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be
considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of
intersection of the side lot lines with the street line intersect at an
interior angle of less than 135°.
(2)
LOT, FLAG — A large lot not meeting minimum frontage
requirements and where access to the public road is by a narrow
private right-of-way or driveway.
(3)
(4) LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the
side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a
straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required
building setback line.
(5)
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot the area or dimension of which
was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or
amendment.
(6)
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:370
LOT ADD-ON — A subdivision plan, or lot consolidation plan, which
proposes to alter the location of lot lines between existing lots to either
increase a lot size or delete a lot line. Additional development involving
the newly created lot shall be subject to the requirements of applicable
Township ordinances.[Added 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
LOT COVERAGE — The total of impervious areas, including building
area, divided by lot area.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A through lot that is not accessible
from one of the parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which
it fronts. In the case of a lot fronting on streets of different
classification, access to the lot shall be from the lower classified
roadway in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan Classification of Roadways.
Example of Lot Types
(7)
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or
that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries
of the lot. Lots fronting on a street and an alley are not considered
through lots.
(8)
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:371
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance measured between the street
right-of-way line and the closest rear property line. On corner and
reverse frontage lots, the depth shall be measured from the street rightof-
way line of the street of address to the directly opposite property
line.
LOT LINES — The boundary lines of a lot as defined herein.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which has been recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines at the
required or proposed building setback line. When there is only one side
lot line, as in the case of single-family semidetached or some singlefamily
attached dwellings, the lot width shall be measured between the
side lot line and the center line of the party wall. For interior singlefamily
attached dwellings, lot width shall be measured between the
center lines of party walls. On corner lots, lot width shall be measured
between the right-of-way line for the non-address street and directly
opposite property line.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps
together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and
protect the lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply.
MANUFACTURED HOME — See "dwelling, manufactured home."
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a manufactured
home park improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single
manufactured home. (See also definition of "mobile home lot.")
FRONT LOT LINE — The lot line separating a lot from a street
right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot or a lot abutting a street
right-of-way on more than one side, the front lot line shall be
determined based on the street address assigned by the post office.
(1)
REAR LOT LINE — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45°
of being parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself
a street line. In the case of a corner lot, the owner shall have the
option of choosing which of the two lot lines which are not street
lines is to be considered a "rear lot line." In the case of a lot having
no street frontage or a lot of an odd shape, only the one lot line
further from any street shall be considered a rear lot line.
(2)
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line which is not a street line or a rear
lot line.
(3)
STREET LINE — A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way
and separating the street from abutting property or lots. Commonly
known as the "street right-of-way line."
(4)
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:372
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — Minor streets, parallel and adjacent to
major traffic streets, which provide access to abutting properties and
control intersections with major traffic street.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel, or contiguous parcels of land under
single ownership, which has been so designated and improved that it
contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of
mobile homes for nontransient use.
MOBILE HOME SALES LOT — An open lot for the outdoor display of
new or used mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME STAND OR PAD — That part of an individual mobile
home space which has been reserved for the placement of a mobile
home and appurtenant structures and connections.
MODULAR/MANUFACTURED HOME — A type of dwelling that is in
substantial part but not wholly produced in sections off the site and
then is assembled and completed on the site. This shall not include
any dwelling that meets the definition of mobile home, nor shall it
include any dwelling that does not rest on a permanent foundation, nor
any dwelling intended to be able to be moved to a different site once
assembled, nor any dwelling that would not fully comply with any and
all applicable building codes. A modular home also shall not include a
building that includes only one substantial piece prior to delivery on the
site.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) — The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
amended and reenacted (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Upper Allen.
NATURAL FEATURE — A component of a landscape existing or
maintained as part of the natural environment and having ecologic
value in contributing beneficially to air quality, erosion control,
groundwater recharge, noise abatement, visual amenities, growth of
wildlife, human recreation, reduction of climatic stress or energy costs.
Such features include those of which, if disturbed, may cause hazards
or stress to natural habitats, property or the natural environment.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of which the area or dimension was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:373
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMITY, DIMENSIONAL — Any aspect of a land use that
does not comply with any size, height, bulk, setback, distance,
landscaping, coverage, screening, or any other design or performance
standard specified by this chapter, where such dimensional
nonconformity lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this chapter or
amendment thereto.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) that is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OFF-STREET PARKING — Parking of motor vehicles as an accessory
use located upon the same lot as a permitted principal use or, in
the case of joint parking, within close proximity to serve the parking
requirements and needs of the principal use.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A parking space provided in a parking
lot, parking structure or private driveway.
OFF-TRACT — A tract not located on the property that is the subject
of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article IV
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-STREET PARKING SPACE — A parking space that is located on a
dedicated or private street right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for the
public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of
owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open
space.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with other
persons, has legal title to any premises. This does not include a lessee,
sublessee or other person who merely has the right to occupy or
possess the premises.
OWNER-OCCUPIED — The property owner, as reflected in title records,
makes his or her legal residence at the site, as evidenced by voter
registration, vehicle registration, or similar means.
PARCEL — A lot or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or
under single control, and usually considered a unit for purposes of
development.
PARKING LOT — Any lot, municipally or privately owned, for off-street
parking facilities, providing for the transient storage of automobiles or
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:374
motor-driven vehicles. Such parking services may be provided as a free
service or for a fee.
PARKING SPACE — The area required for parking one motor vehicle.
PARTY — A person or group taking one side of a question, dispute or
contest.
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — An improved thoroughfare designated
exclusively for pedestrian traffic.
PERFORMANCE BOND — An agreement by and between a contractor
and a bonding company in favor of the developer and the Township
Board of Commissioners guaranteeing the completion of physical
improvements.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — A minimum requirement or maximum
allowable limit on the effects or characteristics of a use, usually written
in the form of regulatory language.
PERSON — A person shall mean and include one or more individuals,
partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, legal
representatives, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that permits full or partial
absorption of stormwater.
PLAN — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
sketch, preliminary or final.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A contiguous area of land
controlled by a landowner to be developed as a single entity for a
number of residential and nonresidential units, the development plan
for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling,
density, lot coverage and required open space to the regulations
established in any one residential district created from time to time
under the provisions of a municipal zoning ordinance.
PLANNING AGENCY — The Planning Commission of Upper Allen
Township.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact land development plan,
prepared for official recording, to define property rights and
proposed streets and other improvements.
(1)
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative land development plan, in
lesser detail than a final plan, showing the salient existing features
of a tract and its surroundings and approximate proposed street
and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a
final plan.
(2)
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal land development plan, not
necessarily to scale, indicating salient existing features of a tract
and its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed land
development for discussion purposes only and not to be presented
for approval.
(3)
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:375
PLANNING MODULE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — A revision to, or
an exception to a revision to, the Township's Official Sewage Facilities
Plan submitted in connection with the request for approval of a
subdivision or land development in accordance with Department
regulations.
PLAT — See definition of "plan."
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY — Water suitable for drinking or cooking
purposes.
PRACTICE OF ENGINEERING — Means the application of the
mathematical and physical sciences for the design of public or private
buildings, structures, machines, equipment, processes, works of
engineering systems, and the consolation, investigation, evaluation,
engineering surveys, planning and inspection in connection therewith,
the performance of the foregoing acts and services being prohibited
to persons who are not licensed under the laws of the commonwealth
as professional engineers unless exempt under other provisions of the
laws of the commonwealth. The term "practice of engineering" shall
also mean and include related acts and services that may be performed
by other qualified persons, including but not limited to municipal
planning, incidental landscape architecture, teaching, construction,
maintenance and research, but licensure under the laws of the
commonwealth to engage in or perform any such related acts and
services shall not be required.
PRACTICE OF LAND SURVEYING — Means the practice of that branch
of the profession of engineering which involves the location, relocation,
establishment, reestablishment or retracement of any property line or
boundary of any parcel of land or any road right-of-way; easement
of alignment; the use of principles of land surveying; determination
of the position of any monument or reference point which marks a
property line boundary, or corner setting, resetting or replacing any
such monument or individual point, including the writing of deed
descriptions; procuring or offering to procure land surveying work for
himself or others; managing or conducting managers, proprietors or
agents of any place of business from which land surveying work is
solicited, performed or practiced; the performance of the foregoing
acts and services being prohibited to persons who are not granted
certificates of registration under the laws of the commonwealth as a
professional land surveyor unless exempt under other provisions of the
laws of the commonwealth.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — An initial meeting between
developers and the Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer which
affords applicants and/or developers the opportunity to present their
proposals informally.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights prior to
final approval after specific elements of a development plan have been
agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:376
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT — A map indicating the proposed
layout of a development and related information that is submitted for
preliminary approval.
PRIMARY SYSTEM — The portion of connected main highways located
within Pennsylvania which now or hereafter may be designated
officially by the Secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and approved by the Secretary of Transportation of the
United States pursuant to Title 23, United States Code, "Highways."
PRIVATE OR NONPUBLIC STREETS — All streets which are not public,
including but not limited to streets maintained by private agreements,
by private owners, or for which no maintenance responsibility has been
established.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — An individual licensed and registered
under the laws of this commonwealth to engage in the practice of
engineering. A professional engineer may not practice land surveying
unless licensed and registered as a professional land surveyor as
defined and set forth in this chapter; however, a professional engineer
may perform engineering land surveys.
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR — An individual licensed and
registered under the laws of this commonwealth to engage in the
practice of land surveying. A professional land surveyor may perform
engineering land surveys but may not practice any other branch of
engineering.
PROFILE LINE (STREET CENTER LINE) — The profile of the center
line of the finished surface of the street, which shall be midway between
the side lines of the street.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a governmental agency
(federal, state or local, including a corporation created by law for the
performance of certain specialized governmental functions, and the
Department of Education).
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — An improvement that has been or will
be dedicated for public use or that is designed to provide adequate
transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection or recreational
facilities or to serve other public requirements in accordance with this
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
and the Zoning Ordinance.114
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas;
(1)
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities; and
(2)
(3) Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245.
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:377
PUBLIC SEWER — A municipal sanitary sewer system, or a comparable
common or package sanitary facility, approved by the State of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection.
PUBLIC STREET/ROAD — A street ordained or maintained or dedicated
and accepted by the Township, county, state, or federal government and
open to public use.
PUBLIC WATER — A municipal water supply system, or a comparable
common water facility, approved by the State of Pennsylvania,
Department of Environmental Protection.
RECREATION OPEN SPACE — The area of land suitable for the
development of specific active recreation facilities for leisure-time
activities, usually of a formal nature and often performed with others,
requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or
fields, including but not limited to baseball fields, soccer fields, football
fields, tennis, basketball and other court games, hockey facilities,
multipurpose fields and community swimming pools and attendant
facilities.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision or land development,
as those terms are defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, whether initially or cumulatively, of a tract under single or
separate ownership, for the purpose of erecting residential dwelling
units.
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or basin used for the permanent
storage of water runoff.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or
for another special use. If the right-of-way involves maintenance by a
public agency, it shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the
plat on which such right-of-way is established.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A public or private thoroughfare for
vehicular traffic and/or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a
street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, land
or however designated.
SCREENING — The provision of a barrier to visibility, airborne
particles, glare and noise between adjacent properties, uses and/or
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way established by the
state or other appropriate governing authority and currently in
existence.
(1)
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY (ULTIMATE) — The right-of-way deemed
necessary by the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan.
(2)
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:378
districts, composed entirely of trees, berm, shrubs, hedges, sight-tight
fences and/or other similar-type materials.
SCREEN PLANTING — A vegetative material of sufficient height and
density to conceal from the view of adjoining property owners the
structures and uses on the premises on which the screen planting is
located.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter
is accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once
this matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually
referred to as "sediment."
SETBACK (BUILDING SETBACK LINE) — The line within a property
defining the required minimum distance between any enclosed
structure and the adjacent dedicated right-of-way and the line defining
rear and side yards, where required.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (ON-SITE) — Any system designed to
eliminate sanitary sewage within the boundaries of the lot.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (PUBLIC OR COMMUNITY) — A sanitary
sewage collection method in which sewage is carried from the site by a
system of pipes to the central treatment and disposal plant.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — The Sewage
Enforcement Officer of the Township.
SEWER — A public or private utility system designed to collect,
centrally treat and dispose of sewage from customers in compliance
with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection regulations
or regulations of the Township, whichever is more stringent. See also
"community sewage system" and "individual on-lot sewage system."
SHADE TREE — A tree in a public place, street, special easement,
private property or right-of-way adjoining a street that provides shade.
SHARED DRIVEWAY — A path or road, extending from a public or
private road to two lots, buildings, dwellings or structures, intended to
provide shared or joint ingress and egress primarily for the occupants
thereof.
SIDEWALK — See definition of "walkway."
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established
at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or
allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SINGLE-LOADED STREETS — Streets having houses only on one side.
[Comment: When lots are trimmed down in width developers can easily
reserve certain street lengths for single loading, such as alongside
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:379
conservation areas or around village greens or commons, without
increasing their average house-lot-to-street-length ratios. Single
loading provides home buyers with views that are more uplifting than
their neighbors' garage doors staring back at them. It also provides all
subdivision residents with welcome views of their conservation land as
they drive, bike, jog, or walk through their neighborhood on a daily
basis, increasing everyone's quality of life as well as their property
values].115
SITE — A parcel of land located in the Township, established by a plat
or otherwise as permitted by law, which is the subject of an application
for development. A site may include more than one lot.
SITE PLAN — An accurately scaled development plan that illustrates
the existing conditions on a land parcel as well as depicting details of a
proposed development.
SKETCH PLAN — See definition of "plan, sketch."
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet over
100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL CEMENT — A mixture of Portland cement and locally available
soil. It serves as a soil stabilizer.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment designed
to increase or maintain the stability of a mass of soil or otherwise to
improve its engineering properties.
STEEP SLOPE — Land with a fifteen-foot-or-greater change in elevation
within 100 feet or less in horizontal distance or, in other terms, 15% or
greater on the average. The following formula is the acceptable method
of determining average slope:[Amended 2-20-2013 by Ord. No. 704]
S = (0.0023 I x L) - A
WHERE
S = Average percent slope of site
I = Contour interval in feet
L = Sum of the length of contours in feet
A = Land area in areas of parcel being considered
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater
runoff and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood
or storm.
STREET — Street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway,
lane, alley, viaduct, and any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private. Streets are
115. Editor's Note: Arendt, Randall G. Conservation Design for Subdivisions -- A Practical
Guide to Creating Open Space Networks. Washington, D.C., Island Press, 1996.
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:380
classified in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive
Plan and are defined as follows:
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of other
streets upon which the lot abuts at the midway of the frontage of the lot
thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of
the street at some midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET WIDTH — The distance between street lines measured at right
angles to the center line of the street.
INTERSTATE HIGHWAY— Limited access highway designed for
traffic between major regional areas or larger urban communities
of 50,000 or more; these highways extend beyond state boundaries,
with access limited to interchanges located by the U.S. Department
of Transportation.
(1)
FREEWAY — Limited access road designed for large volumes of
traffic between communities of 50,000 or more to major regional
traffic generators (such as central business districts, suburban
shopping centers and industrial areas); freeways should be tied
directly to arterial roads, with accessibility limited to specific
interchanges to avoid the impediment of through traffic.
(2)
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A principal arterial provides
land access while retaining a high degree of through-traffic
mobility and serves major centers of urban activity and traffic
generation. They provide a high-speed, high-volume network for
travel between major destinations in both rural and urban areas.
(3)
MINOR ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A minor arterial gives greater
emphasis to land access with a lower level of through-traffic
mobility than a principal arterial and serves larger schools,
industries, hospitals and small commercial areas not incidentally
served by principal arterials.
(4)
COLLECTOR HIGHWAY — A collector road serves dual functions:
collecting traffic between local roads and arterial streets and
providing access to abutting properties. It serves minor traffic
generators, such as local elementary schools, small individual
industrial plants, offices, commercial facilities and warehouses not
served by principal and minor arterials.
(5)
LOCAL ROADS — Those that are local in character and serve
farms, residences, businesses, neighborhoods and abutting
properties.
(6)
LOOP ROAD — A local street of limited length which is intended to
serve as direct or indirect access to residential lots, which begins
and terminates in the same street or highway, but not necessarily
at the same location. [Added 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
(7)
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:381
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A structure subordinate to and detached
from the main building on the same lot, the use of which is customarily
incidental to that of the principal structure on the lot. An accessory
structure shall exclude any vehicle as defined by the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — A structure or part of a structure
that does not comply with the applicable provisions in this chapter
or amendment theretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment or
prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by
reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are
not limited to, nonconforming signs.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or authorized agent of the owner of the lot,
tract or parcel of land to be subdivided for sale or development under
the terms of this chapter. See definition of "applicant" or "developer."
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease petition of the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or
lot development; provided, however, the subdivision by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving
any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall
be exempt.
SUBGRADE — The natural ground lying beneath a road.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either: 1) before the improvement
or repair is started, or 2) if the structure has been damaged and is
being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of the
Zoning Ordinance of Upper Allen Township, substantial improvements
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either state or local health, sanitary
or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe
living conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:382
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, Board of Commissioners (Township Commissioners), its
agents or authorized representatives.
TRACT — In certain districts and uses, the tract is the minimum amount
of land required prior to subdivision into allowed lots.
TRAILER — See definition of "mobile home."
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not
been graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a
building.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
VEGETATIVE COVERAGE — An area covered with a vegetative
material: grass, shrubs, vines and trees.
VIEWSHED — That portion of the landscape which can be readily
viewed by the observer from one or more vantage points. The extent
of area that can be viewed is commonly delineated by landform,
vegetation and/or distance.
WALKWAY — An area designed for pedestrians constructed to the
standards set forth in this Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
WATER FACILITY — Any waterworks, water supply works, water
distribution system or part thereof designed, intended or constructed
to provide or distribute potable water.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use
of groundwater and subsurface resources within the municipality.
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water, river, brook, creek or channel or
ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WETLANDS — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use, building or structure, and located on the same
lot with this principal use, building or structure.
(1)
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary use of property, buildings
or structures.
(2)
§ 220-4 SOLID WASTE § 220-4
210:383
YARD — A space open to the sky and unoccupied by any building,
structure or merchandise for display, sale or storage, located on the
same lot with a building or structure.
YIELD PLAN — One of two methods of determining the maximum
number of permitted dwelling units in a conservation subdivision where
the yield plan is a conceptual layout plan in accordance with the
standards of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
containing proposed lots, streets, rights-of-way, and other pertinent
features. Although the yield plan is drawn to scale, it need not be based
on a field survey. The yield plan is based on a chosen density factor
of a given conservation subdivision option and is applied to the gross
tract acreage. The actual methodology is outlined in the Upper Allen
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.116 The other method is the
adjusted tract area approach.
YARD, BUFFER — A space open to the sky and unoccupied by
any building, structure or merchandise for display, sale or storage,
located on the same lot with a building or structure, but in addition
to and outside of the required front yard, rear yard and side yards.
(1)
YARD, EXTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between the
buildings of a dwelling group or its accessory buildings and the
project boundary or street line.
(2)
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with
a main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the street line and the required building setback line. The
depth of the front yard shall be measured from the street line into
the required building setback line. On a corner lot there shall be a
front yard along the street line.
(3)
YARD, INTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between the
buildings of a dwelling or its accessory buildings; not a front, side
or rear yard.
(4)
YARD, REAR — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with
a main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the rear line of the lot and required building setback line.
The depth of the rear yard shall be measured between the rear line
of the lot and the required building setback line. A building shall
not extend into the required rear yard. On a corner lot, the rear
yard should be the yard area opposite the street of address.
(5)
YARD, SIDE — An open unoccupied space in the same lot with
the building between the side line of the lot and required building
setback line. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be
deemed a side line. A building shall not extend into the required
side yards. On a corner lot, there should only be one side yard.
(6)
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 220-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-4
210:384
ARTICLE III
Plan Requirements and Processing Procedures
§ 220-5. Preparation and filing of plan.
§ 220-6. Sketch plans and data procedure.
A. Whenever a subdivision of land or land development is desired to be
effected in the Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, a plan of the layout shall be prepared, filed and processed
with the Planning Commission and the Township Commissioners
according to the requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. [Amended 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
(1) A lot add-on subdivision plan that does not create any additional
lots may receive Township Planning Commission approval. The
Planning Commission, upon approval or denial, shall give notice to
the developer in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. The lot add-on shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) The existing parcel of land may be added, in whole or in part,
to another existing lot for the sole purpose of increasing the lot
size, provided that:
[1] The parcel to be added shall be contiguous to the existing
lot; and
[2] The lot created shall be conveyed to the adjoining property
owner and shall be considered an extension of that
property owner's original lot; and
[3] The plan shall not create a nonconforming lot; and
[4] The plan shall not alter street alignments, drainage
easements, or other rights-of-way.
(b) The plan shall be prepared in accordance with applicable final
requirements of this chapter, except a preliminary plan need
not be filed.
(c) If a waiver or modification of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance has been requested, then review by
the Board of Commissioners is mandatory.
B. Each applicant shall follow the procedures for the submission and
processing of plans and specifications for such plans as set forth in this
article.
A. Prior to the preparation and filing of the preliminary plan, applicants
are strongly encouraged, but are not required, to submit to the
Planning Commission the following plans and data, and may ascertain
from the Planning Commission those elements which should be
§ 220-5 SOLID WASTE § 220-6
210:385
§ 220-7. Preapplication conference.
As part of the subdivision and land development process, it is strongly
encouraged that the applicant schedule a preapplication conference with
the Township Engineer and/or the Township Zoning Officer prior to
submission of the preliminary and final subdivision and/or land development
plan. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to: 1) foster an
informal plan review between the applicant and the Township staff; 2)
reduce the subdivision processing time and costs for the applicant; and
3) expedite the Township's review and approval process once the plan is
formally submitted. The following procedures and information should be
addressed in the preapplication conference:
§ 220-8. Sketch plans and data specifications.
considered in the design of the subdivision or land development. These
shall include any features of the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive
Plan or of any other plans of the Planning Commission, including but
not limited to proposed streets, recreation areas, drainage
reservations, shopping centers and school sites. Submission of a sketch
plan shall not constitute formal filing of the plan with the Township.
B. If the applicant desires to submit a sketch plan and for the project to
appear on the Township Planning Commission agenda, it is required
that a request for preapplication review include 12 copies of a sketch
plan and one application form available from the Township for
consideration of a subdivision and/or land development plan. The
request shall be submitted to the Township by the first business day of
the month in which the plan will be considered by the Township
Planning Commission. The applicant shall be charged reasonable fees
in accordance with Article VII for engineering-related services.
[Amended 4-17-2013 by Ord. No. 709; 5-20-2015 by Ord. No.
739]
A. The preapplication conference shall be scheduled prior to the initial
plan submission.
B. The applicant shall be charged reasonable fees in accordance with
Article VII for engineering-related services.
C. Due to the informal nature of the preapplication conference, the
applicant or the Township shall not be bound by any determination of
the preapplication conference.
A. The sketch plan shall show the following information:
B. General information. The individual shall provide a narrative describing
the proposed subdivision or land development that shall address the
following items:
(1) Purpose and scope of the subdivision or land development.
§ 220-6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-8
210:386
§ 220-9. Preliminary plans.
(2) Existing land use patterns and conditions of subject tract area and
contiguous parcels.
(3) Major development feature(s).
(4) Provisions for water supply and sewage disposal.
(5) Historical sites.
C. Location map. Provide a map (minimum scale one inch equals 2,000
feet) showing the proposed subdivision or land development's location
with respect to the existing community facilities, local street systems
and municipal boundaries.
D. Sketch plan. Provide a drawing of the proposed land development with
the following features:
(1) Name and address of developer and/or owner, name of
municipality, proposed name of the development, North arrow and
date.
(2) Tract boundaries.
(3) Number of acres in tract, average lot size, approximate number of
lots, anticipated type of development.
(4) Existing and proposed streets, highways, railroads, rights-of-way,
sewers, water mains, fire hydrants and storm sewers.
(5) Proposed general lot layout.
(6) All public facilities such as schools and parks.
(7) Predominant natural features such as wooded areas, streams,
wetlands, floodplains and others as addressed in the Upper Allen
Township Comprehensive Plan.
(8) A location map for the purpose of locating other streets,
developments, recreation areas and rights-of-way to better plan the
proper locations of the same.
(9) Topography, showing contours at vertical intervals of five feet or as
required by the Township Engineer.
(10)Name of the engineer, surveyor or other qualified person
responsible for the map(s).
E. The sketch plan must be drawn to scale. However, approximate
dimensions will be accepted. The plan may be a simple sketch drawn on
a topographic map.
A. Application and review procedure.
§ 220-8 SOLID WASTE § 220-9
210:387
(1) Filing. Preliminary plan application is required for the following:
[Amended 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
(a) Subdivision or land development to be completed in more than
one phase, whether proposed initially or cumulatively.
(2) Preliminary plans shall be submitted to the Township by the first
business day of the month in which the plan will be considered by
the Township Planning Commission in order to be placed on the
agenda.
(3) Applicants are required to submit a sewer facilities plan revision,
supplement or proof of request for a planning module exemption in
conjunction with the preliminary plan.
(4) Application requirements. A preliminary plan application shall
include the following:
(a) A minimum of 15 copies of the preliminary plan and three
copies of all reports, notifications and certifications which are
specified in § 220-11. Additional copies of the preliminary plan
and reports may be required by the Township. [Amended
5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
(b) One application form.
(c) Filing fee as set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
(5) Proper completion. The designated Township representative shall
first determine that the preliminary plan application is complete in
accordance with Subsection A(4). This determination does not
constitute approval or disapproval of the plan but is provided to
assure the submission of sufficient data for the Board of
Commissioners to make a formal action on the plan. The Township
shall complete an administrative review of the application within
10 calendar days of the plan submission. If the application is found
to be incomplete, the applicant shall be notified in writing that the
submitted data does not constitute a formal filing of the preliminary
plan and specify the deficiencies.
(6) Distribution. A designated Township representative shall distribute
the preliminary plan to the Township Zoning Officer, Township
Solicitor, Township Engineer, Park and Recreation Board, Fire
Department, School Board, Township Planning Commission, Board
of Commissioners, and, if deemed necessary, other officials. It shall
be the responsibility of the developer to distribute plans to outside
review and regulatory agencies for required approvals (e.g.,
adjacent municipalities, PennDOT, Cumberland County
Conservation District, PA DEP, and County Planning Commission).
(7) Action by Township. The Township will review and comment
concerning the conformance of the submitted plan with Township
§ 220-9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-9
210:388
ordinances governing design standards, improvements and
construction requirements; and conformance with Township
requirements for installation of individual approved sewage
facilities and other applicable regulatory requirements. Where a
proposed subdivision or land development is located in more than
one municipality, the Board of Commissioners may defer action on
the plan until approval from the adjacent municipality is granted.
All costs incurred through the conducting of any engineering tests
shall be the responsibility of the developer. The Township may
provide the developer an estimate of such costs for tests deemed
necessary.
(8) Action by Township Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall review and recommend approval to the Board of
Commissioners.
(9) Action by Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners
shall approve or disapprove and shall give notice to the developer
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(a) Approval of the preliminary plan by the Board of
Commissioners constitutes conditional approval of the
development as to the character and intensity of development,
the layout, and the approximate dimensions of streets, lots and
other planned features. This approval binds the development
to the scheme shown on the preliminary plan.
(b) Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute approval
of the final plan, nor does it authorize recording of the
preliminary plan to proceed with the construction of proposed
improvements or the sale of any lots. However, such approval
does authorize the developer to proceed with the preparation
of the final plan.
B. In addition to the requirements outlined in Subsection A, the following
preliminary plan procedures shall apply to conservation subdivisions in
accordance with the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.117
(1) The applicant is strongly encouraged to submit a sketch plan, in
accordance with § 220-8 of this chapter, prior to submission of
preliminary plans. It is further recommended that the existing
resources and site analysis plan be prepared during the sketch plan
phase.
(2) Four-step design process. It is recommended that the following
four-step design process is used to lay out conservation
subdivisions to ensure that natural features are protected:
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 220-9 SOLID WASTE § 220-9
210:389
(a) Step 1: Delineation of greenway lands and/or conservation
lands.
[1] The minimum percentage and acreage of required
greenway lands should be calculated by the applicant and
submitted as part of the sketch plan or preliminary plan in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of the
Upper Allen Zoning Ordinance.
[2] Greenway/conservation lands would include all primary
conservation areas comprising floodplains, wetlands and
slopes over 25% of those parts of the remaining buildable
lands with the highest resource significance. Secondary
conservation areas would be delineated to meet the
minimum area percentage requirements for greenway/
open space lands and in a manner clearly indicating their
boundaries as well as the types of resources included
within them.
(b) Step 2: Location of house sites. Potential house sites would be
tentatively located, using the proposed greenway/open space
lands as a base map as well as other relevant data on the
existing resources and site analysis plan such as topography
and soils. House sites shall not be located closer than 100 feet
from primary conservation areas and 50 feet from secondary
conservation areas.
(c) Step 3: Alignment of streets and trails. Upon designating the
house sites, a street plan would be designed to provide
vehicular access to each house, complying with the standards
herein and bearing a logical relationship to topographic
conditions.
[1] Impacts of the street plan on proposed greenway/open
space lands shall be minimized, particularly with respect
to crossing environmentally sensitive areas such as
wetlands and traversing slopes exceeding 15%.
[2] Street shall be laid out to minimize the number of new culde-
sac.
(d) Step 4: Drawing in the lot lines. Upon completion of the
preceding three steps, lot lines are drawn as required to
delineate the boundaries of individual residential lots.
C. Preliminary plan specifications.
(1) The preliminary plan shall be submitted with an application for
consideration of a subdivision and land development plan and an
electronic copy of the plan and all subsequent amendments.
[Amended 4-17-2013 by Ord. No. 709; 5-20-2015 by Ord. No.
739]
§ 220-9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-9
210:390
(2) The preliminary plan shall be drawn at a scale of 10, 20, 30, 40, or
50 feet to one inch. Sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. The
preliminary plan shall show the following information:
(a) Proposed land development name or identifying title.
(b) The municipality or municipalities in which the land
development is located. If the project is located in the vicinity
of a municipal boundary, the location of said boundary shall be
shown on the plan.
(c) North point, scale and date.
(d) Name and address of the owner of the property or authorized
agent.
(e) Name, seal, and signature of the registered engineer and
registered surveyor responsible for the plan.
(f) Total acreage of the tract.
(g) Maximum building height, number of lots, proposed density
and minimum lot size.
(h) Signature blocks for approval by the Board of Commissioners
and Planning Commission. (See Appendix A.118) [Amended
4-17-2013 by Ord. No. 709]
(i) Length and width of new streets proposed.
(j) Type and locations of water supply and sewage disposal
facilities proposed (i.e., on-lot or public). For on-lot systems,
the location of percolation tests must be shown.
(k) Proposed use of land, existing zoning classification for the
property and all surrounding properties and proof of any
variances or special exceptions which may have been granted.
(l) A location map for the purpose of locating the site in relation to
the surrounding neighborhood and community. The location
map should be at a scale of not less then 2,000 feet to one inch.
(m) Tract boundaries clearly showing bearings and distances. Lot
line descriptions shall read in a clockwise direction.
(n) Source of title of all existing lots.
(o) Proposed contours at one-foot vertical intervals or as
authorized by the Township Engineer.
118. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Plan Certificates, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-9 SOLID WASTE § 220-9
210:391
(p) Datum to which contour elevations refer. Where reasonably
practicable, data shall refer to U.S. Coastal and Geodetic
Survey datum.
(q) The names of owners of immediately adjacent land; the names
of proposed or existing land developments immediately
adjacent, and the locations and dimensions of any streets or
easements shown thereon which abut the land to be developed.
(r) Soil types as indicated by the Soil Survey of Cumberland
County, latest edition.
(s) All existing watercourses, tree masses and other significant
natural features, such as rock outcrops, springs, seeps,
wetlands and floodplains. Large trees (thirty-inch caliper or
larger) shall be shown separately, even if located within a tree
mass.
(t) All existing buildings, sewers, water mains, culverts,
petroleum lines, telephone and electrical lines, gaslines, fire
hydrants and other man-made features, including size, type,
location and ownership.
(u) All existing streets on, adjacent to, or within 200 feet of any
part of the tract, including name, right-of-way width, and
cartway width.
(v) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and
the purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have
been established, with accurate dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves. Transmission line easements for gas, electric and
petroleum lines shall be specifically noted as such. Special
conditions required by these easements shall be noted on the
plan.
(w) Blocks and lots shall be numbered in consecutive order (e.g.,
Block A, Lots 1 - 10; Block B, Lots 11 - 22).
(x) Location of all proposed buildings and other significant
proposed man-made features.
(y) Location, dimensions and purpose of all proposed streets,
alleys, sidewalks, rights-of-way and easements; proposed lot
lines with dimensions; driveway access points on all lots where
proposed; proposed minimum building setback line and
dimensions for each street; playgrounds, public buildings,
public areas and parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or
reserved for public use.
(z) The location of existing lot line markers along the perimeter of
the entire existing tract.
§ 220-9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-9
210:392
(aa) Design of all proposed sanitary sewer, water, storm sewer, and
stormwater management facilities, including accurate plan
and profile data.
(bb) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the
developer's entire holding, a sketch shall be required of the
prospective street layout for the remainder.
(cc) The location and configuration of proposed parking facilities
and access drives.
(dd) A notarized statement to the effect that the applicant is the
owner of the land proposed to be developed and that the land
development shown on the preliminary plan is made with the
applicant's free consent.
(ee) Recreation and open space areas.
(ff) Plans should include separate drawings to show facade
treatment, elevations, floor plans, lighting and signing.
(gg) Location and sight distances of driveway access points for land
development plans.
(hh) When phasing of the development is proposed, plans shall
illustrate a phasing plan that includes all plan elements
required by this chapter.
(ii) Where the plan proposes the creation of any new streets, the
application shall be accompanied by a listing of proposed
street names, which shall be reviewed by appropriate officials
of Upper Allen Township and the United States Postal Service
to determine that the same are not identical or deceptively
similar to any existing street name.
(jj) A statement on the plan indicating any zoning amendment,
special exemption or variance, if applicable.
(kk) A statement on the plan indicating any existing or proposed
modifications granted by the Township.
(ll) Radiuses of streets and turnarounds.
(3) Applicants proposing a conservation subdivision in accordance
with the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance shall provide the
following additional information at the time of preliminary plat
submission:
(a) An existing resources and site analysis plan with a preliminary
resource impact and conservation subdivisions. The existing
resources and site analysis plan shall be prepared to provide
the developer and the Township with a comprehensive analysis
of existing conditions, both on the proposed development site
§ 220-9 SOLID WASTE § 220-9
210:393
and within 500 feet of the site. Conditions beyond the parcel
boundaries may be described on the basis of existing published
data available from governmental agencies and from aerial
photographs.
(b) The following information shall be included in the existing
resources and site analysis plan:
[1] A vertical aerial photograph enlarged to a scale not less
detailed than one inch equals 400 feet, with the site
boundaries clearly marked.
[2] The location and delineation of ponds, streams, ditches,
drains and natural drainage swales, as well as the onehundred-
year floodplains and wetlands. Additional areas of
wetlands on the proposed development parcel shall also be
indicated, as evident from testing, visual inspection, or
from the presence of wetland vegetation.
[3] Vegetative cover conditions on the property according to
general cover type including cultivated land, permanent
grassland, meadow, pasture, old field, hedgerow, woodland
and wetland, trees with a caliper in excess of 15 inches,
the actual canopy line of existing trees and woodlands.
Vegetative types shall be described by plant community,
relative age and condition.
[4] Soil series, types and phases, as mapped by the
Cumberland County Soil Survey, and accompanying data
published for each soil relating to its suitability for
construction (and, in unsewered areas, for septic
suitability).
[5] Ridgelines and watershed boundaries shall be identified.
[6] Geologic formations on the proposed development parcel,
including rock outcropping, cliffs, sinkholes, and fault
lines, based on available published information or more
detailed data obtained by the applicant.
[7] All existing man-made features, including but not limited
to buildings, streets and culverts, driveways, farm roads,
woods roads, buildings, foundations, walls, wells, drainage
fields, dumps, utilities, fire hydrants, storm and sanitary
sewers and water mains.
[8] Locations of all historically significant sites or structures
on the tract, including but not limited to cellar holes,
stonewalls, earthworks, and graves.
[9] Locations of trails that have been in public use
(pedestrian, equestrian, bicycle, etc.).
§ 220-9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-9
210:394
(c) The preliminary resource impact and conservation report shall
contain a report and map of impact areas which clearly
demonstrate the impact of proposed development activities
and physical alterations on existing site resources and
measures taken to minimize site disturbance to the greatest
extent practicable. The qualifications and experience of the
preparer shall be provided.
(d) Adjusted tract area (ATA) calculations for all conservation
subdivisions in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Zoning Ordinance,119 showing the total acreage of the tract
and the constrained land area, with detailed supporting
calculations.
(e) Yield plan (conventional subdivision design): optional method
in place of the adjusted tract area calculations, above, for
calculating density in conservation subdivisions and in
accordance with the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance.
The yield plan shall be based upon the density factor of the
chosen option applied to the gross tract acreage.
(f) Community association document. A community association
document, also known as a "homeowners' association
document" or a "condominium association document," shall be
provided for all subdivision and land development applications
which propose lands or facilities to be used or owned in
common by all the residents of that subdivision or land
development and not deeded to the municipality. The elements
of the community association document shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
[1] A description of all lands and facilities to be owned by the
community association. This description shall include a
map of the proposal highlighting the precise location of
those lands and facilities.
[2] Statements setting forth the powers, duties, and
responsibilities of the community association, including
the services to be provided.
[3] A declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions,
giving perpetual easement to the lands and facilities
owned by the community association. The declaration shall
be a legal document which also provides for automatic
association membership for all owners in the subdivision
or land development and shall describe the mechanism by
which owners participate in the association, including
voting, elections and meetings. Furthermore, it shall give
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 220-9 SOLID WASTE § 220-9
210:395
power to the association to own and maintain the common
property and to make and enforce rules.
[4] Statements prescribing the process which community
association decisions are reached and setting forth the
authority to act.
[5] Statements requiring each owner within the subdivision or
land development to become a member of the community
association.
[6] Statements setting cross-covenants or contractual terms
binding each owner to all other owners for mutual benefit
and enforcement.
[7] Requirements for all owners to provide a pro rata share of
the cost of the operations of the community association.
[8] A process of collection and enforcement to obtain funds
from owners who fail to comply.
[9] A process for transition of control of the community
association from the developer to the unit owners.
[10] Statements describing how the lands and facilities of the
community association will be insured, including limit of
liability.
[11] Provisions for the dissolution of the community
association, in the event the association should become
unviable, including provisions requiring individual unit
owners' responsibility for maintenance of common areas
and private streets after the dissolution of the association.
(g) Preliminary greenway/conservation land ownership and
management plan for all subdivisions and land developments
which include greenways/open space lands. Using the
preliminary plan as a base map, the boundaries, acreage and
proposed ownership of all proposed greenway areas shall be
shown. In addition, the applicant shall also submit a
preliminary greenway ownership and management plan
detailing the entities responsible for maintaining various
elements of the property and describing management
objectives and techniques for each part of the property. Such
management plans shall be consistent with the requirements
of the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance (“Ownership
and management of greenway land and common facilities”).120
(4) The preliminary plan shall include thereon or be accompanied by:
120. Editor's Note: See § 245-168.
§ 220-9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-9
210:396
(a) Feasibility study on sewer and water facilities for the tract
(§ 220-11) and for land developments, a plan revision module
for land development along with recommendations from the
regional office of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(b) Reports in accordance with § 220-11 for subdivisions and land
developments, as applicable, unless waived by the Board of
Commissioners.
(c) Profiles, typical cross sections and specifications for proposed
street improvements. Profiles shall be drawn at a horizontal
scale of one inch equals 50 feet and at a vertical scale of one
inch equals 10 feet or one inch equals five feet.
(d) Profiles and other explanatory data concerning the installation
of sanitary and storm sewage systems and water distribution
systems. Profiles shall be drawn at a horizontal scale of one
inch equals 50 feet and at a vertical scale of one inch equals 10
feet or one inch equals five feet.
(e) Preliminary engineering designs of any new bridges or culverts
proposed in the tract.
(f) A drawing of all present and proposed grades and facilities for
stormwater drainage and supporting calculations.
(g) Design of all landscaping and buffer yards complying with the
requirements of this chapter.
(h) Erosion and sedimentation control plans and postconstruction
stormwater management plans, as required by the
Cumberland County Conservation District and Pennsylvania
DEP.
(i) Photometric plans.
(j) Wetland delineation report and jurisdictional determination
from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
(k) Wetland mitigation plans.
(l) Soil percolation tests shall be performed for all developments
where structures at the time of construction will not be
connected to any active public sewage disposal systems. Tests
will be made in accordance with the procedure required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer and/or a sanitarian of
the Department of Environmental Protection shall certify that a
location is available for the on-lot sewage disposal system for
each lot. The minimum lot size where on-lot systems and wells
are proposed shall be one acre. All lots relying on on-lot
sewage disposal systems shall test and designate an alternate
§ 220-9 SOLID WASTE § 220-9
210:397
§ 220-10. Final plans.
absorption area, perpetually protected from disturbance by a
permanent easement. Alternate absorption areas shall not be
permitted in common areas of the proposed development.
(5) Notifications.
(a) Where the tract described in the application includes any
public utility, electric transmission line, gas pipeline, or
petroleum product transmission line located within the tract,
the applicant or lessee of such right-of-way shall notify the
owner of the right-of-way of his intentions. A note stating any
conditions regarding the use of the land, minimum building
setback, or right-of-way lines shall be included on the plan.
This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of
the recorded agreement.
(b) Where the land included in the subject application has an
agricultural, woodland, or other natural resource easement
located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied
by a letter from the party holding the easement stating any
conditions on the use of the land. This requirement may also be
satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded easement.
(c) Where applicable, the plan shall include a note indicating the
absence of streams, wetlands, rock outcrops, soil subsidences,
floodplains, contaminated soils, or slopes in excess of 25%.
(d) In the case of a plan which requires access to the highway
under the jurisdiction of PennDOT, the following statement
shall be included:
"A highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to § 420
of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the
'State Highway Law.' "
A. Application and review procedure.
(1) A final plan application is required for all subdivision and land
development plans. When a preliminary plan application is
required, in accordance with § 220-9, applications for final plan
approval can be submitted only after obtaining preliminary plan
approval.
(2) Final plan details shall include all applicable information in
accordance with § 220-9. [Amended 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
(3) The final plan shall be consistent with the preliminary plan. The
final plan may include sections of an approved preliminary plan,
provided each section independently conforms to the ordinance,
§ 220-9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-10
210:398
regulations and other standards of the Township, and includes a
reasonable portion of the preliminary plan.
(4) Final plan shall be submitted to the Township by the first business
day of the month in which the plan will be considered by the
Township Planning Commission in order to be placed on the
agenda.
(5) Final plan applications shall include the following:
(a) A minimum of 15 copies of the final plan and three copies of all
reports, notifications and certifications which are specified in
§ 220-11. Additional copies of the final plan and reports may be
required by the Township. [Amended 5-20-2015 by Ord. No.
739]
(b) One application form available from the Township for
consideration of a subdivision and/or land development plan.
[Amended 4-17-2013 by Ord. No. 709]
(c) Filing fee as set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
(d) An electronic copy of the plan, and all subsequent
amendments. [Added 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
(6) Proper completion. The designated Township representative shall
first determine that the final plan application is complete in
accordance with § 220-10A(5). This determination does not
constitute approval or disapproval of the final plan but is provided
to assure the submission of sufficient data for the Planning
Commission to make a formal action on lot add-on plans, and for
the Board of Commissioners to make a formal action on all other
final plans. If the application is found to be incomplete, the
applicant shall be notified in writing that the submitted data does
not constitute a formal filing of the final plan and specify the
deficiencies. [Amended 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
(7) Distribution. The designated Township representative shall
distribute the final plan to the Township Zoning Officer, Township
Solicitor, Emergency Management Coordinator, Township
Engineer, Township Planning Commission, County Planning
Commission, Board of Commissioners, Township Fire Chief and, if
deemed necessary, other officials (e.g., municipal authority's
engineer, adjacent municipalities, school board, PennDOT, Natural
Resource Conservation Service).
(8) Guarantee. Before recording an approved final plan, the Board of
Commissioners shall be assured by means of a financial guarantee,
as provided in § 220-13 of this chapter, that all improvements
required by this chapter will be installed by the developer in strict
accordance with the Commissioners' approval and within a
specified time after approval of the final plan.
§ 220-10 SOLID WASTE § 220-10
210:399
(9) Earthmoving activities:
(a) All earthmoving activities within the Township shall be
conducted in such a way as to prevent accelerated erosion and
the resulting sedimentation.
(b) In order to fulfill the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection Rules and
Regulations, Chapter 102, for any subdivision which requires
the construction of streets or other earthmoving activity on an
area of over 5,000 square feet, the Township Planning
Commission shall not recommend approval and the Board of
Commissioners shall not approve the final plan unless the
subdivider submits evidence of having obtained all applicable
permits from the Cumberland County Conservation District
and Pennsylvania DEP.
(10) Any plan which will require access to a highway under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall
not be finally approved unless the highway occupancy permit has
been acquired pursuant to § 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L.
1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway Law."
(11) The Board of Commissioners shall determine whether final plans,
with the exception of lot add-on plans unless otherwise determined
by the Planning Commission, shall be approved or disapproved and
shall give notice to the developer in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. [Amended 5-20-2015
by Ord. No. 739]
(12) The Board of Commissioners in its final approval of a plan may
condition such approval on the developer entering into a
development agreement with the Township detailing the plan
elements, specifications and improvements agreed upon. Such
agreement shall be prepared by the Township and shall be duly
executed and acknowledged by the developer and the Township
and shall be binding upon the developer and upon the developer's
heirs or successors and assigns. The failure or refusal of the
developer to sign the development agreement within 10 calendar
days of its presentation for signature shall result in a deemed
denial of the plan. [Amended 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
(13) Upon approval of the final plan, the developer shall record such
plat in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County,
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(14) Upon approval of the final plan, the developer shall provide the
Township with a .dwg file that includes one drawing of all the lots
on the plan. The data should only include the recorded information,
to include parcel and tract boundaries, lot lines, building footprints,
edge of pavement, street rights-of-way, and with spatial projection.
§ 220-10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-10
210:400
A digital copy of the final plan in PDF format shall also be
submitted. [Added 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
B. Specifications.
(1) The final plan shall be drawn on a twenty-four-inch by thirty-sixinch
sheet at a scale of 10, 20, 30, 40 or 50 feet to one inch and
shall include all specifications shown under § 220-8 for preliminary
plans in addition to the following information:
(a) Certification of title showing that the applicant is the owner of
the land.
(b) For subdivisions, certification by a licensed surveyor and
licensed engineer certifying to the accuracy of survey and plan.
For a land development plan, certification by a licensed
surveyor, licensed engineer or landscape architect, certifying
to the accuracy of the proposed development plan.
(c) A complete street layout shall be provided at a scale of one
inch equals 800 feet.
(d) Primary control points, approved by the Township Engineer, or
description and "ties" to such control points, to which all
dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plan shall
be referred.
(e) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of every street, lot and boundary line and to reproduce
such lines upon the ground. Such data to be tied in to
monuments as required.
(f) All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot
and of each area proposed to be dedicated to public use and
the purpose for such areas.
(g) All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot.
(h) The location and materials for permanent reference
monuments shall be shown on the plan.
(i) Statement of owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way, and any
sites for public use which are to be dedicated.
(j) The final grading plan shall include finish floor elevations for
proposed structures and spot elevations as needed to clarify
proposed grades.
(k) Landscaping plan meeting the requirements of § 220-26 of this
chapter.
(l) Plans must be prepared in permanent black opaque ink or in
black print Mylar.
§ 220-10 SOLID WASTE § 220-10
210:401
(m) Note in § 220-23A(2) must be on plans.
(n) Plans must contain original signatures signed in permanent
black opaque ink.
(o) Plans shall be legible in all details.
(p) When phasing of the development is proposed, plans shall
illustrate a phasing plan that includes all plan elements
required by this chapter.
(q) Location of percs, probes and wells. Wells must maintain the
minimum separation distances, as required by DEP, from both
the primary and alternate absorption areas.
(r) Plans must include the Pennsylvania One Call System, Inc.,
number (1-800-242-1776) as the contact prior to any
excavation activities.
(s) Clear sight triangles and stopping sight distances, as required
by Article V of this chapter.
(2) The plan shall be accompanied by the following data:
(a) Profiles of streets showing grades at a minimum scale of 50
feet horizontal and five or 10 feet vertical.
(b) Cross sections of streets showing the width of right-of-way,
width of cartway, location and width of sidewalks, and location
and size of utility mains. Cross sections shall be at intervals of
50 feet, or as required by the Township Engineer. Cross
sections shall be provided for the construction of new streets
and for the widening of existing streets.
(c) Plans and profiles of proposed sanitary and/or stormwater
sewers, with grades and pipe sizes indicated, and a plan of any
proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes and
location of valves and fire hydrants.
(d) Location and method of streetlighting facilities.
(e) Other state and county certificates as may be required.
(f) Proposed protective covenants running with the land, if any.
(g) Such certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required by the Planning Commission or the Board of
Commissioners of the municipality in the enforcement of these
regulations, and at least in the amount and form as provided
for in § 220-11.
(h) A cost estimate of public improvements for establishment of
the financial security, in accordance with Article IV of this
chapter.
§ 220-10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-10
210:402
§ 220-11. Reports.
(i) Final engineering and design of any bridges or culverts.
(3) Notifications.
(a) All notifications required under the preliminary plan
specifications shall be included on the final plans.
(b) A statement must be included on the plan to indicate any
modifications granted by the Board of Commissioners and the
date of said action.
(c) Notification from DEP that approval of the sewer facility plan
revision module for land development or supplement has been
granted or notice from DEP that such approval is not required.
(d) Notification from the appropriate state and federal agencies
that permits have been issued or are not required, for any
proposed activities within streams, wetlands, or any other
state or federally regulated body of water. These permits
include, but are not limited to, floodplain encroachment
permits, dam permits, earth disturbance permits, stream
encroachment permits and general permits.
(e) When the final plan is submitted in sections, the above
notifications for all applicable activities on the entire site
shown on the approved preliminary plan shall be provided
upon submittal of the first final phase of the project.
A. Sanitary sewer. A sewer facilities plan revision module for land
development, or supplement, when required by the Pennsylvania
Sewerage Facilities Act 537 of 1966, as amended.
B. Hydrogeologic/water facilities study.
(1) A hydrogeologic/water facilities study, describing the availability
and/or adaptability of water facilities in or near a proposed
subdivision or land development, shall be prepared and submitted
to the Township.
(2) The hydrogeologic/water facilities study shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer or hydrogeologist experienced in
the field and procedures involved. The report shall be submitted in
conjunction with preliminary and final plans for review by the
Township Engineer.
(3) The hydrogeologic/water facilities study shall be prepared as a
written report and shall include the following basic data in textual
and tabular form:
(a) A project narrative describing the overall project.
§ 220-10 SOLID WASTE § 220-11
210:403
(b) A narrative describing and focusing on the development site
and an area of one-fourth-mile buffer surrounding the site.
(c) The report study shall consist of an examination of the possible
use of on-site water supply systems and the impact of such
systems on groundwater supply, connection to an existing
water supply system or the construction of a central
community system.
(d) The study shall include a complete geologic profile and plan
and a discussion of the effect of the proposed development and
construction activity on the groundwater supply.
(e) The study shall also include a statement and justifiable analysis
by the registered professional engineer or licensed geologist as
to the sufficiency of the subsurface aquifers to support on-lot
water systems for the proposed development, verified by well
testing and other appropriate means, as well as analyzing the
impact on existing sources.
(f) The study shall describe the distance from the nearest public
water supply system and the capacity of the system to
accommodate the proposed subdivision or land development.
(g) Where a central community water system is proposed, the
report shall provide evidence that the system will have an
adequate supply of potable water for domestic or other
proposed use and that each unit or building will have adequate
supply for the purpose of fire protection.
C. Hydrogeologic/sewer facilities study.
(1) A hydrogeologic/sewer facilities study describing the availability
and/or adaptability of sewer facilities in or near a proposed
subdivision or land development shall be prepared and submitted
to the Township.
(2) The hydrogeologic/sewer facilities study shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer or licensed geologist experienced
in the field and procedures involved. The report shall be submitted
in conjunction with preliminary and final plans for review by the
Township Engineer.
(3) The hydrogeologic/sewer facilities study shall be prepared as a
written report and shall include the following basic data in textual
and tabular form:
(a) A project narrative describing the overall project and the
proposed method of sewage disposal for each lot.
(b) A narrative describing and focusing on the development site
and an area of one-fourth-mile buffer surrounding the site.
§ 220-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-11
210:404
(c) The study shall describe the distance from the nearest public
sewer system and the capacity of the system to accommodate
the proposed subdivision or land development. The feasibility
of utilizing said systems for sewage disposal shall be included
where on-site sewage facilities are proposed.
(d) Soil test results, certified as accurate by the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer, to assess the ability of the soil to absorb
waste from any proposed subsurface sewage disposal facilities.
Primary and alternate absorption areas must be identified and
tested.
(e) Calculations and a narrative describing how the proposed onsite
sewage facilities will adequately and properly dispose of
the anticipated quantities of waste. Standards for installation
of on-site sewage disposal systems shall be as required by DEP
at the time of construction.
D. Stormwater. A drainage plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
Upper Allen Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.
E. Steep slope. A steep slope report for all applications involving
construction on lands that possess slopes exceeding 15%. The steep
slope report shall include the following:
(1) A topographic map of the site which highlights those areas that
possess slopes exceeding 15%. Also reflected on this map shall be
all existing and proposed site alterations and improvements (e.g.,
buildings, streets, access drives, driveways, parking compounds,
utilities, etc.) that are located within the steep slope area.
(2) In those instances where construction and/or modifications is
proposed to the existing topography and vegetative cover within
areas of 15% or greater slope, the applicant shall provide a detailed
description of the methods that are being used to:
(a) Protect and stabilize areas that have a high potential for soil
erosion;
(b) Accommodate stormwater runoff,
(c) Assure structural safety and minimize harm to the environment
associated with construction on steep slopes;
(d) Protection and preservation of on-site and off-site valuable
natural wildlife, plant habitats and water quality;
(e) Protection of steep slopes on adjoining properties; and
(f) Assure adequate foundations for buildings and/or structures.
(3) In those instances where construction and/or modifications to the
existing topography and vegetative cover in areas of 18% or
§ 220-11 SOLID WASTE § 220-11
210:405
greater slopes, the applicant shall provide a soils engineering
report. A soils engineering report shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer or licensed geologist with expertise in soil,
geology and construction. The report shall include:
(a) The nature, types, distribution and stability of the surface and
subsurface soils for load bearing, stability and compaction;
(b) Extent, description and location of exposed rock and bedrock;
(c) Erodibility of surface soil; and
(d) Depth to seasonal high water table.
F. Traffic impact report.
(1) A traffic impact report shall be submitted for all developments
generating 50 trips or more per day, as determined by methodology
outlined in the Institute of Transportation Engineers Guidelines.
The study shall assess the impacts to adjacent roadways and
identify improvements that may be required to maintain a level of
service (LOS) rating of "D" on the affected roadway network.
Where the affected roadway network is determined to have a LOS
rating of "E" or "F," the study shall identify specific improvements
that would restore a LOS rating of "D" or better. For commercial
and industrial developments, the traffic impact shall include
analysis of access drives interior to the site.
(2) When establishing the study area boundaries, sufficient area shall
be included to ensure that key corridors that afford access to the
site and critical intersections that may be affected by the sitegenerated
traffic are taken into account. The exact limits of the
study area shall be based on engineering judgment and an
understanding of existing traffic conditions at and in the vicinity of
the proposed site. In all instances, however, the study limits must
be mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Township prior to
preparation of the traffic impact study.
(a) Existing and proposed site uses. The existing and proposed
uses of the site shall be identified in terms of the various
zoning categories in the jurisdiction. In addition, the specific
use on which the request is made shall be identified. In the
case where a current land use is being upgraded or modified, a
description of the proposed improvements with respect to
density changes shall be included. Such a density change may
necessitate replacing existing traffic volumes generated by the
current land use with increased volumes resulting from a
change in land use and density.
(b) Existing and proposed nearby uses. A complete description of
the existing land uses in the vicinity of the site, as well as their
current zoning shall be included. The proposed uses for
§ 220-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-11
210:406
adjacent land in terms of zoning categories shall be included.
This latter item is especially important where large tracts of
undeveloped land are in the vicinity of the site and within the
defined study area.
(c) Existing and proposed roadways and intersections.
[1] The study shall describe existing roadways and
intersections within the study area with respect to
geometrics and traffic signal control as well as any
planned and committed roadway and traffic operational
improvements by government agencies. In addition to
critical intersections, high volume driveways adjacent to
or across from the site shall be identified.
[2] An analysis of existing and future projected traffic
conditions shall be prepared so that the impacts of the
proposed development can be determined. Future traffic
projections should consider a ten-year growth period
beyond the construction of the proposed development. The
section shall describe the results of the volume studies and
capacity analysis to be completed for the roadways,
intersections and driveways in the vicinity of the site under
existing and future conditions as well as any data
collection efforts that are required. The source and/or
method of computation for all traffic volumes and capacity
analysis shall be included. Traffic studies are to comply
with PennDOT Publications 201 and 282, as amended, and
the Institute of Transportation Engineers Guidelines.
Where discrepancies between reference documents exist,
the more restrictive standards shall apply.
[3] The study shall include an executive summary. The
summary shall be a clear, concise description of the study
findings, recommendations and, where applicable,
proposed improvements and who will pay for said
improvements.
G. Park and recreation.
(1) A park and recreation report for residential developments of 25 or
more units. This report shall be prepared by a registered landscape
architect (RLA), with the following minimum considerations:
(a) A description of the total projected number of residents in their
respective age groups.
(b) A description of those existing public recreation facilities
located within a one-half-mile radius of the site.
§ 220-11 SOLID WASTE § 220-11
210:407
(c) A description of the adequacy of existing recreation facilities to
serve the proposed residents, taking into consideration current
usage.
(d) A discussion of potential for any recreation facilities to be
provided by the developer to accommodate new residents and/
or compensate for any anticipated deficiencies of the
Township's recreational facilities.
(e) A description of any recreation facilities to be provided by the
developer.
(f) A discussion on the relationship of the proposal to other parks
and recreation facilities located within the Township.
(g) A description of responsibility for maintenance of any
recreational facilities to be provided by the developer.
(h) A description of accessibility of the proposed facilities to
general Township residents.
(i) Source of standards used in the data presented.
(2) The park and recreation report will be transmitted to the Township
Planning Commission for review.
H. Historical features.
(1) A historic features narrative shall be required for all applications
involving structures or lands that are listed on the National
Register of Historic Places; have received a determination of
eligibility from the National Register from the National Park
Service; or are identified by the Pennsylvania Historical Museum
Commission (PHMC).
(2) The development shall be designed to preserve, adaptively reuse,
or otherwise provide for the historic features. Modifications and
exterior alterations to historic features or sites, or new
construction adjacent to historic features, shall be consistent with
the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation of
Historic Properties, as published by the National Park Service.
(3) Subdivisions and land developments shall also be designed so that
new structures do not block historic views, or obstruct the view of
historic properties, and new construction shall be consistent with
the Secretary of the Interior's Guidelines. If, because of size,
construction material or type of use, a proposed land development
or subdivision would jeopardize the historic value of a site or
structure, the Board of Commissioners may require that such new
construction be screened or otherwise visually buffered. The Board
of Commissioners may also require that mitigation measures
recommended by the PHMC be incorporated into the proposed
development to preserve the value of the historic site or structure.
§ 220-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-11
210:408
I. Important natural habitats. All applications for lands that possess an
important natural habitat, as defined herein, shall plot the location or
report the presence of the natural resources. Important natural habitat
is defined as follows:
(1) Wetlands, as defined by criteria of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers;
(2) Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI) confirmed extant
plant and animal species and communities that are listed as
"Pennsylvania Threatened" or "Pennsylvania Endangered;" or
(3) PNDI confirmed extant plant and animal species and communities
that have a state rank of S1 or S2, which are defined as follows:
S1, CRITICALLY IMPERILED — Critically imperiled in the state
because of extreme rarity or because of some factor(s) making it
especially vulnerable to extirpation from the state; typically, five or
fewer occurrences or very few remaining individuals or acres.
S2, IMPERILED — Imperiled in the state because of rarity or
because of some factor(s) making it very vulnerable to extirpation
from the state; typically, six to 20 occurrences or fewer remaining
individuals or acres.
§ 220-11 SOLID WASTE § 220-11
210:409

ARTICLE IV
Improvement Construction Assurances
§ 220-12. General.
All improvements required by this chapter which are subject to public use
shall be installed in accordance with the design standards of this chapter.121
§ 220-13. Performance requirements.
No final plan shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners unless the
installation of all monuments and markers, streets, roadways, walkways,
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary
sewers, storm drains, stormwater detention basins, stormwater retention
basins, or related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space
improvements, landscaping and buffer yards, or other improvements
required by this chapter, any other ordinance of the Township, or as
specified by the Board, has been guaranteed in writing by the developer
with financial security as hereinafter provided.
A. Upon making application for approval of a preliminary subdivision or
land development plan, the developer shall notify the Township in
writing that the developer elects, subject to the approval of the Board of
Commissioners, which will not be unreasonably withheld, one of the
following:
(1) Guarantee of future performance. To file with the Township a
written guarantee with financial security as hereinafter provided
assuring the installation and completion of all improvements
required or specified on or for the approved plan in a manner
satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners. Such written
guarantee shall be secured to the Township by one of the following
forms of financial security in an amount equal to 110% of the cost
of the required improvements. Cost shall be determined in
accordance with the PA Municipalities Planning Code.
(a) Surety bond. The developer shall obtain and file with the
Township a corporate surety bond from a bonding company
authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania payable to the Township, conditioned upon the
developer installing and completing all required
improvements.
(b) Escrow account. The developer shall deposit with the Township
or with a federal or commonwealth-chartered banking
institution authorized to do business in Pennsylvania cash or
acceptable obligation instruments readily convertible into cash
at face value to be held in escrow conditioned upon the
developer installing and completing all required
121. Editor's Note: See Article V, Design Standards.
§ 220-12 SOLID WASTE § 220-13
210:411
improvements. The Township, the developer and the escrow
agent, if any, shall enter into a written agreement restricting
and conditioning the escrow account in such a manner as the
Township shall reasonably require to secure the installation
and completion improvements.
(c) Letter of credit. The developer shall provide and deposit with
the Township an irrevocable letter of credit from a federal or
commonwealth-chartered lending institution authorized to do
business in Pennsylvania payable to the Township, conditioned
upon the developer installing and completing all required
improvements.
(2) Long-term projects.
(a) In the event that a developer providing financial security for
the installation and completion of required improvements
requires more than one year to complete the same, the Board
of Commissioners may, in its discretion, require that the
financial security be increased by an additional 10% for each
one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from the
posting of security. This amount shall not exceed 110% of the
cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished
on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period.
(b) In the event that a developer, through no lack of diligence or
good faith, shall have failed to complete required
improvements within a one-year period, the Board of
Commissioners may, in its discretion, permit the continuation
of the original financial security in an amount not exceeding
110% of the cost of completing the required improvements
remaining uninstalled on or about the expiration of the initial
one-year period.
(c) Where a subdivision or land development is of such size as to
justify the development of the same over a period of years,
nothing contained in this section shall, after approval of a
preliminary plan for the entire development, preclude or
prevent the developer from installing and completing required
improvements in sections or stages with financial security
posted therefor.
B. Release or reduction of financial security. When the developer has
completed all of the required improvements and desires a release of the
financial security, or has completed a part of the required
improvements and desires a partial release, written notice of the
requested release shall be filed with the Township Secretary, in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
C. Dedication and maintenance.
§ 220-13 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-13
210:412
(1) Dedication. Upon the installation and completion of all required
improvements and upon submittal of as-built plans, electronic
drawing files, and legal descriptions for all improvements, in a
manner satisfactory to the Township evidenced by the Township's
approval in writing or by inaction of the Board of Commissioners
upon the developer's request for release of financial security, the
developer shall make a written offer of dedication to the Township
of all improvements intended for public use. The Board of
Commissioners shall thereupon accept all or such portions of the
improvements offered for dedication as the Board shall determine,
provided the developer shall have filed with the Township financial
security for the maintenance of the accepted improvements, as
hereinafter set forth.
(2) As-built plans. The subdivider or developer shall furnish the
Township with reproducible Mylars and electronic data files of all
drawings showing the water system, sanitary sewer system, storm
sewer system, roadway network, and other associated
infrastructure, modified as necessary to show the facilities as
constructed. All drawings must be 24 inches by 36 inches and must
be signed and sealed by a professional engineer or professional
land surveyor attesting to the correctness of the facility
information shown. Where necessary, the developer must conduct
field surveys to accurately locate facilities as constructed.
Electronic data files shall be in a format designated by the
Township at the time that as-built drawings are prepared. The
Township intends to use prints of the Mylar drawings to provide
information to designers and contractors, as required by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Act 287, as amended, and to
maintain municipal records. The developer shall be responsible for
bearing all costs associated with filing as-built record data, data
conversion, and data storage into the Township's record system.
Fees shall be paid in accordance with Article VII of this chapter.
(3) Financial security for maintenance. Before the Board of
Commissioners shall accept an offer of dedication for all or any
portion of the public improvements installed and completed by the
developer, the Board shall require the developer to file with the
Township a written guarantee of the structural integrity of the
offered improvements and the functioning of the same in
accordance with the design and specifications of the approved plan
for a period of 18 months, such written guarantee shall be secured
to the Township by one of the forms of financial security specified in
§ 220-13A(1) of this chapter in an amount not exceeding 15% of the
actual cost of the dedicated improvements.
D. Public utilities, municipal authorities and homeowners' associations.
Where water mains and/or sanitary sewers and such apparatus and
facilities as relate thereto are to be installed and completed by the
developer as a requirement of an approved plan, such improvements
§ 220-13 SOLID WASTE § 220-13
210:413
shall be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the public utility, municipal authority or homeowners'
association to which such improvements are intended to be assigned
or dedicated, and the financial security therefor shall be filed in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the controlling public
utility, municipal authority or homeowners' association, and no financial
security therefor shall be required by the Township as provided in this
chapter.
E. Building permits. Where a developer has filed financial security as
provided in the foregoing § 220-13A of this chapter, the issuance of
building, grading, occupancy or other permits for or within the
development shall not be withheld or conditioned upon the installation
of the required improvements; provided, however, that occupancy
permits for any buildings erected may be withheld until the
improvement of the streets providing access to and from existing public
streets and such buildings shall be mud-free or otherwise in a
permanently passable condition and all other required improvements
necessary for reasonable use or occupancy of such buildings have been
installed. Roads must be maintained by the developer prior to
dedication and before issuance of building or occupancy permits.
F. Default by developer.
(1) In the event that a developer shall default on an agreement
guaranteeing the installation and completion of any required
improvements or shall default on an agreement guaranteeing the
maintenance of any such improvements after acceptance of
dedication by the Township, the Township shall cause any required
improvements to be installed and completed, or maintenance
performed, and enforce against the financial security recovery of
the cost of the same by any appropriate legal or equitable remedy.
(2) Where the financial security shall be a corporate surety bond,
reasonable opportunity shall be given the surety company to install
and complete the required improvements or perform any required
maintenance, but absent such performance by the surety company,
the Township shall by its own personnel and equipment or by
contract with a responsible contractor install and complete the
improvements or perform the maintenance and collect all
necessary cost thereof from the surety company.
(3) Where the financial security shall be an escrow account or a letter
of credit, the Township shall by its own personnel and equipment or
by contract with a responsible contractor install and complete the
improvements or perform the maintenance and collect all cost
thereof from the escrow account or by presentation of the letter of
credit.
§ 220-13 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-13
210:414
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 220-14. General.
§ 220-15. Streets and roadways.
A. The standards and requirements contained in this article are intended
as the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety and
general welfare and shall be applied as minimum design standards for
subdivision and/or land developments. Land subject to hazards to life,
health or property, such as may arise from fire, flood, diseases or other
causes, shall not be subdivided for building purposes unless the hazards
have been eliminated or unless the plans show adequate safeguard
against them. Land included as having unsuitable characteristics for
development would be the following:
(1) Land subject to flooding or which has a seasonal high groundwater
table which will interfere with the construction of basements or
habitable areas below grade.
(2) Land which, if developed, will create or aggravate a flooding
condition upon other land.
(3) Land subject to subsidence.
(4) Land subject to underground fires.
(5) Land containing significant areas of slopes greater than 25%.
(6) Land which, because of topography or means of access, is
considered hazardous by the Township Board of Commissioners.
(7) Land which is subject to ground pollution or contamination.
(8) Land which is defined as wetland area.
B. All improvements shall be in conformance with Township engineering
standards and specifications, as contained herein.
A. Design standards. The general arrangement, character, extent and
location of all streets proposed shall conform to the Township's
Comprehensive Plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing
or proposed streets, topographical conditions, the public convenience
and safety, and in the appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land
to be served by such streets. The arrangement, width, grade and other
design standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found
herein.
B. Design and arrangement.
§ 220-14 SOLID WASTE § 220-15
210:415
(1) In general, all streets shall be continuous and in alignment with
existing streets and shall comprise a convenient system to ensure
circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(2) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
street, the newly proposed streets shall be planned and designed in
order to protect residential areas from heavy traffic and also to
provide separation between local and through traffic.
(3) Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce
usable lots and reasonable grades.
(4) Half or partial streets shall not be permitted. Wherever a tract to
be subdivided borders an existing half or partial street, the
remaining portion of the street shall be platted within such tract.
(5) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except as stubs utilizing
temporary cul-de-sacs to permit future street extension into
adjoining tracts of ground or when designed as a permanent cul-desac
of less than or equal to 800 feet in length. Cul-de-sacs shall be a
minimum of 250 feet in length, measured from the center line of
the intersecting street to the midpoint of the cul-de-sac. Cul-desacs
shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet to the outside edge of
the cartway and 50 feet to the outside edge of the right-of-way and
tangent, whenever possible, to the right side of the street. The
closed end of all proposed cul-de-sacs must be provided with a
twenty-foot by ten-foot easement to be used to stockpile snow for
winter road maintenance. Temporary and permanent cul-de-sacs
shall not exceed 800 feet in length or serve more than 20 dwelling
units.
(6) Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be toward the open
end. If drainage is toward the closed end, water shall be conveyed
away from private property via underground storm sewer or by
other means approved by the Township. Where drainage is
proposed towards the closed end of a cul-de-sac, provisions must
be made for the safe conveyance of the one-hundred-year-storm
flow away from the road and private property. The minimum grade
of the stormwater pipe on cul-de-sacs shall be designed to ensure a
minimum of 1% and a maximum of 5% along the curbline to the
designed low points.
(7) Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of
streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the proper
projection of streets. Where a new subdivision adjoins
unsubdivided land capable of future subdivision, then the new
streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the tract proposed to
be subdivided.
(8) The vacation of any street or part of a street dedicated for public
use shall not be approved if such vacation interferes with the
§ 220-15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-15
210:416
uniformity of the existing street pattern or any future street plans
prepared for the area.
(9) A design speed of 30 miles per hour shall be utilized unless traffic
patterns and volumes dictate a variation from said design speed.
Said variations shall be as approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
(10) If undeveloped property has an alternative means of vehicular
access, a single-family lot in an adjoining recorded plan shall not be
used as a future right-of-way for a public street, private street or
other vehicular access.
(11) Improvement of existing streets and intersections. Where a
subdivision or land development abuts an existing Township and/or
state street or shall have a traffic impact on an existing Township
and/or state street as indicated by a traffic study required to be
performed in accordance with this chapter, the developer shall be
required to make the following improvements:
(a) In cases where a subdivision or land development abuts an
existing Township or state street, the street shall be
reconstructed to the widths specified in this chapter.
(b) In cases where the development is situated only on one side of
an existing street, the Township may require that only that side
of the street be reconstructed.
(c) Where the developer of the subdivision or land development is
required to provide a traffic study and report and the traffic
study and report indicates that improvements are required, the
developer shall install the improvements, including but limited
to traffic signals, traffic control devices, additional traffic
lanes, traffic dividers, and highway markings.
(d) When the Township determines that the required
improvements are not feasible at the time of development of
the use, the developer shall deposit funds with the Township in
the amount of 110% of the cost of the improvements, computed
in accordance with Article IV of this chapter. The amount of the
deposit shall be submitted for approval by the Township
Engineer.
(12) The extension of existing streets which are presently constructed
with a cartway different from current Township standards shall be
provided with a transition area, the design of which is subject to
Township approval.
(13) Dedication of additional right-of-way. If a subdivision or land
development abuts an existing Township and/or state street which
has a right-of-way width of less than the widths as set forth in this
chapter, the developer shall dedicate to the Township or
§ 220-15 SOLID WASTE § 220-15
210:417
commonwealth, as applicable, that amount of land necessary so
that the distance from the center line of the street to the edge
of the right-of-way abutting the proposed development is 1/2 the
ultimate right-of-way width set forth in this chapter. Additional
right-of-way dedicated to the Township shall be used to improve
safety, drainage and future maintenance of Township roads.
(14) When the proposed development requires construction within an
existing street right-of-way, such as sewer, water or stormwater
lines, the Township may require construction of a new full-width
wearing course along the entire frontage and/or disturbed area.
(15) If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to
permit resubdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided,
adequate rights-of-way for streets and other required
improvements shall be provided as necessary to permit further
subdivision.
(16) A loop street shall not exceed an average daily traffic volume (ADT)
of 300 trips per day. [Added 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
C. Street grades.
(1) The minimum grade on all streets shall be 1%. The maximum grade
exceeding on arterial and collector streets shall be 6% and on local
streets, 10%.
(2) The through street at intersections shall be approached by side
streets in accordance with the following standards: Where the
grade of the side street exceeds 5%, there shall be a leveling area
on the side street with a minimum length of 100 feet (measured
from the intersection of the center lines), within which no grade
shall exceed a maximum of 4%.
D. Vertical and horizontal curve design.
(1) Horizontal curves.
(a) Horizontal curves shall be used at all horizontal alignment
deflections in excess of 2°.
(b) The minimum radius at the center line for the horizontal curves
on arterial streets shall be 600 feet; for the collector streets,
300 feet; and for local streets, 150 feet. Proper superelevation
shall be provided for curves on arterial streets.
(c) There shall be tangent of at least 100 feet between reverse
curves for all collector and arterial streets.
(d) Proper sight distance shall be provided with respect to both
horizontal and vertical alignment. Measured along the center
line, 400 feet for arterial streets, 275 feet for collector streets,
and 200 feet for local streets.
§ 220-15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-15
210:418
(2) Vertical curves.
(a) Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding
1%.
(b) The length of vertical curve shall be based on the formula L =
KA; where "L" is the minimum length of curve in feet, "K" is the
length of vertical curve per percent change in "A," and "A" is
the algebraic difference in grade (in percent). Values for "K"
shall be based on the following criteria:
Design Speed
(in miles per
hour)
"K"
Crest Vertical
Curves
"K"
Sag Vertical
Curves
20 10 20
25 20 30
30 30 40
35 45 50
40 70 70
45 100 90
50 150 110
55 220 130
(c) Notwithstanding the length of vertical curve calculated using
the above formula, the minimum length of vertical curve shall
be 100 feet.
E. Intersections.
(1) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles; in any event, no street shall intersect another at less than
75°. Intersections of more than two streets shall be prohibited.
Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
directly opposite one another.
(2) No more than two streets shall intersect at the same point.
(3) Street center line intersections shall be offset by a minimum of 200
feet.
(4) Intersections with collector streets entering into arterial streets
shall not be located less than 1,000 feet apart on the same or
opposite side of the arterial street, measured from center line to
center line of the collector streets.
(5) Intersections on collector streets shall not be located less than 800
feet apart on the same or opposite side of the street as measured
from center line to center line of the intersecting streets.
§ 220-15 SOLID WASTE § 220-15
210:419
(6) A seventy-five-foot clear sight triangle (150 feet for collector and
arterial streets) shall be provided and maintained at all street
intersections. The triangle shall be provided and maintained at all
street intersections. No building, planting or other obstruction
above the height of three feet and below 10 feet in height that
would obscure the vision of a motorist shall be permitted within the
area. The height shall be measured from the center line grade of
the intersecting streets. This requirement shall not apply to traffic
signals, traffic signs, street name signs, public utility poles and
similar-type structures.
(7) The cartway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a
tangential arc with a minimum radius of 35 feet for local streets
and 50 feet for intersections involving collector or arterial streets.
The right-of-way radii at intersections shall be substantially
concentric with the edge of the cartway.
(8) At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way
street intersection, and one street name sign shall be placed at
each "T" intersection. Signs shall be installed in a location and
manner where they will be clearly visible at all hours. The design of
street name signs shall be approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
(9) All streets intersecting a state highway shall be subject to the
approval of the Pennsylvanian Department of Transportation.
(10) Clear sight distances. In addition to the other requirements of this
article, there shall be required unobstructed clear sight distance at
all intersections as specified below.
(a) Required clear sight distances shall be at least as large as the
minimum safe stopping sight distance, SSSD.
SSSD = 1.47 Vt + V2/30 (f+G)
WHERE:
SSSD = Minimum safe stopping sight distance (feet)
V = Speed of vehicle in miles per hour
t = 2.5 seconds (perception/response time of driver)
f = 0.3 (wet pavement friction)
G = Roadway grade in percent divided by 100 (positive
for upgrade, negative for downgrade)
(b) Required sight distances shall be measured between a driver
approaching along the through street from either allowed
direction and:
§ 220-15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-15
210:420
[1] A driver awaiting egress onto a through street and whose
eyes are 10 feet back from the nearest cartway edge of the
through street.
[2] A driver stopped at a reasonable location on the through
street waiting to make a left turn into the cross street.
[3] A driver having just completed a left or right turn from the
stop street onto the through street.
[4] For purposes of measuring clear sight distances, the
height of the driver's eye and the observed vehicle (or
object) shall be assumed to be 3.5 feet above their
respective road surfaces.
(c) Inadequate sight distance remedies. If it is impossible to
achieve required clear sight distance in both directions, the
Township may:
[1] Prohibit left turns by entering or exiting vehicles.
[2] Require alteration of the horizontal or vertical geometry of
the roadway or access; all such work shall be at the
expense of the applicant;
[3] Require removal of physical obstruction from the line of
sight, at the expense of the applicant;
[4] Require installation of a separate left turn standby lane; or
[5] Deny access to the roadway.
F. Street width and types.
(1) Functional classifications are hereby established for the streets and
roads in the Township of Upper Allen and are defined in Article II.
(2) Minimum street right-of-way and cartway widths shall be in
accordance with Table V-1 below.
§ 220-15 SOLID WASTE § 220-15
210:421
Table V-1
Street Types and Widths
Street Widths (minimum)**
Street Type Right-of-Way *Shoulders Cartway
Arterials As determined by Commission after consultation
with Board of Commissioners, Township
Engineer and the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation
Collectors 60 feet *16 feet
(8 feet per
side)
*24 feet (with
shoulders)
42 feet (curbed)
Local
(public and
private)
50 feet *10 feet
(5 feet per
side)
*24 feet
(shoulder)
34 feet (curbed)
Turn around or
cul-de-sac
(residential)
100 feet
diameter
— 80 feet diameter
(to the edge of
pavement or face
of curb)
Turn around or
cul-de-sac
(industrial)
As determined by Commission after consulting
with Board of Commissioners, Township
Engineer and the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation
NOTE:
* Width provisions for shoulders shall only apply where curbs
are not required by § 220-16A of this chapter or where the
Board of Commissioners elects to waive requirements for
curb.
** Reduced cartway width may be considered by the Board of
Commissioners depending on site conditions and other
considerations.
G. Minimum required street improvements.
(1) Standards. The gradations and consistency of all materials and the
methods of construction, unless otherwise authorized herein, shall
be in accordance with current standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, including:
(a) PennDOT Specifications for Roadway Construction, Publication
408.
(b) PennDOT RC-, TC-, and TS- Standard Drawings.
§ 220-15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-15
210:422
(2) Notice. No road construction activity shall be permitted in the
Township of Upper Allen until and unless the contractor shall notify
the Township at least one week in advance of commencing the
work. The contractor shall at all times during the progress of the
work have a competent superintendent or foreman on the job site.
Inspection of the road work shall be done by the Township or its
designee.
(3) Grading and utilities.
(a) The entire width of a right-of-way for each street in a proposed
subdivision shall be graded and suitably prepared for the
installation of drainage structures, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks in accordance with the appropriate standards for the
class of street.
(b) Roadway subgrade shall be free of sod, vegetative matter,
boulders, spongy soil or other unsuitable material. Where poor
subsurface drainage conditions exist, adequate drainage shall
be installed. Subgrade construction shall conform to minimum
standards as outlined in § 220-15G(4) of this chapter.
(c) The subgrade shall not be prepared during freezing weather or
when frozen or when it is unstable due to excessive moisture.
(d) All utility lines, under drains, sewer lines, including laterals
and service lines, being placed in the roadway shall be
installed prior to the commencement of road construction at
the following minimum depths:
[1] Gravity sewer lines: six feet.
[2] Force main sewer: four feet below finish grade.
[3] Waterlines: four feet.
[4] Gaslines: 2 1/2 feet.
[5] Telephone, electrical and television cable: two feet; not to
be located within paved cartway.
[6] Sewer and water lines shall have a minimum separation
distance of 10 feet or be located on opposite sides of the
street or roadway.
[7] PA Department of Environmental Protection and private
utility regulations and procedures will prevail where
applicable.
(e) All backfill for utilities under existing roadways shall be 2A
stone compacted to within 3% of the optimum material
moisture content and placed in not greater than eight-inch
lifts. The Township may require flowable fill or other alternate
§ 220-15 SOLID WASTE § 220-15
210:423
backfill material where conditions may warrant such
measures.
(f) All backfill for utilities under new roadways shall be suitable
backfill material with no stones over four inches and no
organic material, compacted to within 3% of the optimum
material moisture content and placed in not greater than eightinch
lifts.
(4) Preparation of road subgrade.
(a) The subgrade shall be compacted and fine graded to not more
than 0.2 foot below the grade as shown on the plan.
(b) All soft, plastic (as determined by proof roll) or rock areas in
the subgrade shall be undercut to a depth of at least 12 inches
or more if deemed necessary by the Township Engineer and
shall be refilled with approved materials and/or underdrained
and/or reinforced with geotextile, as determined by the
Township Engineer.
(c) The subgrade shall conform to the same crown as the paved
surface.
(d) Prior to the placement of subbase or base course, the subgrade
shall be proof-rolled with a fully loaded tandem axle dump
truck. The proof rolling shall be observed by the Township
Engineer. An acceptable proof roll shall be non-movement of
the subgrade.
(5) Preparation of road base.
(a) The base course material shall consist of compacted PennDOT
No. 2A subbase meeting the specifications of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 408, as amended,
and shall be laid in the manner prescribed therein to the
following thickness:
[1] Industrial/commercial area: 10 inches.
[2] All other roads: eight inches.
(b) Pipe underdrain shall be provided in wet areas, in areas of
roadway sag conditions, or any other areas as required by the
Township Engineer.
(6) Preparation of road surface. Roads shall be constructed from
multiple courses of pavement materials, including a base course
and a wearing course of hot-mixed, hot-laid asphaltic concrete. An
additional binder course may be required on collector roads and
industrial or commercial areas.
§ 220-15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-15
210:424
(a) The base course shall consist of a minimum of five inches of
compacted HMA Superpave base, P664-22, 37.5 mm mix,
meeting the specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Publication 408, as amended, and shall be laid
in the manner prescribed therein. The base course shall be
repaired if defects occurred prior to placement of wearing
course. Where cracking or any other type of failure has
occurred in the base course, the contractor shall completely
remove the base course, stabilize the subgrade if necessary
and construct new base course. Where the deficiency involves
depressions or raveling in the surface of the base course, the
repair may be made by skin patching with a suitable
bituminous material.
(b) The wearing course shall consist of a minimum of 1 1/2 inches
of compacted HMA Superpave wearing course, P664-22, 9.5
mm mix, meeting the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 408, as amended,
and shall be laid in the manner prescribed therein. Where a
wearing course is placed on an existing street, a minimum onehalf-
inch scratch course of compacted HMA Superpave
wearing course, P664-22, 9.5 mm mix, shall be placed prior to
the wearing course. The Township Engineer may require that
the existing pavement be milled prior to placement of the
scratch course.
(c) The wearing course shall only be placed after sufficient time
has passed to ensure that no further settling will take place.
The wearing course shall only be placed after an inspection has
determined no sags, low spots or depressions exist which could
adversely affect the integrity of the wearing course. Any
defects found shall be repaired prior to the placement of the
wearing course. In the event of any deficiency in the wearing
course such as raveling, depressions, cracking etc., such
deficiencies shall be repaired by removing the wearing course
and replacing with new material. Subject to said inspection,
the wearing course shall be placed no later than the time when
90% of the lots have been issued a certificate of occupancy by
the Township. A tack coat meeting the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 408,
as amended, shall be placed prior to paving with the wearing
course.
(d) Where required, the binder course shall consist of a minimum
of two inches of compacted HMA Superpave binder course,
P664-22, 12.5 mm mix, meeting the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 408,
as amended, and shall be laid in the manner prescribed
therein.
§ 220-15 SOLID WASTE § 220-15
210:425
H. All roadways and streets constructed in the Township of Upper Allen
shall provide for the proper flow of stormwater and natural water in the
areas of new streets and roads and shall conform to the Upper Allen
Township Stormwater Ordinance, as amended.
I. Shoulders/improved berms.
(1) Where curbs are not required, each street or road shall have
shoulders and/or berms beyond the edges of the travel lanes.
(2) Shoulders along the edge of travel lanes shall be improved with full
depth road base and road surface materials. Improved berms shall
extend beyond the edge of the cartway.
(3) Any berms or embankments beyond the curb or shoulder edge shall
be graded at a maximum slope of one foot vertical to two feet
horizontal for cuts and one foot vertical to three feet horizontal for
fills and shall be seeded and mulched to provide adequate
vegetative cover. There shall be a minimum two-foot-wide area
beyond proposed shoulders or curbs in which the cross slope does
exceed 5%.
J. Inlets.
(1) The inlets shall conform to the shape and dimensions shown in the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Design Standards for
Road Construction, as amended.
(a) Cement concrete construction shall comply with the applicable
requirements of § 1001.3 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Publication 408, as amended.
(b) Precast top units and inlet boxes may be used in lieu of cast-inplace
top units and inlet boxes if the items are supplied by an
approved manufacturer. Precast inlet boxes shall be placed on
a thoroughly compacted suitable base, satisfactory to the
Board of Commissioners and Township Engineer.
(c) In pavement areas, all inlet boxes shall have weep holes placed
at the appropriate elevations to completely drain the subgrade
prior to placing the base course and wearing course. Concrete
flow channels shall be formed at the bottom of all inlets.
(2) The inlet grades and frames shall be ductile or malleable cast iron
or structural steel. The type of inlet grates and frames shall be Type
C, Type M, or Type S, as shown in the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation's Design Standards for Road Construction, as
amended. The type of inlet grates and frames used shall be suitable
for the particular construction situation. Lightweight frames shall
not be used. Bicycle-safe grates shall be used in all areas likely to
receive pedestrian traffic. A detailed drawing of the inlets shall be
§ 220-15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-15
210:426
included on the preliminary and final subdivision or land
development plans.
K. Bridges and culverts.
(1) All bridges or similar structures to be constructed on any Township
roads or any road which is to be dedicated to the Township for
acceptance must be designed in accordance with the requirements
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Design Manual
and Part 4, as amended, entitled "Structures," as well as the
requirements of the American Association of State and Highway
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) "Standard Specifications for
Highway Bridges."
(2) Plans and design calculations meeting the foregoing requirements
shall be submitted for review and approval by the Township
Engineer.
(3) All materials and workmanship for construction must be in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Specifications Publication 408, as amended.
(4) All bridges to be constructed in accordance with the terms hereof
shall be of reinforced concrete, either poured-in-place or utilizing
precast concrete members.
L. Crown. All proposed Township roads shall be crowned with a minimum
cross slope of 2% across the cartway. Curves on collector and arterial
streets shall be designed with superelevated cross slopes, in
accordance with PennDOT Design Manual 2, as amended.
M. Calendar and weather limitations. Road construction work, such as
filling, berming, subgrade, fine-grade construction, base construction,
surface construction or paving, shall not be commenced before April 1
and shall be completed by October 31 of the same year. It is assumed
that the weather conditions between these dates will be ideal for road
construction. However, if adverse weather conditions occur between
these dates, the contractor or builder must abide by the judgment of the
Township Commissioners and/or Township Engineer in regard to
permissible construction weather conditions. Work shall only be
permitted before or after these dates on a day-by-day basis as approved
by the Township Commissioners and/or Township Engineer.
N. Improvement plan.
(1) Construction and paving plans. The paving width, curbing
requirements, grades (existing and proposed), sight distance for
the individual lots and type of paving shall be established by and
noted on detailed plans and profiles submitted to the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 220-15 SOLID WASTE § 220-15
210:427
§ 220-16. Curbs, sidewalks and vehicular parking facilities.
(2) Drainage plans. Detailed plans of the existing and proposed
drainage facilities of said street or road and contiguous territory
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission prior to the Board
of Commissioners for its approval. Said plans must cover a scope
large enough to show the effect of the facility or facilities on any
land or stream above and any land or stream below. This scope
shall be determined by the Board of Commissioners and/or the
Township Engineer and must be set forth on a separate plan.
(3) Certification of plans. All plans, profiles or drawings required under
the provisions of this chapter shall include a certification by a
Pennsylvania-registered professional engineer attesting that all
elements of the plan are in conformity with Township Code and any
applicable state regulations.
(4) Number of plans. Plans and profiles for streets, roadways, drainage
or other items required under the terms of this chapter must be
submitted to the Township on drawings not to exceed 24 inches by
36 inches. Match sheets may be used where necessary. One set of
drawings on Mylar and two sets of drawings on bond must be
provided.
(5) As-built drawings. Within 30 calendar days of the completion of the
street, roadway and/or drainage system, the Upper Allen Township
Engineer shall be supplied one detailed drawing of said streets,
roadways and/or drainage systems as the same have been
completed. Said drawings must include a certification by a
Pennsylvania-registered professional engineer that all elements of
the approved plan have been constructed as designed and
approved.
O. Inspection fees. Inspection shall be required for all phases of road
construction work: subgrading, stormwater inlets, manhole and piping
installation, base installation, binder placement and finish course
applications. The contractor and/or builder, prior to any approval by the
Board of Commissioners, must pay an inspection fee in an amount not
less than the actual cost of the inspection.
A. Curbs.
(1) Curbs shall be required along all proposed streets in subdivisions;
along all proposed streets, access drives, alleys, parking
compounds and along building fronts in land developments. The
developer shall submit the location and grade of proposed curbs to
the Township for review.
(2) Curbs shall be provided along all existing Township and/or state
roads that adjoin any portion of any subdivision and/or land
development. Lot add-on subdivision plans, as set forth in
§ 220-15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-16
210:428
§ 220-5A(1) of this chapter, shall be exempt from this section if
no curbs exist adjacent to the lots to be subdivided or are not
logical extensions of or links to other existing or proposed curbs.
[Amended 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 789]
(3) Curbs shall be installed to the dimensions and construction
standards of the Township or, in lieu of such standards, in
accordance with the standards of PennDOT Publication 408, as
amended.
(4) Curb depressions for driveways, handicap ramps or drainage shall
not be saw cut after the curb has been installed but shall be formed
and poured as depressed curb sections. Curb sections installed
between sections of existing curb shall be anchored to the existing
curb sections with two No. 4 rebar dowels at each end.
B. Sidewalks.
(1) The Township shall require installation of curbs and sidewalks in
any subdivision and land development as provided herein.
Sidewalks are required to provide access to and/or within a
commercial, industrial or community facility. Sidewalks which are
provided as part of such nonresidential facilities shall be designed
and constructed to service the projected pedestrian needs. All
public areas shall be designed barrier free in accordance with
applicable federal and state standards, including but not limited to
the Rehabilitation Act and Americans with Disabilities Act.
Appropriate details shall be provided on the plans.
(2) Sidewalks shall be constructed of Class A cement concrete four
inches thick, containing steel mesh of six-by-six-by-fourteen-inch
gauge, upon a properly prepared subgrade; four inches of AASHTO
No. 57 crushed stone shall be properly compacted using a
mechanical tamper. Upon the crushed stone, the sidewalks shall be
constructed by pouring concrete in separate slabs 30 feet in length.
The slabs shall be completely separated by one-fourth-inch
expansion joint and scored every five feet. A four-foot-wide grass
planting strip shall be provided between the curb and sidewalk.
(3) Sidewalks shall be provided along all existing Township and/or
state roads that adjoin any portion of any subdivision and/or land
development, except for the following: [Amended 11-6-2019 by
Ord. No. 789]
(a) Lot add-on subdivisions as set forth in § 220-5A(1) of this
chapter, if no sidewalks or trails exist adjacent to the lots to be
subdivided or are not logical extensions of or links to other
existing or proposed pedestrian facilities.
(b) Residential single-family detached lots with a required
minimum lot frontage of 125 feet or greater, as set forth in
Chapter 245, Zoning.
§ 220-16 SOLID WASTE § 220-16
210:429
(c) The subdivision of land into three lots or less, provided
sidewalks or trails are not proposed, deferred, planned or
existing along adjacent properties.
(d) A planned or existing trail in a greenway area as part of an
approved Conservation Design subdivision plan may satisfy
this requirement.122
(4) Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all proposed streets in
subdivisions and land developments, as herein specified.
(5) Sidewalks shall be located within the street right-of-way line and
shall be a minimum of four feet in width.
(6) Pedestrian easements may be required by the Township to facilitate
pedestrian circulation or to give access to community facilities.
Pedestrian easements shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide with
suitable improvements, in the sole opinion of the Township, to
serve their intended purpose.
(7) Sidewalks shall conform to the adjacent earthen areas as to
elevations.
(8) If sidewalks are made of concrete or similar masonry material, they
shall be broom finished and not have a smooth surface.
(9) Fee in lieu of installation of sidewalks. [Added 11-6-2019 by Ord.
No. 789]
(a) The applicant may offer a fee in lieu of installation of required
sidewalks when the Township determines that one or more of
the following conditions exist:
[1] Sidewalks are scheduled to be installed as part of a
Township, county, or state project that has been funded for
construction.
[2] Where the District Executive of PennDOT recommends, in
writing, that no sidewalk be constructed, and the
Township agrees.
[3] The sidewalks are not logical extensions of or links to
other existing or proposed pedestrian facilities.
[4] Where a combination of conditions exists (such as, but not
limited to, topography, hazardous conditions, impacts in
environmentally sensitive areas, or other conditions
warranting same upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer) which make it impractical or not
feasible to construct a sidewalk.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 220-16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-16
210:430
[5] The sidewalks are not a proposed feature as depicted in
the Township's Comprehensive Plan or any Official Map as
may have been adopted by the Township.
(b) Fees. The fee in lieu of the sidewalks shall not exceed 110% of
the current cost of construction for said sidewalk. Construction
cost estimates shall be submitted by an engineer and reviewed
and approved by the Township.
(c) Payment of fees. The fee paid and contributed to the fund shall
be paid upon approval of the subdivision or land development
plan or any phase of section thereof. Payment of the required
contribution shall be included as a condition of approval of
such subdivision and land development plans.
(d) Use of fees. All fees collected by the Township pursuant to
these provisions shall be accounted for separately from other
monies and placed in an interest-bearing account and shall be
accounted for separately from the other Township funds.
Interest earned on this account shall likewise be the funds of
the Township. The Township shall maintain records indicating
the source of the funds and the projects where the funds are
expended. Such fees shall only be used in the following
manner:
[1] For construction or expansion of sidewalks, trails,
pedestrian accesses, or other facilities that are available to
the public or located in a public right-of-way or easement.
[2] For design, engineering, acquisition of rights-of-way or
easements and utility relocation associated with
installation of facilities described above.
C. Vehicular parking facilities.
(1) Off-street vehicular parking facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.123
(2) Landscape screening and interior landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the Upper Allen Township
Zoning Ordinance. Landscape screening and interior landscaping
shall not restrict sight distances.
(3) Not less than five-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for
horizontal curves in parking areas.
(4) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient
back-up area for all end stalls.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 220-16 SOLID WASTE § 220-16
210:431
§ 220-17. Driveways and access drives.
(5) Painted lines, arrows and dividers shall be provided and maintained
to control parking when necessary to direct vehicular circulation.
(6) All parking compounds and access drives shall be constructed to
meet the following minimum standards:
(a) Crushed aggregate base course with a minimum thickness of
six inches, as specified in PennDOT Specifications Publication
408, as amended.
(b) The bituminous surface shall consist of a minimum of two
inches of ID-2 binder course and one-and-one-half-inch ID-2
wearing course.
Material shall be equal or superior to Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications Publication 408,
as amended, and shall be applied in accordance with those
same specifications.
A. Driveways. Driveways shall only be used to provide vehicular access
between a parking area for a single residential unit of occupancy or
agricultural use and a local street, service or marginal access drive.
Driveways shall conform to the Upper Allen Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended, and to the following standards:
(1) Only one driveway connection per 100 feet of lot frontage and no
more than two driveway connections per lot are permitted.
(2) Driveways shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles; in any event no driveway shall intersect another at
less than 75°.
(3) Driveways on either side of a street shall not connect with a public
street within 50 feet of the center line of any intersecting streets
nor within 300 feet of the center line of a signalized intersection.
Driveways shall not be constructed within five feet of a fire hydrant.
[Amended 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
(4) Driveways shall be located and constructed so clear sight triangles
are provided in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended.
(5) Driveways grades shall be in accordance with the Upper Allen
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended. Driveway intersections
with streets shall be constructed to allow the flow of stormwater
parallel to the street and shall comply with the requirements of the
Upper Allen Township Stormwater Management Ordinance, as
amended. Driveways shall be designed to intercept runoff,
preventing it from entering the road or street. Detailed grading
§ 220-16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-17
210:432
must be provided where driveways cross existing or proposed
drainage swales.
(6) Driveway access shall be provided to the street of lesser
classification when there is more than one street classification
involved.
(7) Driveways which intersect shall provide adequate turnaround
within the lot so egress to the street is in a forward direction.
(8) All intersections with a state route shall be subject to the approval
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Any driveway
intersecting with a state route shall obtain a highway occupancy
permit from PennDOT prior to receipt of a building permit.
(9) Driveways shall be paved with bituminous concrete or an
equivalent stabilized material from the edge of the street right-ofway
a minimum distance of 15 feet toward the interior of the lot
and be provided in a manner consistent with the design,
construction and stormwater drainage of the street to prohibit
runoff onto Township roadways.
(a) Where existing or proposed sidewalks cross a driveway, a
concrete apron shall be provided from the edge of the street
cartway to the far edge of the sidewalk. Concrete driveway
aprons shall have a minimum depth of six inches and be
constructed with reinforced wire or fiberglass substitute for
strengthening purposes.
(b) Driveway pavement materials shall be separated from street
pavement with concrete depressed curb, constructed in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
standard drawing RC-64M and Pennsylvania Department of
Highway Specifications, 2000, Form 408, as amended.
(10) All driveways shall also comply with the site distance requirements
outlined in § 220-15E(10) of this chapter.
B. Access drives. Access drives are private drives, which provide vehicular
movement between a street and a tract of land containing any use other
than one single-family dwelling unit or farm. Access drives shall
conform to the following:
(1) The vertical alignments of access drives shall conform to the
specifications for streets, as stated in § 220-15 of this chapter.
(2) The horizontal alignments of access drives shall be measured along
the center line. Horizontal curves shall be used at all angle changes
in excess of 2°. All curves shall be tangential arcs. The minimum
horizontal curve radius shall be 75 feet.
(3) All access drive intersections shall be:
§ 220-17 SOLID WASTE § 220-17
210:433
(a) Subject to approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation when intersecting a state route. Copies of
highway occupancy permits from the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation shall be submitted for all proposed
intersections with a state route prior to final plan approval.
(b) Set back 50 feet from the center line of any intersecting streets
and 300 feet from the center line of a signalized intersection.
[Amended 5-20-2015 by Ord. No. 739]
(c) Set back from any side and/or rear property lines per
requirements contained in the Upper Allen Zoning Ordinance,
as amended.124
(d) Located in relationship to access drive intersections on
adjacent properties to provide safe and efficient movement of
vehicles.
(e) Located directly across from any intersecting street, driveway
or access drive on the opposite side of the street, where
applicable.
(f) Designed with right-angle intersections whenever possible. No
access drive intersection shall utilize an angle less than 75°,
unless turning movement restrictions are imposed.
(g) Rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius of 30 feet.
The Township may require a larger radius where large vehicle
turning movements are anticipated.
(h) Provided with a clear sight triangle, in accordance with
§ 220-15 of this chapter.
(i) Compliant with the site distance requirements outlined in
§ 220-15E(10) of this chapter.
(j) Landscaped with street trees, as required for public streets.
(4) Access drives which form a cul-de-sac shall not exceed 800 feet in
length, measured from the center line intersection of a street or
access drive which is not a cul-de-sac. Access drive cul-de-sacs
which do not terminate in a parking compound shall be provided at
the terminus with a fully paved turnaround with a minimum
diameter of 100 feet.
(a) The Board of Commissioners, upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, may permit an alternative turnaround
design, including a turnaround incorporated in a parking court
or a landscaped island, provided safe movement of traffic is
assured.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 220-17 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-17
210:434
(5) Access drive grade profiles within 50 feet of the street right-of-way
shall conform to standards outlined in PennDOT Publication 44.
The grades on access drives shall not exceed the following:
(a) Eight percent when access is to an arterial street.
(b) Ten percent when access is to a collector or minor street.
(6) When vehicular parking is prohibited along access drives, the
prohibition must be acknowledged on the plan and properly signed
along the cartway.
(7) The cartway of all access drives shall be constructed with a
minimum six-inch crushed aggregate base course and a minimum
three-and-one-half-inch depth of bituminous concrete material, as
specified in the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Publication 408. Additionally, all work procedures
shall conform to the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation Publication 408.
(8) Table V-2 specifies various access drive width requirements:
(9) The maximum slopes of banks located within 20 feet of the cartway
shall not exceed 3:1 for fills and 2:1 for cuts.
Table V-2
Access Drive Width Requirements
Function
Required Cartway
Width
(feet)
Two lanes of traffic with parking on
both sides
40
Two lanes of traffic with parking on
one side
36
Two lanes of traffic without parking 24
One lane of traffic with one lane of
parking*
20
One lane of traffic without parking* 12
NOTE:
* The one-way direction of traffic must be identified along the
cartway.
C. Recreation or nonlicensed vehicle crossings of streets, alleys, access
drives and driveways. The following standards shall apply for all
recreation or nonlicensed vehicle trail crossings (e.g., equestrian, golf
carts, off-road vehicles, snowmobiles):
§ 220-17 SOLID WASTE § 220-17
210:435
§ 220-18. Blocks and lots.
(1) Crossings shall be provided in a manner consistent with the design,
construction and stormwater drainage of the street, alley, access
drive or driveway.
(2) Crossings shall be easily identifiable.
(3) Crossings shall be perpendicular to the vehicular traffic
movements.
(4) No crossing shall be located between 15 feet and 150 feet from the
cartway edge of a street, alley, access drive or driveway
intersection.
(5) Crossings shall be provided with a clear sight triangle of 75 feet
measured along the center line of the street, access drive or
driveway and five feet from the edge of the roadway at the center
line of the recreation vehicular crossing. No obstructions, grading
and/or planting greater than three feet above the cartway grade
are permitted in the clear sight triangle. A public right-of-way shall
be reserved for the purpose of removing any object, material or
other obstruction to the clear sight.
(6) Crossings shall not exceed a slope of 8% within 25 feet of the
cartway being crossed.
(7) Crossings shall be signed to warn motorists and pedestrians of the
crossing. The surface of the crossing shall be brightly painted with
angle stripes.
(8) Crossing of major streets shall consist of a tunnel, bridging or other
suitable measures to assure safe crossing.
(9) Crossings shall also comply with the site distance requirements
outlined in § 220-15E(10) of this chapter.
A. General. The configuration of blocks and lots shall be based upon the lot
area requirements, traffic circulation, salient natural features, existing
man-made features, and land use. Lot configurations should provide for
flexibility in building locations, while providing safe vehicular and
pedestrian circulation.
B. Residential blocks. All blocks in a residential subdivision shall have a
maximum length along any side of 1,500 feet and shall be of sufficient
depth to permit two tiers of lots, except as otherwise provided for
herein.
C. Nonresidential blocks. Block configurations in nonresidential areas
shall be based primarily upon safe and efficient traffic circulation and
salient natural features.
D. Lot configuration.
§ 220-17 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-18
210:436
(1) Whenever practical, side lot lines shall be radial to street lines.
(2) In order to avoid jurisdictional problems, lot lines shall follow
municipal boundaries rather than cross them. Where a lot is
divided by a municipal boundary, the minimum standards of both
municipalities shall apply.
(3) Lots with areas that are two or more times the minimum area
requirements shall be designed with configurations that allow for
additional subdivision. The Township may require a sketch plan of
such large lots that indicates the potential future subdivision is
generally in conformance with the design standards.
(4) All lots shall front on a public street. No residential lots shall be
created which front upon a limited access highway. Furthermore,
no lots in a subdivision and/or land development shall be created
which front upon a collector or arterial street. The only exception is
reverse frontage lots.
(5) Double frontage lots are prohibited. A double frontage lot fronts
upon two roughly parallel streets or upon two streets which do not
intersect and vehicular access is provided to both streets. The
Township permits reverse frontage lots as provided in
§ 220-18D(6), below.
(6) Reverse frontage lots front upon two parallel streets or upon two
streets which do not intersect, and vehicular access is provided to
only one of the streets. All residential reverse frontage lots shall
designate one frontage as the rear yard with a minimum depth of
75 feet. Vehicular access shall be prohibited from the rear of
reverse frontage lots.
All reverse frontage lots shall include an identification of the
frontage for use as a road access. The street designated for
frontage must be consistent with contiguous lots. Reverse
frontage lots must meet the required lot width along the street of
lesser classification.
(7) When a residential subdivision or land development is proposed, a
maximum of four proposed lots or dwelling units shall gain access
in whole or in part via driveways connecting to existing streets for
each parent tract in existence, as of the effective date of this
chapter.
(8) Proposed lot lines shall be configured such that when one area of a
lot is connected to another area of the lot via a strip of land, the
width of said strip of land shall have a minimum width not less than
75% of the minimum lot width for that zoning district. The width of
the connecting strip of land shall be measured along the shortest
path between lot lines.
(9) The maximum lot-depth-to-width ratio shall be 3 1/2:1.
§ 220-18 SOLID WASTE § 220-18
210:437
(10) Flag lots. Flag lots shall only be permitted where specifically
provided for within the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance,
and then only in compliance with the following:
(a) Flag lots shall only be permitted when they will enable the
preservation of some important natural or cultural feature
(including productive farmland), which would otherwise be
disturbed by conventional lotting techniques. Further
subdivision will require road frontage as specified in the
Township Zoning Ordinance.125 Flag lots shall be restricted
from future subdivision.
(b) For the purposes of this section, a flag lot shall be described as
containing two parts: 1) the "flag" shall include that portion of
the lot that is the location of the principal and accessory
buildings; 2) the "pole" shall be considered that portion of the
site that is used for vehicular access between the site and its
adjoining road.
(c) Requirements for the flag.
[1] The minimum lot area and lot width requirements of the
Township Zoning Ordinance shall be measured exclusively
upon the flag.
[2] For purposes of determining required yards and setbacks,
the following shall apply:
[a] Front yard. The area between the principal structure
and that lot line of the flag which is most parallel to
the street providing vehicular access to the site.
Additionally, all areas of the pole shall be considered
to be within the front yard;
[b] Rear yard. The area between the principal structure
and that lot line of the flag that is directly opposite the
front yard, as described above; and
[c] Side yards. The area between the principal structure
and that one outermost lot line which forms the flag
and pole, plus the area on the opposite side of the
principal structure.
The flag lot shall contain adequate driveway
dimension for vehicular backup so that ingress to and
egress from the lot is in the forward direction.
(d) Requirements for the pole.
[1] The pole shall maintain a minimum width of 50 feet.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 220-18 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-18
210:438
§ 220-19. Building setback lines and building separations.
§ 220-20. Sewage disposal.
[2] The pole shall not exceed 800 feet in length.
[3] No part of the pole shall be used for any portion of an onlot
sewage disposal system, nor any other improvement
except a driveway and other permitted improvements such
as landscaping, fencing, utility connections to off-site
facilities, mailboxes and signs.
[4] The cartway contained on the pole shall be located at least
six feet from any adjoining property line and 20 feet from
any existing structures on the site or any adjoining
property.
No pole shall be located within 200 feet of another on the
same side of the street.
A. A building setback line shall be provided along each right-of-way and
property line. The area within the building setback shall be preserved
from structural development.
B. The building setback lines and building separations shall conform with
the prevailing Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance requirements.
C. In the case of corner lots, the setback from each adjacent street shall
apply.
A. As required by Article III of this chapter, all plan submissions must be
accompanied by the appropriate sewage facilities planning module for
land development provided by the PA Department of Environmental
Protection. All planning module reviews shall conform to the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act of 1965, P.L. 1935, No. 537, as
amended; DEP Chapter 71 Regulations, Administration of Sewage
Facilities; the Upper Allen Township Act 537 Plan; and this and any
other Township ordinances.
B. Each new dwelling created in the Township shall be self-sufficient for
sewage disposal and the sewage disposal system shall be public,
community or individually owned, maintained or operated. The
proposed sewer design must be based upon the results of the sanitary
sewer feasibility report required by Article III of this chapter.
C. Measures to mitigate the impact of the proposed development upon
archaeological and historic resources, agreed to with the Pennsylvania
Historic and Museum Commission, shall be reviewed by the Township
during the planning process, shall meet the requirements of any
Township ordinance, and shall be subject to review and approval by the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 220-18 SOLID WASTE § 220-20
210:439
D. Public sewage facilities.
(1) Where a public sanitary sewer system is within 1,000 feet of, or
where plans approved by the municipality provide for the
installation of such public sanitary sewer facilities to within 1,000
feet of, a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall provide the
subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer-system if, in the Board
of Commissioners' opinion, on the recommendation of the
Commission, it is feasible.
(2) Where a public sanitary sewage system does not currently exist
within 1,000 feet of the development site, but in the opinion of the
Board of Commissioners will become available within five years,
the subdivider shall install a complete sanitary sewer collection
system in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Collector mains shall be installed in the street or approved
rights-of-way;
(b) Sewer laterals shall be installed in the right-of-way lines of
streets, lot or parcel property lines, or sewer easement rightof-
way lines, whichever pertains to the individual situation;
(c) The system shall be connected to an approved community onlot
system or a temporary package treatment plant until
connection to a public sanitary sewer system is made;
(d) All termini shall be capped in a manner that will insure that all
collector mains, laterals and house line connections shall be
watertight pending connection with the public sanitary sewer
system.
(3) Design and construction.
(a) The construction of the system, including all service
connections, pumping stations and interceptors, shall be
constructed at the developer's expense and shall not
commence until application has been made to and written
authorization to proceed with construction has been obtained
from the Township.
(b) The system shall be designed by a registered professional
engineer and approved by the Township Engineer.
(c) When a public sanitary sewer system is installed and capped by
the applicant, the applicant may also install on-site sewage
disposal facilities, provided the system is designed to allow
connection to the public sewer when it becomes available.
(d) Sanitary sewers and sewage disposal systems shall not be
combined with stormwater sewers and shall not be constructed
to receive effluent from any stormwater collection system.
§ 220-20 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-20
210:440
(e) Pipe sizes for sanitary sewer mains and sewer laterals and
locations for manholes shall meet the Township's
specifications. The Township Engineer shall inspect the sewer
line before it is backfilled.
(4) Central community sanitary sewage facilities.
(a) A central community sanitary sewage facility shall be
permitted if it can be shown that such an approach would
provide more reliable and effective treatment of waste than
individual on-lot systems or a central community system is
required as part of cluster or open space development.
(b) The design and installation of a central community sanitary
sewage facilities shall be subject to the approval of the Board
of Commissioners and the PA DEP.
(c) The system shall be designed by a registered professional
engineer and approved by the Township Engineer. The
construction of the system, including all pumping stations,
interceptors, drainage fields and treatment plants, shall be at
the developer's own expense.
(d) All suitable agreements, including financial guarantees shall
be established for the ownership and maintenance of the
system. Ownership and maintenance of the central community
sanitary sewer system shall be the responsibility of an
organization formed and operated in accordance with
§ 220-13D of this chapter.
(e) Central community sanitary sewage facilities shall be located
on a separate lot under the ownership of an organization
approved by the Township. The lot shall be used solely for the
community sanitary sewage facility. The area of the lot shall be
of sufficient size to accommodate the system, the required area
for a complete alternate or replacement system, and all
required setbacks.
(f) The Township shall have the right to inspect and test
community sanitary sewage facilities at any time. The
Township may require the owner to provide the results of
regular professional testing of the system when the Township
deems necessary. The cost of inspections and testing shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
E. On-lot sewage disposal.
(1) Where public sanitary sewers are not feasible, the use of on-lot
sewage disposal systems shall be permitted. The use of such on-lot
systems is governed by regulations of the PA DEP and enforced by
the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO).
§ 220-20 SOLID WASTE § 220-20
210:441
§ 220-21. Water supply.
Each new dwelling created in Upper Allen Township shall be individually
self-sufficient for water supply and the water supply system. The applicant
shall provide an adequate and potable water supply and distribution system
to service the proposed subdivision and land development which shall be: 1)
individual; 2) public; or 3) private community and maintained and operated
in accordance with the PA Department of Environmental Protection. The
purpose of these provisions is to ensure that each dwelling unit and each
commercial and industrial building in all subdivisions hereafter granted
approval shall have an adequate supply of potable water for domestic use
and, where feasible, for fire protection.
(2) Prior to approval of any plan depicting on-lot sewage disposal
systems, the developer shall have had soils testing performed on
each lot to determine the suitability for such systems and shall have
secured the approval of the Township SEO and/or PA DEP through
the use of planning module for land development. The Township
SEO and PA DEP must approve each on-lot sewage disposal system
including the primary and alternate absorption areas.
(3) An individual sewage disposal system shall be located on the lot it
serves or within adjacent open space that it designated for that
purpose.
A. Public water supply. Where there is an existing public water supply
system within 1,000 feet from a proposed subdivision and such system
has adequate planned capacity and is willing to serve that subdivision
or land development, a complete water supply system connection to the
existing water supply system must be provided, and fire hydrants shall
be installed in accordance with § 220-22 of this chapter.
(1) Where plans approved by a public water supplier provide for the
installation of such public water supply system within four years,
the developer shall provide a complete water system for connection
to the planned water main supply system.
(2) Where connection to a public water supply is possible or feasible,
the plan for the installation of such water supply must be prepared
for the development with cooperation of the appropriate water
utility company and approved by the Township Engineer. Upon
completion of the water supply system, a reproducible as-built plan
of the system shall be filed with the Township
(3) Where a public water supply system is not feasible for the proposed
development as evidenced in the hydrogeologic/water facilities
study, the developer shall provide information related to the
construction and installation of a central community water supply
system, as described in § 220-11 of this chapter.
§ 220-20 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-21
210:442
B. Central community water supply system. The design and installation of
a central community water supply system shall be subject to the
approval of the Board of Commissioners and the PA Department of
Environmental Protection.
(1) Standards and materials for the construction of any central
community water supply system shall meet or exceed those
requirements described in the Public Water Supply Manual of the
PA DEP and shall be subject to approval by the Township Engineer.
Where a permit is required by PA DEP, it shall be presented as
evidence of such review and approval before construction of the
system will commence.
(2) Where the central community water supply system occurs under
the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission
(PUC), the water supply study shall also incorporate those items of
information required by the Public Utilities Commission.
(3) The central community water supply system shall be designed to
furnish an adequate supply of water to each lot, with adequate
water main sizes and fire hydrant locations to meet the
specifications of the Middle Department Inspection Agency (MDIA)
[3901 Hartzdale Drive, Suite 112, Camp Hill, PA 17011, (717)
761-5340, fax: (717) 761-5590]. A technical study shall be
submitted to the Township for review by the Township Engineer
and Fire Company representatives. Fire hydrants should be placed
and constructed in accordance with § 220-22 of this chapter.
(4) All suitable agreements, including financial guarantees, shall be
established for the ownership and maintenance of the system.
Ownership and maintenance of the central community water
system shall be the responsibility of an organization formed and
operated in accordance with § 220-13D of this chapter. Such a
system shall be designed and constructed in a manner that would
permit adequate connection to a public water supply system in the
future.
(5) All water systems located in flood-prone areas, whether public or
private, shall be floodproofed to a point 1 1/2 feet above the onehundred-
year-flood elevation.
(6) Groundwater control for central community water systems.
Groundwater for central community water systems must conform
with the PA DEP requirements and standards. A minimum of two
sources of groundwater must be provided for each community
water system. Each should be capable of supplying the average
daily demand of the proposed dwelling units.
C. On-lot water supply.
(1) Where there is no existing public water supply and the
hydrogeologic/water facilities study indicates that connection to a
§ 220-21 SOLID WASTE § 220-21
210:443
§ 220-22. Fire hydrants.
public water supply system and central community system is not
feasible, each lot in the development must be provided with an
individual on-lot water supply system in accordance with the
standards required by the PA Department of Environmental
Protection. The Board of Commissioners shall approve the use of
individual on-lot water supply systems when:
(a) The hydrogeologic/water facilities study indicates that
justification of the project necessitates the use of this type of
water supply;
(b) The anticipated water supply yield is adequate for the type of
development proposed;
(c) The installation of an on-lot system(s) will not endanger or
decrease the groundwater supplies to adjacent properties.
(2) Construction of wells for individual small water supplies shall
conform to PA DEP's Construction Standards for Individual Water
Supplies, as revised.
A. Where public and central community water systems are provided for
subdivision and land development, fire hydrants suitable for coupling
with fire equipment serving the Township shall be installed as specified
by the Insurance Services Offices of Pennsylvania. The fire protection
system shall be designed by a registered professional engineer and
approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Fire hydrants shall meet the following standards and shall be approved
by the Board of Commissioners upon review and recommendation by
the Township Engineer.
(1) All fire hydrants will be located on an eight-inch line or a looped sixinch
line. Where a dead-end line is required to contain a fire
hydrant, the portion of the line between the main loop and the
hydrant shall have a minimum diameter of eight inches.
(2) Fire hydrants shall be spaced in a development so that all proposed
buildings will be no more than 600 feet from the hydrant, measured
along traveled ways.
(3) All central community water systems must provide a minimum of
500 gallons per minute (GPM) at a residential pressure of 20 psi for
a two-hour period.
(4) Fire hydrant adapters shall be the five-inch Storz Hydrant Adapter.
[Added 1-18-2017 by Ord. No. 762]
C. The cost of a hydrant is charged to the governing body by the
appropriate water authority. The developer shall post monies sufficient
§ 220-21 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-22
210:444
§ 220-23. Utility easements.
to cover the cost of the installation of said fire hydrants with the Board
of Commissioners prior to the approval of the development plan.
A. Utilities.
(1) Easements shall be provided for poles, wires, conduits, storm and
sanitary sewer lines, gas, water and heat mains, and other utilities
intended to serve the abutting lots and for access to facilities.
Wherever possible such easements shall be centered on the side or
rear lot lines or along the front lot lines. The minimum width of
utility easements shall be as follows:
(a) Sanitary sewer and storm drainage facilities: 30 feet.
(b) Underground and overhead public utilities: 20 feet.
(2) Nothing shall be placed, planted, set or put within the area of an
easement that would adversely affect the function of the easement
or conflict with the easement agreement. This requirement shall be
noted on the final plan.
(3) Where any natural gas, petroleum or high-tension electric
transmission line traverses a subdivision or land development, the
applicant shall confer with the applicable transmission or
distribution company to determine the minimum easement
requirements for the transmission line. Additionally, the Township
will require, with the final plan application, a statement from the
owner of the transmission line stating any conditions on the use of
the tract which shall contain the above.
(4) The applicant shall provide the Township with copies of easement
agreements or statements from public utility providers, as
applicable, to confirm the adequacy of proposed easements.
B. Stormwater, sanitary sewer and clear water collection systems. Where
a subdivision and/or land development are traversed by stormwater,
sanitary sewer or clear water collection system facilities, a utility
easement shall be provided. In no case shall the easement be less than
30 feet in width. Additional width may be required by the Board of
Commissioners depending on the purpose and use of the easements.
C. Stream, watercourse, drainage channel, pond or lake.
(1) Where a subdivision and/or land development is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be
provided a drainage easement conforming sustainability with its
location for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating,
improving or protecting such watercourses, providing proper
maintenance, or for the purpose of installing a stormwater or clear
water system. The following standards shall apply:
§ 220-22 SOLID WASTE § 220-23
210:445
§ 220-24. Monuments and markers.
(a) Perennial streams: 15 feet from the stream bank.
(b) Intermittent stream, drainageway, channel or swale: 15 feet
from the center line of the watercourse.
(c) An access easement shall be provided to the drainage
easement. The width of such access points shall not be less
than 30 feet.
(2) In no case shall any drainage easement be less than 30 feet in
width.
D. Conservation.
(1) Where environmental protection and floodplain overlay zones exist,
a conservation easement shall be depicted on the plan within the
overlay area.
(2) In all subdivisions and land developments, a fifteen-foot
conservation easement shall be provided around all delineated
wetland areas to ensure minimal disturbance and encroachment in
these areas.
E. Pedestrian.
(1) Where necessary for access to public or common lands, a
pedestrian easement shall be provided with a width of no less than
10 feet. Additional width, fencing and/or planting may be required
by the Board of Commissioners, depending on the purpose and use
of the easement.
(2) When a subdivision proposes multifamily attached dwellings, such
as townhouses, the plans shall include an access easement for the
purposes of property maintenance along the front and rear
property lines of all units and side property lines of the end units, to
allow all lot owners within the unit access to front and rear yards.
The access easement shall have a minimum width of 10 feet. This
requirement shall be noted on the final plan and shall be included
in all deeds for lots which contain the easement. This easement is
intended only for pedestrian access or for small and nonlicensed
motorized maintenance equipment.
A. Monuments must be so placed that the scored or marked point
coincides exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being
monumented. They must be set so that the top of the monument or
marker is level with the surface of the surrounding ground. Monuments
must be marked on top with a copper or brass dowel.
B. Location of monuments.
§ 220-23 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-24
210:446
§ 220-25. Street names and name signs.
(1) At the intersection of lines forming angles in the boundaries of the
subdivision; except in minor subdivisions, this requirement shall
not apply unless required by the Township Engineer.
(2) At the intersection of street right-of-way lines.
(3) At change in alignment of streets.
(4) At each lot in a subdivision having at least two monuments.
(5) At such intermediate points as may be required by the Township
Engineer.
C. Markers shall be set at the beginning and ending of all curves along
street property lines; at all points where lot lines intersect curves,
either front or rear; at all angles in property lines of lots; and at all
other lot corners.
D. Monuments and markers shall be made of the following size and
material:
(1) Monuments shall be six inches square or four inches in diameter
and shall be 30 inches long. Monuments shall be made of concrete,
stone or by setting four-inch cast iron or steel pipe filled with
concrete. Monuments must be marked on top with a copper or
brass dowel.
(2) Markers shall be 3/4 of an inch square or 3/4 of an inch in diameter
and 15 inches long. Markers shall be made of iron pipes or iron or
steel bars.
E. All monuments shall be placed by a registered engineer or surveyor so
that the center of the monument shall coincide exactly with the point of
intersection of the lines being monumented.
F. Removal. Any monuments that are removed must be replaced by a
registered engineer or surveyor at the expense of the person removing
them.
A. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or approximate existing or
platted street names, or approximate such names by use of suffixes
such as "land," "way," "drive," "court," and "avenue." In approving the
names of new streets, cognizance shall be given to existing or platted
street names within the Township and postal district. New street names
shall bear the same name or number of any continuation or alignment
with an existing or platted street. All proposed street names must be
approved by the Township.
B. The contractor or developer shall install street name signs at each
street intersection. All traffic control signs and devices are to be
installed prior to any certificates of occupancy being issued.
§ 220-24 SOLID WASTE § 220-25
210:447
§ 220-26. Landscaping, buffer yards and screening.
In residential subdivisions of 10 or more units, all commercial and industrial
subdivisions and land developments with greater than 10 parking spaces,
the developer shall provide buffer yards and landscaping in accordance
with this section. For commercial and industrial subdivisions and land
developments, a minimum of 10% of the developed area shall be landscaped
or in buffer yards.
C. Street sign specifications. Street signs shall conform to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Publication 236M, dated
April 1997, as amended.
A. General buffer and screening regulations.
(1) Buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with the Upper Allen
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.126 Screening and screens
in buffer yards shall be installed in accordance with § 220-26B of
this chapter.
(2) All planting shall be performed in conformance with good nursery
and landscape practice. Plant materials shall conform to the
standards recommended by the American Association of
Nurseryman, Inc., in the American Standard of Nursery Stock,
ANSIZ60, current edition, as amended.
B. Screening.
(1) Screening and screens required by this chapter are intended to
provide an effective visual barrier at the street level between
conflicting uses related to noise, heat, glare, dust and traffic.
Screening and screens are used to preserve property values and
ensure the compatibility of different land uses as well as improve
the appearance of individual properties and neighborhoods in the
Township. This section provides standards and options for the
design and installation of plants, fences and walls used as
screening in the Township. Screening shall be in accordance with
the following table and with the Buffer Yard Exhibit in Appendix
B.127 The buffer yard types relate to the Township's zoning districts
as described in the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance,
General buffer regulations.128 [Amended 4-17-2013 by Ord. No.
709]
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
127. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Examples of Buffer Yard Types, is included at the end of this
chapter.
128. Editor's Note: See § 245-156.
§ 220-25 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-26
210:448
Buffer Yard Type and Minimum Screening
Buffer Yard
Type Minimum Screening
1 One shade tree per 50 linear feet and one
evergreen tree per 40 linear feet of buffer yard
screen
2 One shade tree per 40 linear feet and one
evergreen tree per 30 linear feet of buffer yard
screen and one deciduous or evergreen shrub
per 20 linear feet of buffer yard screen. At least
60% of shrub plantings shall be of the evergreen
type
3 One shade tree per 30 linear feet and one
evergreen tree per 10 linear feet of buffer yard
screen and one deciduous or evergreen shrub
per 10 linear feet of buffer yard screen. At least
70% of shrub plantings shall be an evergreen
type
(a) All screening materials and landscaping shall not encroach
upon the adjoining property line at full maturity.
(b) Landscaping shall be a combination of shade trees, ornamental
trees, evergreen trees, deciduous shrubs, evergreen shrubs
and ground covers. The following buffer yard plantings shall be
of the minimum planting height: [Amended 5-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 739]
[1] Evergreen trees, including arborvitae trees or shrubs:
minimum five-foot planting height.
[2] Deciduous trees: minimum two-inch caliper and six-foot
planting height.
[3] Evergreen or deciduous shrubs: minimum eighteen-inch
planting height, reaching a minimum of 30 inches within
two years. All shrubs must have a minimum spread of 12
inches to 15 inches when planted.
[4] Minimum planting width: 10 feet.
(c) Selected plant materials shall be in accordance with
§ 220-26B(2), Recommended plant species, herein.
(d) All loading and service areas shall meet the following
screening requirements when adjacent to a residential zone or
use: one shade tree per 60 linear feet and one evergreen per
10 linear feet of visible loading and service area.
§ 220-26 SOLID WASTE § 220-26
210:449
(e) All dumpsters, transformers, fuel storage tanks and unsightly
utilities shall meet the following screening requirements
regardless of location or district: one shade tree per 40 linear
feet and one evergreen tree per five linear feet of visibility. In
addition, all trash disposal areas shall be effectively screened
with no less than a six-foot solid fence so as not to be visible
from parking areas, roadways or adjacent properties.
(f) Existing acceptable vegetation should be retained when
feasible. Credit may be applied to required perimeter
landscape plantings if the existing trees can be maintained and
are of acceptable size and health.
(g) Screening of stormwater management facilities shall be in
accordance with the following standards:
[1] Landscape buffering and screening techniques shall be
required for stormwater management facilities that are
adjacent to dissimilar adjoining properties and public and
private roads.
[2] The stormwater management screening and buffering
shall not be applied to fulfill any other of the required
landscape buffering requirements of the site.
[3] If stormwater facilities and ponds are required to provide
fencing, the required fencing cannot be credited towards
stormwater facility landscape requirements.
[4] When fences abut public or private roads or dissimilar land
uses, the proposed plantings shall be on the exterior of the
fence, facing adjacent roadways and properties.
[5] Stormwater management buffering and screening
requirements may be exempt in industrially zoned districts
if they are not adjacent to dissimilar uses. When
stormwater facilities adjoin or are adjacent to residentially
zoned districts or public roadways, the required screening
shall be in compliance with buffer yard 3 above.
[6] The means in which to quantify required plant material
will be measured from the top of the dam elevation in
linear feet.
[7] Plant material shall not be permitted in fill areas which
may compromise the structural integrity of the stormwater
management facility. This restriction shall not supercede
the required landscape screening and buffering
requirements.
[8] The required plant material shall be of native vegetation or
an acceptable equivalent site-tolerant plant type in
§ 220-26 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-26
210:450
accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
[9] The proposed plant material and landscaping
requirements for the stormwater management facility
should be designed in a manner that will minimize
excessive maintenance.
[10] If the side slopes of the stormwater facility are too steep
(3:1 slope or greater) to mow and maintain, it is
recommended that they be planted with acceptable
ground covers which do not require excessive mowing.
[11] The proposed required landscape shall not encroach or
impede the ability to access and maintain the stormwater
facility. Woody vegetation that includes deciduous
evergreen trees and shrubs shall not be on the
embankments or within 50 feet of an inlet structure,
standpipe or drainageway. Proposed vegetation that has
excessive leaf and seed litter will not be permitted.
[12] Existing acceptable vegetation should be retained around
the proposed stormwater management facility when
feasible. Credit may be applied to required perimeter
landscape plantings if the existing trees can be maintained
and are of acceptable size and health.
(2) Recommended plant species for landscape screens.
(a) Medium-to-large shade trees:
Acer rubrum Red maple
Betula alleghaniensis Yellow birch
Betula lenta Black birch
Betula nigra River birch
Fagus grandifolia American beech
Fraxinus americana White ash
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green ash
Liriodendron tulipfera Tulip poplar
Nyssa sylvatica Black gum
Pinus strobes Eastern white pine
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore
Quercus alba White oak
Quercus montana Chestnut oak
Quercus palustris Pin oak
Quercus rubra Red oak
§ 220-26 SOLID WASTE § 220-26
210:451
Sassafras albidum Sassafras
Tilia americana Basswood
Tsuga canadensis Canadian hemlock
(b) Small trees and shrubs:
Alnus serrulata Smooth alder
Amelanchier arborea Serviceberry
Aronia melanocarpa Black chokeberry
Ceanothus americanus New Jersey tea
Cephalanthus occidentalis Buttonbush
Cercis canadensis Redbud
Cornus alternifolia Alternative-leaved dogwood
Cornus amonum Silky dogwood
Cornus florida Flowering dogwood
Hamamelis virginiana Witch hazel
Hydrangea arborescens Wild hydrangea
Ilex verticillata Winterberry
Kalmia latifolia Mountain laurel
Lindera benzoin Spicebush
Physocarpus opulifolius Ninebark
Prunus americana Wild plum
Rhododendron maximum Rosebay
Rhododendron
periclymenoides
Pinxter flower
Salix nigra Black willow
Salix sericea Silky willow
Sanbucus canadensis Elderberry
Vaccinium angustifolium Lowbush blueberry
Vaccinium corymbosum Highbush blueberry
Viburnum acerifolium Maple-leaved viburnum
Viburnum recognitum Arrowwood
Parthenocissus quinquefolia Virginia creeper
(3) The following plants CANNOT be used because they are on the
Pennsylvania Invasive Plant List.
(a) Trees:
Ailanthus altissima Tree of Heaven
Ulmus pumila Siberian elm
§ 220-26 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-26
210:452
(b) Shrubs:
Elaeagnus umbellate Autumn olive
Lonicera maacki Amur honeysuckle
Lonicera morrowii Morrow's honeysuckle
Lonicera standishii Standish honeysuckle
Lonicera tatarica Tartarian honeysuckle
Rose multiflora Multiflora rose
Berberis vulgaris European barberry
Elaeagnus angustifolia Russian olive
Ligustum obtusifolium Border privet
Ligustum vulgare Common privet
Lonicera morrowii x tatarica Bell's honeysuckle
Rhamnus catharticus Common buckthorn
Rhamnus frangula Glossy buckthorn
Rubus phoenicolasius Wineberry
C. Existing wooded areas. Existing wooded areas shall be protected to
prevent unnecessary destruction. At least 25% of the number of trees
(minimum trunk caliper of five inches at six inches above the ground)
that exist at the time of plan submission shall be maintained or replaced
immediately following construction. Replacement trees shall be a
minimum trunk caliper of three inches at a height of six inches above
finished grade and located within nonbuildable sections of the site (i.e.,
floodplain, steep slope and setback areas). Plans shall be submitted
showing existing trees and proposed construction and be in
conformance with this section.
D. Street trees. Street trees shall be provided in all residential
subdivisions with densities greater than one dwelling per acre and all
commercial and residential land developments. All street trees shall be
provided by the applicant in accordance with the following standards:
(1) The trees shall be nursery grown in a climate similar to that of the
locality of the project. Varieties of trees shall be subject to the
approval of the authority which accepts ownership of the street.
(2) All trees shall have a normal habit of growth and shall be sound,
healthy and vigorous; they shall be free from disease, insects,
insect eggs and larvae.
(3) The trunk diameter, measured at a height of six inches above finish
grade, shall be a minimum of two inches.
(4) Trees shall be planted between the street right-of-way line and the
building setback line except where the municipality has authorized
placement of trees within the street right-of-way. The trees' growth
§ 220-26 SOLID WASTE § 220-26
210:453
shall not interfere with the street cartway, sidewalk or utility line.
Street tree branching shall not interfere with clear sight triangles.
Typical branching shall not be within 10 feet of ground level after
10 years of growth.
(5) All planting shall be performed in conformance with good nursery
and landscape practice and to the standards established by the
authority which accepts ownership of the planting.
(6) Requirements for the measurements, branching, grading, quality,
balling and the burlapping of trees shall follow the code of
standards recommended by the American Association of
Nurserymen, Inc., in the American Standard for Nursery Stock,
ANSIZ60, current edition, as amended.
(7) A minimum of two canopy street trees shall be provided for every
100 feet of public right-of-way. Street trees shall be placed a
minimum of 40 feet apart along the right-of-way and shall be
located so as to maximize the growth potential of the plant
material, minimize the potential for root interference with public
infrastructure, and enhance the quality of the development.
(a) Street trees shall be one of the following species:
[1] Small trees (25 to 35 feet).
Crataegus crusgalli inermis Thornless cockspur
hawthorne
Crataegusphaenopyrum Washington hawthorne
Crataegus viridis Winter king hawthorne
Amelandhier gradifolia Shablow/serviceberry
Syringa reticulata Japanese tree lilac
Prunis sargenti columnaris Columnar sergent cherry
Acer ginnala Amur maple
Acer buergeranum Trident maple
[2] Medium trees (35 to 50 feet).
Carpinus caroloniana American hornbeam
Carpinus betulus European hornbeam
Pyrus Redspire callery pear
Pyrus Aristocrat callery pear
Gled tricanthos inermis Imperial honeylocust
[3] Large trees (50-plus feet).
§ 220-26 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-26
210:454
Fraximus pennsylvania Green ash
Gleditsia triacanthos
inermis
Thornless honey locust
Quercus ruba Northern red oak
Tilia cordata Littleleaf linden
Quercus Willow oak
Quercus Alba White oak
Quercus robur English oak
Ginko biloba (male only) Ginko
Fraximus americana White ash
Zelkova serrata Zelkova “green vase”
Nyssa sylvatica Blackgum or tupelo
Corylus colurna Turkish filbert
Metasequia
gluptostroboides
Dawn redwood
Acer rubrum Red maple
(b) The following species are not acceptable for use as street trees
because of their brittleness, growing habits and excessive
litter:
Acer saccharum Silver maple
Aesculus hippocastanum Common horsechestnut
Ceanothus americanus New Jersey tea
Crataegus Hawthorn (thorny species)
Fraxinum species Ash family
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (female species)
Gleditsia Honeylocust (thorny species)
Prunus americana Wild plum
(c) Other tree species may be used, provided acceptable
information is submitted to indicate that the species are hardy
street trees. No one species shall compose more than 25% of
the entire number of street trees in a particular development.
(8) Street trees are to be maintained and guaranteed for a minimum of
two years by the developer. Planting of trees shall occur within the
standard planting season (March through November). No more
than 1/3 of the tree shall be damaged or dead without replacement.
Replacement trees shall conform to all requirements of this section
and shall be maintained and guaranteed for a minimum of two
planting seasons.
§ 220-26 SOLID WASTE § 220-26
210:455
§ 220-27. Erosion and sediment pollution control plan.
E. Ground cover. Ground cover shall be provided on all areas of the project
to prevent soil erosion. All areas which are not covered by paving, stone
or other solid material shall be protected with a suitable ground cover
consisting of spreading plants including sods and grasses less than 18
inches in height.
A. General requirements and standards.
(1) In conjunction with the submission of a subdivision and land
development plan, an erosion and sediment pollution control
(E&SPC) plan must be submitted to the Cumberland County
Conservation District for its review and approval in accordance
with the requirements of Title 25 PA Code, subsection 102.1 et seq.,
Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP). A copy of the E&SPC plan must
be provided to the Township.
In accordance with the above-referenced DEP regulations,
construction and land development activity involving earth
disturbances of five acres or more will require a National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit for
discharges of stormwater associated with construction activities
(PAG-2) from the Department of Environmental Protection. Earth
disturbance activities of five acres or more which are not eligible
for coverage under the NPDES general permit will require a
NPDES individual permit for discharges of stormwater associated
with construction activities from the PA DEP.
(2) The applicant shall be responsible to prepare and forward all
applicable E&SPC plan information and other data to the
appropriate county and state agencies.
(3) The Township shall not issue a building permit to those engaged in
earthmoving activities requiring a PA DEP permit or other NPDES
permits, until the PA DEP has reviewed and issued all applicable
permits.
(4) An E&SPC Plan must be prepared for a single lot or more where
subdivision, land development or other earthmoving activity is
proposed. The plan must be submitted: a) as required by the
erosion and sediment control regulations of the PA DEP noted
above; and b) as required by the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law,
Act 222, July 31, 1970, as amended.
(5) In the preparation of erosion and sediment control plans, the
person preparing such plans shall consult with the Cumberland
County Conservation District to determine the measures needed to
control erosion and sedimentation. The most recent version of the
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual, prepared
§ 220-26 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-27
210:456
§ 220-28. Park, recreation and open space requirements.
by the PA DEP in accordance with Chapter 102, shall be used in the
preparation of such plan. Copies are available in the Cumberland
County Conservation District Office.
(6) In the case of subdivision plans proposed for the sale of lots only,
the subdivider/applicant shall include on the final plan a covenant
with the land assuring the implementation of erosion and sediment
pollution control plans by lot owners.
A. Where a proposed school, park, playground, easement or other publicly
owned or operated facility is shown in the Comprehensive Plan or
where deemed necessary by the governing body and Planning
Commission, the governing body may require the reservation of such
area within the subdivision or land development. The size and location
for any reservation of land shall be suitable for the designated purpose,
as determined by the governing body and Planning Commission.
B. In the layout and design of a subdivision or land development, the
subdivider or developer shall make provisions for the preservation of
natural features which would add to the aesthetic value and living
amenities for the residents of the municipality; the preservation of trees
and wooded areas; the protection and preservation of watercourses;
and the protection and preservation of historical points of interest.
C. If a subdivision or land development is within 1,000 feet of an historic
district designated in Chapter 155, Historic Districts, enacted by the
governing body, or if the subdivision or land development encompasses
or abuts land on which is situated an historic property included within
an official listing approved by the governing body, the subdivider or
developer shall be subject to such requirements and restrictions,
including buffer zones and screening, as may be imposed by the
governing body for the purpose of protecting and preserving such
areas.
D. Open space, recreation land and fee requirements.
(1) The purpose of this provision is to ensure that present and future
residents of Upper Allen Township will have adequate open space,
parks, recreation areas and facilities available to them by
establishing requirements for the dedication of land for open space
and for the dedication of land or a fee in lieu of such dedication to
be imposed on subdividers and land developers as authorized by
the Municipalities Planning Code. All land so dedicated for
recreation areas and facilities or fees collected in lieu thereof shall
be used only for the purpose of providing accessible park or
recreational facilities.
(2) This section shall apply to all final subdivision and land
developments in Upper Allen Township.
§ 220-27 SOLID WASTE § 220-28
210:457
(3) Every subdivision or land development for residential purpose
containing an aggregate of 50 or more dwelling units shall contain
open space for recreational, scenic or aesthetic purposes according
to the following schedule:
Number of Residential Units
Required Open Space
(acres)
50 to 75 2
76 to 100 3
101 to 150 4
151 to 200 6
More than 200 8
(a) The location and distribution of open space shall be approved
by the governing body after reviewing the considerations
pertaining to each particular subdivision or land development.
As a general rule, the open space in subdivisions or land
developments which border land which is already subdivided
or developed shall be located along the border of such land or
lands; open space in subdivisions or land developments which
do not border on land which is already subdivided or developed
shall be located in the interior of the proposed subdivision or
land development. To the extent consistent with all other
considerations, the open space shall be concentrated in one or
more bulk areas of not less than three acres each.
(b) Open space shall be suitably graded where necessary, provided
with a vegetative cover and, unless otherwise approved by the
governing body, landscaped. Ownership of the open space may
remain in the subdivider or developer, may be vested in an
association of property owners or may be dedicated to the
Township as approved by the governing body. Proper
provisions satisfactory to the governing body must be made for
maintenance and preservation of the open space. Stormwater
management facilities shall not be included in the calculations
for determining required open space areas.
(c) If a natural watercourse or drainageway abuts or runs through
the proposed subdivision or land development, the subdivider
or developer shall set aside as open space a strip of land on
each side of such watercourse, 50 feet in width (measured
from the nearest edge or bank) and running the entire length
of that portion of the watercourse which abuts or runs through
the subdivision or land development. Such open space shall be
in addition to the open space required elsewhere in Subsection
D of this section. Subdivisions or land developments on land
which abuts or comes within 500 feet of the Yellow Breeches
Creek shall be subject to such additional requirements as the
§ 220-28 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-28
210:458
governing body may deem necessary to protect and preserve
that watercourse.
(4) Every final subdivision or land development plan shall, as a
condition of approval and subject to the conditions for acceptance
set forth hereafter, provide for the development of recreational
areas or facilities by the dedication of land and improvements
suitable therefor, unless the Township Board of Commissioners
determines that such land in that location would not be reasonable,
in which case a recreation fee in lieu of land shall be required in
accordance the hereinafter established standards as set forth in
Subsection D(5) of this section.
(a) Residential. Except as hereinafter provided, every owner,
subdivider or developer shall dedicate a portion of the land
proposed for said development to the Township for
recreational purposes in accordance with the following
schedule:
Number of Residential
Units
Required Recreation Space
(acres)
2 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 7
201 to 250 10
More than 250 2 acres for every 50 units or
portion thereof
(b) Nonresidential. Except as hereinafter provided, every owner,
subdivider or developer shall dedicate a portion of the land
proposed for said development to the Township for
recreational purposes in accordance with the following
standards and formula:
[1] Business and professional office uses: 300 square feet per
300 square feet of gross floor area for said office space.
[2] Commercial uses: 500 square feet per 500 square feet of
gross floor area for commercial use.
[3] Industrial uses: 1,500 square feet per 1,500 square feet of
gross floor area for industrial use.
[4] Institutional uses: 1,500 square feet per 1,500 square feet
of gross floor area for industrial use. Public uses and
§ 220-28 SOLID WASTE § 220-28
210:459
facilities owned and operated by political subdivisions and
public school districts are excluded from the requirements
of this provision.
(c) Acceptance of the dedication shall be at the option of the Board
of Commissioners. The decision of the Board of Commissioners
to accept or reject dedication shall be conclusive. In
determining whether to accept or reject land offered for
dedication, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the
recommendations of the Township Parks and Recreation Board
and Planning Commission and the following factors:
[1] Location. Recreational space must be contiguous with the
subdivision land to be developed. When public park and
open space land exists adjacent to the tract to be
subdivided, the dedicated land shall be located to adjoin
and enlarge the existing public park and open space land.
[2] Access. At least one side of the dedicated land shall abut a
public street for the minimum required lot width. No
roadways shall traverse the dedicated land. Recreational
space must be accessible to pedestrians, with necessary
foot bridges or tunnels or other means to be provided by
the developer, including roads or easements. The
dedicated land shall be accessible to utilities such as
sewer, water and power.
[3] Slope. Not more than 20% of the offered land shall be
located in a floodplain or exceed a slope in excess of 8%.
All grading shall be performed by the developer.
[4] Size. The dedicated land shall be part of a contiguous tract
of at least three acres and never less than the minimum lot
size for the underlying zoning district unless the land shall
be developed as a trail or bike route. The land may be one
parcel or a number of parcels strategically located, as
subject to approval by the Board of Commissioners.
[5] Equipment. Each park, tot lot or other form proposed for
dedication shall be provided with modern recreational
equipment at the expense of the developer. Recreational
equipment shall be subject to approval by the Board of
Commissioners.
[6] Parking. On-site parking shall not be required, provided
that the recreational area is within a one-fourth-mile
radius of 75% of the lots to be served. Otherwise, one
space shall be required for each five dwelling units to be
served by said facilities.
[7] Landscaping. No exposed surfaces are permitted, except
for a softball/baseball field. All unused areas shall be
§ 220-28 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-28
210:460
planted and maintained in grass, crown vetch or other
typical ground cover. Flowers are encouraged. Shade trees
are mandatory and shall be subject to a specific tree
planting plan, varying with the size and other site
characteristics.
[8] Condition. Under no circumstances will unclaimed or
derelict land, such as marshes, swamps, or wetlands,
comprising more than 20% of the total proposed
recreational space, be acceptable. The land shall have soils
suitable for the intended recreational use.
(5) In the event the Board of Commissioners determines not to accept
land offered for recreation use, a contribution to the Township
Recreation Land Acquisition and Improvement Fund in lieu of
dedication shall be required.
(a) Fees for residential development. Every subdivision or land
development for residential purposes shall contribute to the
Township Recreation Land Acquisition and Improvement Fund
(the "fund) an amount of $2,300 per dwelling unit. This fee may
be revised, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
(b) Fees for nonresidential development. Every subdivision or land
development for any new business or professional, commercial
or industrial purposes shall contribute to the fund an amount of
$200 per employee. This fee may be revised, from time to time,
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. The fee for
nonresidential development shall be based on the following:
[1] Business and professional office use. One employee per
300 square feet of floor area for office space.
[2] Industrial use. One employee per 1,500 square feet of floor
area for industrial purposes.
[3] Commercial uses. One employee per 500 square feet of
floor area for commercial use.
[4] Institutional use. One employee per 500 square feet of
floor area for institutional use. Public uses and facilities
owned and operated by political subdivisions, public
libraries, and public school districts or entities are
excluded from the requires of this provision.
(c) The fees paid and contributed to the fund shall be paid upon
approval of the subdivision or land development plan or any
phase or section thereof. Payment of the required contribution
shall be included as a condition of approval of such subdivision
and land development plans.
§ 220-28 SOLID WASTE § 220-28
210:461
§ 220-29. Access requirements. [Amended 5-20-2015 by Ord. No.
739]
(6) The required recreation contribution to the fund will not be waived
in the case of a developer who sets aside recreation land within a
development without being required to do so by the governing
body.
(7) The moneys in the fund shall be used exclusively by the Township
for the purpose of acquiring and developing new recreation areas
in the Township and of acquiring, installing and developing capital
improvements in new or existing recreation areas in the Township.
It is not intended that moneys from the fund be used to provide for
the routine and necessary maintenance and upkeep of the
Township's recreation areas; such moneys are intended to be
provided by and through the Township's annual budget process.
Authorization of expenditures from the fund shall be made by the
governing body after taking into consideration the
recommendations of the Township's Park and Recreation Board.
The governing body shall establish administrative procedures for
the investment and disbursement of all moneys maintained in the
fund.
(8) In the open space/recreation areas to be dedicated to the Township,
the transfer of ownership of the land shall be afforded for
dedication within three years of final approval and recording of the
final subdivision plan or the first phase if the subdivision is
developed in phases. Property provisions must be made for
maintenance and preservation of the open space.
A. All subdivisions or land developments containing 20 or more dwelling
units or building(s) containing a total aggregate gross floor area of
15,000 square feet or greater shall be provided with at least two
separate and distinct means of access to the subdivision or land
development.
B. Access shall be provided through the location of two or more public or
private streets, each of which intersects with an existing public street.
Such public or private streets shall meet all the requirements of this
chapter concerning design and construction.
C. Access for a land development may be provided through two or more
access drives into the land development. Such access drives shall be
separated by a distance of at least 150 feet and shall comply with all
requirements of this chapter.
D. Emergency access drives may be provided in addition to the provisions
herein, provided that:
§ 220-28 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-29
210:462
§ 220-30. Refuse collection stations.
§ 220-31. Storm drainage and stormwater management.
Storm drainage and stormwater management facilities shall be provided
in accordance with the prevailing Upper Allen Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance.
§ 220-32. Lighting.
(1) The emergency access shall be improved with a stabilized surface
so that emergency vehicles may safely traverse it and shall be
indicated on the plans.
(2) The emergency access shall be acceptable to the providers of
emergency services within the Township and approved by the
Township. Applicants proposing to provide emergency access shall
submit evidence of such approval.
(3) The emergency access may be located so that access to the
subdivision or land development is gained from a public street.
(4) The emergency access may be located so that access is gained from
a private street or private drive. Applicants with plans indicating
emergency access through an adjoining private street or drive shall
provide evidence that the adjoining property owner has consented
to said emergency access location and that the applicant has
entered into an easement agreement with the adjoining property
owner.
A. Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash
removal when individual collection is not made and indoor storage is
not provided. Refuse collection stations shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.129
B. Collection stations shall be located so as to be separated adequately
from habitable buildings to avoid being offensive, but at the same time
be convenient for both collectors and residents, and shall be screened
and landscaped adequately, generally in accordance with § 220-26B of
this chapter.
C. Collection stations shall be so constructed as to prevent the escape of
refuse by wind, water or other natural elements and prevent animals,
rodents, etc., from entering.
A. Parking areas, main entrances and exits which are open to the public
shall be lighted to a minimum average of two footcandles and a
maximum of six footcandles. All lighting shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light downward and away from adjoining premises and
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 220-29 SOLID WASTE § 220-32
210:463
§ 220-33. Utilities.
public rights-of-way. Lighting plans, including photometrics and all
details, shall be included with all plans.
B. The Board of Commissioners may require lights along proposed streets
and at key intersection locations, where deemed necessary.
C. All lighting shall be directed downward and inward to the site.
Proposed canopy lights shall be fully recessed, and light fixtures within
parking compounds shall be equipped with cutoff shields.
D. All light standards shall have a maximum twenty-five-foot height.
A. Telephone, electric, TV cable and other such utilities shall be installed
underground and shall be provided with easements to be dedicated for
such utilities and in accordance with plans approved by the Board of
Commissioners and the applicable utility company.
B. Lots which abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where
aboveground utility lines have been previously installed may be
supplied with electric and telephone service from those overhead lines,
but service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be
installed underground.
C. Where road widening and other conditions resulting from subdivision
and land development necessitate replacement or relocation of
overhead utility lines, new facilities shall be installed underground.
Costs of any relocation of public utilities shall be the responsibility of
the developer.
D. Underground installation of the utility distribution and service lines
shall meet the prevailing standards and practices of the company
providing the service and shall be completed prior to street paving and
gutter, curbing and sidewalk installation.
E. Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the placement
and alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of
lines as follows:
(1) Alignment and pole locations shall be carefully routed to avoid
locations along horizons; and
(2) Clearing swaths through wooded areas shall be avoided by
selective cutting and a staggered alignment.
F. Underground utility notifications. In accordance with the provisions of
PA Act 38, as amended, the applicant shall contact all applicable
utilities and accurately determine and show the location and depths of
all underground utilities within the boundaries of the tract proposed for
development and in the vicinity of any proposed off-site improvement,
prior to excavation.
§ 220-32 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-34
210:464
§ 220-34. Other public sites.
In large-scale residential land developments of 25 or more lots or units,
the dedication of sites for other appropriate public uses, such as but not
limited to schools, libraries and public service buildings, may be requested
by the Board of Commissioners. Such areas or sites must be of a character,
extent and location as to be clearly related to the local and neighborhood
needs of the residents of the development. No land may be required for
dedication which would primarily serve the needs of the Township as a
whole as distinguished from the development or neighborhood.
§ 220-35. Floodplain area standards.
A. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize losses due to periodic inundation of
certain areas of the Township of Upper Allen as designated as being
inundated by the one-hundred-year flood ("regulatory flood").
B. No subdivision plan or proposed subdivision plan shall be approved by
the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Upper Allen in the areas
within the one-hundred-year-flood boundary unless and until
compliance with the following requirements, in addition to all the other
requirements of this chapter, have been established.
(1) The floodplain district shall be delineated on the preliminary and
final subdivision or land development plan.
(2) No alteration or relocation of a watercourse, except as part of an
overall drainage basin plan, may be undertaken by a developer or
subdivider. In the event of an overall drainage basin plan, the
developer or subdivider shall provide that the flood-carrying
capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse
is maintained and shall be in accordance with the Upper Allen
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.130
(3) In addition to the setback requirements in this chapter and in the
Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance, setbacks shall clearly
take into consideration and be placed beyond the floodway.
(4) Any subdivision or land development plan for a riverine area shall
further contain a statement indicating that the subdivision or land
development has been planned in such a manner as to avoid
exposure to mudslide or mudflow hazards.
(5) All proposals of subdivision plans submitted hereafter are
consistent with a need to minimize flood damage.
(6) All public and private utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located, elevated and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Zoning.
§ 220-34 SOLID WASTE § 220-35
210:465
(7) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
§ 220-35 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-35
210:466
ARTICLE VI
Mobile Home/Manufactured Home Park Regulations
§ 220-36. Purpose.
Upper Allen Township recognizes the importance of providing a variety
of housing types, designs and layouts to meet the housing needs of its
residents. In accordance with the requirements of Article V, § 501 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as reenacted and
amended, this Article VI is established to provide reasonable standards
for the development of manufactured/mobile home parks which will be
coordinated with the design and improvements requirements of this
chapter, as a whole, and will encourage well coordinated, convenient and
safe environments for manufactured/mobile home residents.
§ 220-37. Plan requirements and processing procedure.
The plan requirements and processing for a manufactured/mobile home
park as a land development shall be in accordance with the requirements
contained in Article III of this chapter.
§ 220-38. Design standards and other requirements.
The arrangement and other design standards of streets, easements, blocks,
lots, stormwater management, and erosion and sedimentation control shall
be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, except as otherwise
specified in this article and, or the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance,
as amended.
A. Site location and design standards:
(1) Layout of lots.
(a) All manufactured/mobile home lots shall abut a street. Side lots
laid out in rectangular blocks should be diagonal to the street
at an angle no greater than 30° from perpendicular. Front and
rear lot lines in rectangular blocks shall be straight and
continuous.
(b) In cul-de-sac arrangements, the side lot lines shall be radial to
the street lines.
(2) Lot dimensions. The lot width shall not be less than 60 feet at the
minimum required building setback line for interior lots. Lot areas
shall not be less than 7,200 square feet. In addition, each
manufactured/mobile home lot shall:
(a) Be designed to fit dimensions of mobile or manufactured
homes anticipated.
(b) Provide for each manufactured/mobile home all public utilities,
pads, hookups, appurtenant structures and other appendages.
§ 220-36 SOLID WASTE § 220-38
210:467
(3) Corner lots. Corner lots for manufactured/mobile home use shall
have the manufactured/mobile home situated to permit appropriate
building setback from both streets and allow proper sight distance.
(4) Building setback lines.
(a) Park boundary property line: 35 feet.
(b) The minimum front, side and rear yard distance setbacks from
the lot line shall be in accordance with the provisions
contained in the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.
(c) Accessory structures shall be permitted in the rear yard no
closer than five feet from the rear or side lot lines of the
manufactured/mobile home lot. Accessory structures shall not
exceed 340 square feet and shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
(5) Buffer strips and screening. Screening shall be provided within a
buffer area 10 feet in width along the entire perimeter of the
manufactured/mobile home park in order to separate the
manufactured/mobile home park from the adjacent land uses and
roadways. Screening for the manufactured/mobile home park shall
include one of the following screening options provided in Table
VI-1.
Table VI-1
Buffer Strips and Screen Options for Manufactured/Mobile
Home Parks
Options Minimum Tree Size
Maximum
Spacing Distance
Option 1
Wall/fence,
with a hedge
6 feet in height
6 feet in height
N/A
N/A
Option 2
A hedge,
plus evergreen
trees
6 feet in height
4 feet in height
N/A
10 feet on center
Option 3
Evergreen trees
plus deciduous
trees
6 feet in height
6 inches in height; 2
inches caliper
6 inches on center
15 feet on center
B. Manufactured/mobile home park street system.
§ 220-38 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-38
210:468
(1) General requirements. A safe and convenient vehicular access shall
be provided from abutting public streets or roads. Streets within
the manufactured/mobile home park shall be privately owned.
(2) Location principles. The streets or roads in a manufactured/mobile
home park shall be located and built with regard to:
(a) Providing trafficways for convenient access to each
manufactured/mobile home lot and other important facilities in
the park.
(b) Recognizing existing easements which are to be preserved.
(c) Permitting connection to existing facilities where necessary for
the proper functioning of drainage and utility systems.
(3) Circulation. The street system should provide convenient
circulation by means of minor streets and properly located
collector streets. The following standards should also be applied to
manufactured/mobile home park street systems:
(a) Closed ends of dead-end streets should be provided with a
paved vehicular turning space having a minimum diameter of
at least 80 feet to the outside paving edge.
(b) Interior streets shall so be laid out in a manner, which will
reduce or eliminate through use by through traffic.
(c) The manufactured/mobile home park shall be provided with
two entrances for emergency access.
(d) Where a manufactured/mobile home park abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, the Board of
Commissioners may require marginal access streets, reverse
frontage with screen planting along the rear property line, or
such other treatment as may be necessary to afford separation
of through and local traffic.
(4) Extent of street improvements, general requirements. In addition
to standards set forth in Article V of this chapter, the street
improvements in manufactured/mobile home parks should conform
to the following general design requirements:
(a) Extend continuously from the existing improved street to
provide access to each manufactured/mobile home lot and
other facilities in the park.
(b) Provide convenient circulation of vehicles.
(5) Street surfacing. Streets should be surfaced to the grades and
dimensions shown on the street profile and cross-section plan
submitted and approved with the final plan. The paving and
§ 220-38 SOLID WASTE § 220-38
210:469
§ 220-39. Fuel supply and storage.
wearing surface should be constructed according to the standards
outlined in § 220-15 of this chapter.
C. Blocks. The size and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard
to:
(1) Need for convenient access, automotive and pedestrian movement.
(2) Providing desirable lot depths for interior walkways and easements
for utilities to be located within the block.
(3) Blocks shall not exceed a maximum length of 600 feet.
(4) Pedestrian paths should be designed within blocks to permit
convenient access to other areas of the manufactured/mobile home
park.
D. Sidewalks. Sidewalks may be required where essential to assist
circulation or pedestrian movement and safety to common or important
facilities in the park. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with
this chapter.
E. Easements.
(1) Easements shall be provided for all utilities not located in a street
and for well-defined watercourses.
(2) Utility, conservation, stormwater, drainage, pedestrian and other
easements shall be provided in accordance with Article V of this
chapter.
(3) Easements shall be centered on the utility or watercourse
alignment.
(4) Where necessary for access to public or common lands, a
pedestrian easement shall be provided with a width of no less than
10 feet. Additional width may be required by the Board of
Commissioners, depending on the purpose and use of the
easement.
F. Mailboxes. The owner shall provide and maintain a central location(s)
for mailboxes for persons living within the park.
G. Off-street parking requirements:
(1) Each mobile home/manufactured home shall have paved off-street
parking areas. Parking shall be provided at the rate of at least two
vehicular parking spaces for each mobile home/manufactured
home lot.
(2) Each such off-street parking space shall contain at least 200 square
feet and shall be located on the lot it is intended to serve.
§ 220-38 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-39
210:470
A. General. Natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, and oil fuel systems
provided for manufactured/mobile homes, service buildings or other
structures, when installed, shall be maintained in conformity with the
rules and regulations of any authority having jurisdiction over such
systems and/or recommendations from any suppliers or manufacturers
of such equipment or systems.
B. Natural gas systems:
(1) Natural gas piping systems, when installed in manufactured/mobile
home parks, shall be maintained in conformity with accepted
engineering practices.
(2) Each manufactured/mobile home lot provided with gas shall have
an approved shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The
outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent
accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
C. Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) systems:
(1) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at
a safe location.
(2) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
gas. Such means shall be located outside the manufactured/mobile
home and shall be maintained in effective condition.
(3) All LPG piping outside the manufactured/mobile homes shall be
well supported and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted
LPG in liquid form shall not be conveyed through piping equipment
and systems in manufactured/mobile homes.
(4) Vessels of more than 12 and less than 60 U.S. gallons gross capacity
may be installed on a manufactured/mobile home lot and shall be
securely, but not permanently, fastened to prevent accidental
overturning.
(5) No LPG vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any
storage cabinet, carport, manufactured/mobile home, or any other
structure.
D. Fuel oil supply systems:
(1) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to
manufactured/mobile homes shall be securely, but not permanently,
fastened in place.
(2) All fuel oil supply systems provided for manufactured/mobile
homes, service buildings and other structures shall have shutoff
valves located within five inches of storage tanks.
§ 220-39 SOLID WASTE § 220-39
210:471
§ 220-40. Solid waste disposal.
§ 220-41. Park and recreation facilities.
(3) All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and shall
not be less than five feet from any manufactured/mobile home exit.
(4) Storage tanks located in areas subject to vehicular traffic shall be
protected against physical damage.
A. The applicant shall provide information to the Township regarding the
treatment and disposal of solid waste and garbage related to the
manufactured/mobile home.
B. All solid waste storage facilities shall be located in areas conveniently
located to park residents and shall not be less than 50 feet from any
manufactured/mobile home unit.
C. Collection stations shall be screened and landscaped adequately,
generally in accordance with the landscaping and screening section of
this chapter.
D. Collection stations shall be so constructed as to prevent the escape of
refuse by wind, water or other natural elements and prevent animals,
rodents, etc., from entering.
A. General. All manufactured/mobile home park land development plans
submitted after the effective date of this chapter shall provide for
suitable and adequate recreation for children and residents of the
manufactured/mobile home park in order to: 1) ensure adequate
recreational areas and facilities to serve the future residents of the
Township; 2) reduce increasing usage pressure on existing recreational
facilities and areas; and 3) ensure that all present and future residents
have the opportunity to engage in many and varied recreational
pursuits.
B. Exemptions and requirements. The following are exempt or partially
exempt from the provisions of this article:
Any manufactured/mobile home park for which a preliminary or final
plan has been submitted prior to the effective date of this chapter
which is ultimately approved and development is substantially
completed within five years of approval.
C. Required play space area.
(1) The amount of land required to be designed and provided for
recreational purposes for manufactured/mobile home parks shall
be 3,000 square feet for manufactured/mobile home parks with 10
or fewer lots, and an additional 200 square feet of play space shall
be provided for each additional manufactured/mobile home lot.
§ 220-39 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-41
210:472
(2) A maximum of 25% of the total land area required by this chapter
section may consist of floodplain areas.
(3) Such land set aside shall be suitable to serve the purpose of active
and/or passive recreation by reason of its size, shape, location and
topography and shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
D. Recreation area location criteria. The Board of Commissioners shall
consider the following criteria in determining whether to approve the
proposed location of recreation areas in the applicant's subdivision or
land development plans.
(1) Sites should be easily and safely accessible from all areas of the
manufactured/mobile home park, have good ingress and egress and
have access to the park road system.
(2) Site or sites should have suitable topography and soil conditions for
use and development as a recreation area.
(3) When designing and developing these recreation areas, it shall be
done according to the standards established by the National
Recreation and Parks Association.
(4) Site or sites should, to the greatest extent practical, be easily
accessible to essential utilities such as water, sewer and electric.
(5) Site or sites should meet minimum size requirements for useable
acreage with respect to the National Recreation and Parks
Association standards, with 75% of such area having a maximum
slope of 7%.
E. Fee in lieu of private reservation of recreation land.
(1) In a case where the applicant does not wish to provide play space
or recreation areas within the manufactured/mobile home park,
and where the Board of Commissioners determines that because of
shape, size, location, access, topography or other physical features
of the land that it is impractical to set aside a recreation area as
required by this article, the Board of Commissioners shall require a
payment of a fee in lieu of required private reservation of such
land, which shall be payable to the Township prior to approval of
each final section of the overall plan. Such fee shall be calculated
by multiplying the number of manufactured/mobile home lots in the
park by the fee per dwelling unit. The amount of the fee shall be set
aside by resolution by the Board of Commissioners and shall bear a
reasonable relationship to the use of the public park and
recreational facilities by future inhabitants of the manufactured/
mobile home park.
(2) A fee authorized under this section shall, upon its receipt by the
Township, be deposited in an interest-bearing account, clearly
§ 220-41 SOLID WASTE § 220-41
210:473
§ 220-42. Improvement and construction requirements.
All improvements, construction requirements, and engineering
specifications for the improvements required shall be provided in
accordance with Article V of this chapter.
§ 220-43. Fees and permits.
identifying the specific recreation facilities for which the fee was
received. Interest earned on such accounts shall become funds of
that account. Funds from such accounts shall be expended only
in properly allocable portions of the cost to construct the specific
recreation facilities for which the funds were allocated.
(3) Upon request of any person who paid any fee under this subsection,
the Township shall refund such fee, plus interest accumulated
thereon from the date of payment, if the Township has failed to
utilize the fee paid for the purposes set forth in this chapter within
three years from the date such fee was paid.
A. Streetlights. Street or on-site lights shall be provided to illuminate
streets, driveways and walkways for the safe movement of vehicles and
pedestrians at night. Their type and location shall be in conformance
with the Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance and shall be shown on
the lighting plan submitted with the final subdivision or land
development plan.
B. Underground utilities. Electric, telephone and all other utilities shall be
installed underground.
C. Tie-downs. Tie downs to prevent the movement of the manufactured/
mobile home by natural causes (wind, water, etc.) shall be provided for
each manufactured/mobile home.
D. Enclosure. An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be
erected around the entire base of each manufactured/mobile home.
Such enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and
deterioration of the structure.
A. Fees. At the time of filing the preliminary and final subdivision or land
development plan for a manufactured/mobile home park, the applicant
shall be required to pay to the Township fees in accordance with the
requirements of Article VII of this chapter.
B. Permits. Any person intending to develop a tract of land as a
manufactured/mobile home park shall secure a permit from the
Township of Upper Allen for each such park issued in accordance with
the following requirements:
(1) Such permit shall be issued by the Upper Allen Township Zoning
Officer, upon proper application and submission of evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other
§ 220-41 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-43
210:474
applicable legal requirements and upon payment of a fee provided
herein.
(2) Each permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issue.
(3) Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee,
payable to the Township for each manufactured/mobile home
placed upon a manufactured/mobile home lot in the manufactured/
mobile home park. The permit fee shall constitute the license fee
for the first year commencing with the date of notice of approval of
the application. The fee shall be charged upon the placement of a
specific manufactured/mobile home on a mobile home lot, said fee
chargeable whenever a mobile home is moved upon a lot and for
every change in manufactured/mobile homes on any particular lot;
said fee shall be set according to the provisions of Article VII of this
chapter.
(4) The first applicant for a permit for a manufactured/mobile home
park proposed for development following the effective date of this
chapter shall be made to the Upper Allen Township Zoning Officer
on a form provided by him/her and shall be submitted together with
copies of the following:
(a) A copy of the approved final manufactured/mobile home park
plan signed by the proper officials.
(b) A receipt signed by the recorder of deeds, showing that the
manufactured/mobile home park plan has been publicly
recorded.
(c) A permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection as required by Chapter 179, Title 28,
Rules and Regulations, Mobile Home Park, 25 Pa. Code § 179.1
et seq.
(d) Payment of annual license fee as required in Subsection B(3)
hereof
C. Application for the annual renewal of a license shall be made by the
holder of the license to the Upper Allen Township Zoning Officer on a
form provided by him/her within 14 days preceding expiration of the
preceding license period shall be accompanied by a fee as required in
§ 220-43B(3) and by any changes since the preceding license was
issued. The Upper Allen Township Zoning Officer shall inspect each
manufactured/mobile home park prior to the issuance of a license for
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and all the applicable
legal requirements.
D. It shall be incumbent upon the proprietor of a manufactured/mobile
home park to keep a register and to report therein the name of the
person or head of family occupying each said manufactured/mobile
home, showing date of entry on said land, license number of
§ 220-43 SOLID WASTE § 220-43
210:475
§ 220-44. Fire protection.
§ 220-45. Responsibilities of park management.
automobile, serial number, and make and size of manufactured/mobile
home, the last permanent address of the person or head of family using
said manufactured/mobile home park.
E. Said register and manufactured/mobile home park shall be subject to
inspection by the Upper Allen Township Zoning Officer annually or
upon request of the Board of Commissioners.
A. Manufactured/mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter,
rubbish and other flammable materials.
B. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the Township Fire
Chief shall be kept in public service buildings under park control.
C. Fire hydrants.
(1) Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with national
standards and in no case less than the following:
(a) The water supply source shall permit the operation of a
minimum of two one-and-one-half-inch hose streams.
(b) Each of two nozzles held four feet above the ground shall
deliver at least 75 gallons of water per minute at a flowing
pressure of at least 30 pounds per square inch at the highest
point of the park.
(2) Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within 600 feet of any
manufactured/mobile home, service building or other structure in
the park.
A. The person to whom a permit for a manufactured/mobile home park is
issued shall operate the park in compliance with this chapter and shall
provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and
equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
B. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile
home on its manufactured/mobile home stand, which includes securing
its stability and installing all utility connections.
C. The park management shall give the Zoning Officer free access to all
manufactured/mobile home lots, service buildings and other community
service facilities for the purpose of inspection.
D. The management shall maintain a register containing the names of all
park occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized
person inspecting the park.
§ 220-43 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-45
210:476
§ 220-46. Inspection of manufactured/mobile home parks.
The Township of Upper Allen is hereby authorized to make such inspections
as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter and
regulations issued hereunder.
§ 220-47. Notices, hearings and orders.
E. The management shall notify the local Pennsylvania Department of
Health immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious
disease within the park.
A. The Township shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon
any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter and
regulations issued hereunder.
B. The Township shall have the power to inspect the register containing a
record of all residents of the manufactured/mobile home park and all
manufactured/mobile homeowners leasing land in the park.
C. It shall be the duty of the owner(s) of the manufactured/mobile home
park to give the Township access to such premises at reasonable times
for the purpose of inspection.
A. Whenever the Township determines there are reasonable grounds to
believe there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter or
regulations issued hereunder, notice shall be given of such alleged
violation to the person to whom the permit or license was issued, as
hereafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent, as the case may require;
provided, however, that such notice or orders shall be deemed to
have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy
thereof has been sent by certified mail to his last known address, or
when he has been served by such notice by any method authorized
or required by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations
issued hereunder.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter or regulation
issued hereunder may request a hearing on the matter before the Board
of Commissioners, provided that such a person file in the office of the
Township a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a
§ 220-45 SOLID WASTE § 220-47
210:477
§ 220-48. Revocation of permit.
Whenever upon inspection of any manufactured/mobile home park it is
determined that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
provision of this chapter, or any regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
the Board of Commissioners shall give notice in writing to the person to
brief statement of the grounds within 10 calendar days after the day the
notice was served.
(1) The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the
notice and of the suspension except in the case of an order issued
under Subsection E. Upon receipt of such petition, the Board of
Commissioners shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall
give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show
why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
(2) The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 calendar days
after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that, upon
application of the petitioner, the Board of Commissioners may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such
ten-calendar-day period when, in its judgment, the petitioner has
submitted good and sufficient reasons for such postponement.
C. After such hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall make findings as
to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued
hereunder and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or
withdrawing the notice, which shall be served as provided in
Subsection A(4). Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or
modifying a notice, the license of the manufactured/mobile park
affected by the order shall be revoked.
D. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Board of Commissioners together with a copy of every notice and
order related thereto, shall be entered as a matter of public record in
the office of the Board of Commissioners. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Board of Commissioners may seek relief therefrom in
any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Whenever the Township finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public, it may, without notice or
hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as it may deem necessary to meet
the emergency, including the suspension of the license.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall
be effective immediately but, upon a petition to the Board of
Commissioners, the petitioner shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
possible. The provisions of Subsections C and D shall apply to such
hearing and the order issued thereafter.
§ 220-47 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-48
210:478
whom the permit was issued, such notice to consist of a listing of the
violated sections of this chapter, and shall advise them that, unless such
conditions or practices are corrected within a period of time specified
in the notice, the permit to operate will be suspended. At the end of
such period, such manufactured/mobile home parks shall be reinspected
and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the Board of
Commissioners shall suspend the permit and give notice in writing of such
suspension, by certified mail, to the person to whom the permit is issued.
§ 220-49. Manufactured/mobile home placement and removal.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured/mobile home park
owner to notify the Township when a privately owned manufactured/
mobile home is placed in the manufactured/mobile home park. The
notification of placement shall be forwarded to the Township Zoning
Officer within 30 calendar days of the placement of the manufactured/
mobile home.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured/mobile home park
owner to supply the Upper Allen Township Tax Collector with a status of
occupancy report for new and vacated manufactured/mobile homes
placed or leased within the manufactured/mobile home park. The status
of occupancy report shall be provided within 10 calendar days of the
new tenant occupancy.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or custodian of a
manufactured/mobile home to remove or attempt to remove from Upper
Allen Township a manufactured/mobile home without first obtaining a
removal permit from the Upper Allen Township Tax Collector. A removal
permit shall be granted upon payment of a removal fee, established by
resolution, and submission of the following information:
(1) The street address of the manufactured/mobile home.
(2) Names of owners and of the occupants of the manufactured/mobile
home.
(3) Evidence of payment of all taxes duly assessed by the Township, the
County of Cumberland and the school district.
(4) A penalty fee, established by resolution, shall be applied to those
individuals moving without obtaining a removal permit.
§ 220-48 SOLID WASTE § 220-49
210:479

ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 220-50. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Commissioners or a duly appointed
officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The duly appointed officer
shall require that the application for a building permit contain all
information necessary to enable him/her to ascertain whether the proposed
building, alteration or use is located in an approved subdivision or land
development. No building permit shall be issued until the duly appointed
officer has certified that the site for the proposed building, alteration or use
complies with all the provisions of this chapter and conforms to the site
description as indicated on the approval and recorded final plan.
A. Time limitations and ordinance changes.
(1) When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or
final, has been approved without conditions or approved by the
applicant's acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or
amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right of
the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the
approved development in accordance with the terms of such
approval within five years from such approval.
(2) Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the
aforesaid five-year period shall be counted from the date of the
preliminary approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a
preliminary approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of
the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at
the time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
(3) Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plan within the aforesaid
five-year limit or any extension thereof as may be granted by the
Board of Commissioners, no change in Township ordinance or plan
enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the preliminary plan
shall modify or revoke any aspect of the approved final plan
pertaining to zoning classification or density, lot, building, street or
utility location.
(4) In the case of a preliminary plan calling for the installation of
improvements beyond a five-year period, a schedule shall be filed
by the landowner with the preliminary plans delineating all
proposed sections as well as deadlines within which applications
for final plan approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such
schedule shall be updated annually by the applicant on or before
the anniversary of the preliminary plan approval, until final plan
approval of the final section has been granted and any modification
§ 220-50 SOLID WASTE § 220-50
210:481
§ 220-51. Modifications.
The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the Township. The Township Planning Commission shall have the right to
recommend to the Board of Commissioners modifications to the regulations
in the individual cases as may be necessary in the public interest; provided,
however, that such variations shall not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of these regulations. The list of suggested modifications
and the specific reasons for such change shall be entered in the minutes of
the Planning Commission and a copy of this entry shall be transmitted to
the Board of Commissioners together with the approved plans for review
and approval by the Township Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners
may then alter any subdivision plans and specify changes or modifications
therein which it deems necessary and may make its approvals subject to
such alterations, changes or modifications. Upon approval by the Board of
Commissioners, said modifications shall be clearly defined and entered on
the final plan and signed by the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 220-52. Fees.
in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to approval of the
Commissioners in its discretion.
(5) Each section in any residential subdivision or land development,
except for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the
total number of the dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary
plan, unless a lesser percentage is approved by the governing body,
in its discretion. Provided the landowner has not defaulted with
regard to or violated any of the conditions of the preliminary plan
approval, including compliance with landowner's aforesaid
schedule of submission of final plans for the various sections, then
the aforesaid protections afforded by substantially completing the
improvements depicted upon the final plan within five years shall
apply and for any section or sections, beyond the initial section, in
which the required improvements have not been substantially
completed within said five-year period. The aforesaid protection
shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years from the
date of final plan approval for each section.
A. Sketch, preliminary and final plats. At the time of filing a sketch plan,
preliminary or final subdivision or land development plan, the applicant
shall deliver to the municipality a check payable to the municipality in
an amount as set by resolution of the governing body. Said amount shall
be used by the municipality to cover the costs of processing the plans,
including engineering review costs, legal review costs (if necessary),
administrative costs and other costs. If said amount is not sufficient to
cover such costs, the applicant shall furnish additional amounts, from
time to time, when called upon to do so. All amounts so furnished shall
be held by the municipality in escrow until the plat has been fully
§ 220-50 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-52
210:482
§ 220-53. Penalties.
processed. No plan shall be finally approved until all costs of processing
the plan have been paid by the applicant.
B. Construction of improvements. Upon approval by the governing body of
a final plan, the applicant, in addition to all bonds or other security
required, shall deliver to the municipality a check payable to the
municipality in an amount determined by resolution of the governing
body. Said amount shall be used by the municipality to cover the costs
of assuring the proper construction and completion of said
improvements, including inspection during installation, inspection upon
completion, administrative costs, costs to update municipal records,
and other related costs. If said amount is not sufficient to cover such
costs, the applicant shall furnish additional amounts, from time to time,
when called upon to do so. All amounts so furnished shall be held by the
municipality in escrow until all improvements have been completed. No
lot shall be sold and no permit to erect, alter or repair any building shall
be issued with respect to the land included in said final plan until all
costs of assuring the proper construction and completion of
improvements have been paid.
C. Escrow accounts. Deposits shall be credited to each escrow account as
they are made, and costs shall be charged against each escrow account
as they are incurred. The applicant shall be furnished with the details
thereof upon request. A minimum charge for administrative costs, as
set by resolution of the governing body, shall be charged against each
escrow account. At such time as the escrow account may be terminated,
any excess amount remaining therein after all costs have been paid
shall be refunded to the applicant.
A. No lot in a subdivision shall be sold, rented, leased or conveyed in any
manner; no permit to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a
subdivision or land development shall be issued; and no building shall
be erected in a subdivision or land development until a final plan of
such subdivision or land development has been approved and properly
recorded and until improvements have been either constructed or
guaranteed.
B. Any person, copartnership or corporation who shall subdivide any lot,
tract, or parcel of land; layout, construct, open or dedicate any street,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water mains for public use or travel or
for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon; sell,
rent, lease or convey in any manner any lot; or erect any building in a
subdivision without first having complied with the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
§ 220-52 SOLID WASTE § 220-53
210:483
§ 220-54. Appeals.
The procedures for securing review of any ordinance, decision, or
determination is set forth in Article X of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247), as reenacted and amended.
§ 220-55. Repealer.
All Ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 220-56. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of
this chapter.
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commerce or be imposed, levied or payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate violation unless the district justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance
to have believed that there was no such violation; in which event
there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the
fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
district justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
D. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order to stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
E. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 220-53 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 220-56
210:484
Chapter 223
TAXATION
§ 220-56 SOLID WASTE § 220-56
210:485

ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 686131]
§ 223-1. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2011.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Township Commissioners of Upper
Allen Township.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Upper Allen Township, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or
reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
THIS ENACTMENT — This article.
§ 223-2. Imposition of tax; rate.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of
131. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Earned Income Tax, adopted
5-4-1966 by Ord. No. 105, as amended.
§ 223-1 SOLID WASTE § 223-2
210:487
§ 223-3. Exemption.
Although credits and deductions against the tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from tax based on age, income, or other factors.
§ 223-4. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 223-5. Employer withholding, remittance and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit the tax, and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 223-6. Collection of tax.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity of
any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1.60%.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the taxing authority based on
the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations, and with policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by
the collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937.
§ 223-2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-7
210:488
§ 223-7. Interest, penalties and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 223-8. through 223-11. (Reserved)
§ 223-7 SOLID WASTE § 223-8
210:489

ARTICLE II
Streetlight Tax
[Adopted 10-4-1971 by Ord. No. 166]
§ 223-12. Levy of tax. [Amended 12-19-1991 by Ord. No. 458;
6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 474]
An annual tax as provided for in the Act of May 27, 1949, P.L. 1955, (53 P.S.
§ 56513), is hereby levied to pay the cost and expense of the maintenance
of the streetlights in Upper Allen Township as the Commissioners shall from
time to time designate by ordinance or resolution.132
§ 223-13. Real estate owners to bear maintenance costs.
The annual cost and expense of maintenance of said streetlights shall be
borne by the owners of the real estate within 250 feet of such lighting
facility in proportion to the number of feet their property fronts on the
street or highway or portion thereof to be lighted.
§ 223-14. Assessment of vacant lots.
The assessment for the annual cost and expense of the maintenance of said
streetlights per front foot against vacant lots shall be 25% of the assessment
per front foot against property with improvements thereon.
§ 223-15. Real estate owners to bear cost of ornamental standards
and wiring.
The cost and expense of the furnishing and installation of ornamental
standards for streetlighting with fittings and underground wiring therefor
along such streets or highway or portion thereof affected shall be borne
by the owners of the real estate situate within 250 feet of such standard
in proportion to the number of feet the property fronts on the street or
highway or portion thereof to be lighted.
§ 223-16. Assessment of farmlands.
There shall be no assessment made against any farmlands, but vacant lots
between built-up sections, whether tilled or untilled, shall not be deemed to
be farmlands.
§ 223-17. Inequitable assessments.
In the event that an assessment would be inequitable because of the
peculiar or pointed shapes of lots or at intersections, the Commissioners
may, in their discretion, provide for an equitable reduction from the
frontage of said lots.
132. Editor's Note: The ordinance or resolution setting the current tax rate is on file in the
office of the Township Secretary.
§ 223-12 SOLID WASTE § 223-18
210:491
§ 223-18. Interest and attorney's commission on delinquent
payments.
A. If the assessments for the annual cost and expense of the maintenance
of said streetlights remain unpaid on the first Monday of May of the
succeeding year, the solicitor of Upper Allen Township shall collect the
same together with 5% as attorney's commission and interest from the
date such assessments were due, by a municipal claim filed against the
property of the delinquent owner in like manner as municipal claims are
by law filed and collected.
B. If the assessment to provide for furnishing the installation of
ornamental standards for streetlighting with fittings and underground
wiring therefor remain unpaid at the expiration of 90 days from the
date the notice is received for the assessment of the same, the Solicitor
of Upper Allen Township shall collect the same, together with 5% as
attorney's commission and interest from the date such assessments
were due, by municipal claim filed against the property of the
delinquent owner in like manner as municipal claims are by law filed
and collected.
§ 223-18 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-18
210:492
ARTICLE III
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-27-1972 by Ord. No. 176]
§ 223-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Every natural person who shall attain the age of 18 years prior
to the commencement of each tax year.
§ 223-20. Imposition of tax.
An annual tax for general revenue purposes of $10 upon each person who
resides in Upper Allen Township is hereby imposed subject to the following
provision: In the event that any person resides in Upper Allen Township
for a portion of any tax year and pays a per capita tax of $10 to another
municipality in which he/she resides for a part of said year, such person
shall be exempt from the Upper Allen Township tax, provided that he/she
has paid the per capita tax of $10 in the other municipality.
§ 223-21. Collection of tax.
A. Said tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax
Collector of the Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, in the same manner and at the same time or times as
other Township taxes are collected, as provided by law.
B. The Tax Collector shall demand, receive and collect delinquent per
capita taxes from all corporations, political subdivisions, associations,
companies, firms or individuals employing persons owing delinquent
per capita taxes, or whose spouse owes delinquent per capita taxes, or
having in possession unpaid commissions or earnings belonging to any
person or persons owing delinquent per capita taxes, or whose spouse
owes delinquent per capita taxes, upon the presentation of a written
notice and demand under oath or affirmation, containing the name of
the taxable or the spouse thereof and the amount of tax due. Upon the
presentation of such written notice and demand, it shall be the duty of
any such corporation, political subdivision, association, company, firm
or individual to deduct from the wages, commissions or earnings of
such individual employees, then owing or that shall within 60 days
thereafter become due, or from any unpaid commissions or earnings of
any such taxable in its or his/her possession or that shall within 60 days
thereafter come into its or his/her possession a sum sufficient to pay the
respective amount of the delinquent per capita taxes and costs, shown
upon the written notice or demand, and to pay the same to the Tax
Collector of the taxing district in which such delinquent tax was levied
within 60 days after such notice shall have been given. Such
corporation, political subdivision, association, firm or individual shall
be entitled to deduct from the moneys collected from each employee
§ 223-19 SOLID WASTE § 223-21
210:493
§ 223-22. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-17-1993 by Ord. No.
474]
Any person found in violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be sentenced to
imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days.
the costs incurred from the extra bookkeeping necessary to record such
transactions, not exceeding 2% of the amount of money so collected and
paid over to the Tax Collector. Upon the failure of any such corporation,
political subdivision, association, company, firm or individual to deduct
the amount of such taxes or to pay the same over to the Tax Collector,
less the cost of bookkeeping involved in such transaction, as herein
provided, within the time hereby required, such corporation, political
subdivision, association, company, firm or individual shall forfeit and
pay the amount of such tax for each such taxable whose taxes are not
withheld and paid over or that are withheld and not paid over, together
with a penalty of 10% added thereto, to be recovered by an action
of assumpsit in a suit to be instituted by the Tax Collector or by the
proper authorities of the taxing district as debts of like amount are
now by law recoverable, except that such persons shall not have the
benefit of any stay of execution or exemption law. The Tax Collector
shall not proceed against a spouse or his employer until he has pursued
collection remedies against the delinquent taxpayer and his employer
under this section. [Amended 6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 474]
§ 223-21 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-22
210:494
ARTICLE IV
Fire Hydrant Tax
[Adopted 3-12-1975 by Ord. No. 213]
§ 223-23. Levy of tax. [Last amended 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 695]
An annual tax be and the same is hereby levied for maintaining fire hydrants
within the Township as follows: For fire hydrant purposes, the sum of
0.05873 mill on each dollar of assessed valuation or the sum of $0.005873
on each $100 of assessed valuation on all properties within 780 feet of a fire
hydrant.
§ 223-24. Effect on other legislation.
The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the
authority of any ordinance repealed by this article.
§ 223-23 SOLID WASTE § 223-24
210:495

ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 10-3-2007 by Ord. No. 645133]
§ 223-25. Title; authority; purpose.
§ 223-26. Definitions and word usage.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOARD — The governing body of Upper Allen Township.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The governing body of Upper Allen
Township.
COLLECTOR — The person or firm from time to time designated by motion
of the Board of Commissioners of Upper Allen Township to collect and
administer the provision of this article and collect the tax levied by this
article. Until changed by subsequent motion, the collector shall be the Tax
Collector, the same person or firm last designated to collect the Emergency
and Municipal Services Tax for Upper Allen Township.
EARNED INCOME — "Compensation" as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V (relating to
personal income tax) not including, however, wages or compensation paid
to individuals on active military service. Employee business expenses are
allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971. Any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy
shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on a salary, wage, commission, fee or other compensation basis, including a
self-employed person.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Allen
Township Local Services Tax Ordinance."
B. This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, as amended by Act No. 7 of 2007.
C. The purpose of this article is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction
of property taxes and for such other purposes as may be specified for
such tax from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
133. Editor's Note: This ordinance which has a when effective date of 1-1-2008, also repealed
former Art. V, Emergency and Municipal Services Tax, adopted 12-27-2004 by Ord. No.
590, as amended.
§ 223-25 SOLID WASTE § 223-26
210:497
HE, HIS OR HIM — Shall include singular and plural number and male,
female and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person engaged in any occupation, trade or profession
within the jurisdictional limits of Upper Allen Township whose total earned
income and net profits within the Township are greater than $12,000 per
calendar year.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, (except from Corporations), determined under
section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. 1 Subpt. B Art. V
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming, the term shall not include:
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or preformed within the jurisdictional limits of Upper Allen Township for
which compensation is charged and/or received, whether by salary, wages,
commissions, fees or net profits for services rendered.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, The Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax levied in this article.
TOWNSHIP — The geographic area within the jurisdictional limits of Upper
Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year.
§ 223-27. Levy. [Last amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 649]
Upper Allen Township hereby levies and imposes on every individual
engaging in an occupation within the jurisdictional limits of the Township a
tax in the amount of $47 per annum, beginning the first day of January 2008
and continuing on a calendar-year basis annually thereafter, until modified
or repealed by subsequent ordinance. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Township.
Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farming machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
§ 223-26 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-28
210:498
§ 223-28. Restricted use.
§ 223-29. Duties of employers; filing returns.
A. Upper Allen Township shall use the revenue derived from this tax for
the following purposes:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services.
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance.
(3) Reduction of property taxes.
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85 Subch. F.
(relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. Upper Allen Township shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the Local Services Tax for emergency services.
A. Each employer within Upper Allen Township and each employer situate
outside the Township who engages in business within the Township is
hereby charged with the duty of collecting the tax from each of the
employees engaged by the employer and performing work for the
employer within the Township. Each person subject to the tax shall be
assessed a pro rata share of the tax for each payroll period in which the
person is engaging in an occupation.
B. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll period
shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services
tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar.
C. Employer collection of the local services tax shall be made on a payroll
period basis for each payroll period, beginning with the first payroll
period in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
D. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the local
services tax or for the payment of the withheld tax money to a political
subdivision if the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect
information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or
places of employment, the employee's principal office or where the
employee is principally employed.
E. Returns. Employers are required to make and file a local services tax
quarterly return 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar
year. The local services tax quarterly return shall list the name,
address, social security number of the employee; the physical address
of the employee's place of employment; the number of payroll periods
§ 223-28 SOLID WASTE § 223-29
210:499
§ 223-30. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30 and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30 and October 1 to December
31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on July 30,
October 30 and January 30, respectively.
§ 223-31. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
§ 223-32. Exemptions to the local services tax.
for which the local services tax was withheld and the amount of local
services tax being remitted for each employee.
A. In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is
concurrent employment or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during the payroll
period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in
the following order:
(1) The political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) The political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if
the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) The political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax if the employee provides:
(1) A recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the
name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the
amount of local services tax withheld; and
(2) A statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence.
C. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. It is the
intent of this section that no person shall be subject to the payment of
the local services tax by more than one political subdivision during each
payroll period.
§ 223-29 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-32
210:500
A. The local services tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for
each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
B. The law requires municipalities and school districts who levy the local
services tax at a combined rate exceeding $10 to exempt any person
from the local services tax whose total earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for
the calendar year in which the local services tax is levied.
C. Each political subdivision levying the local services tax shall exempt the
following persons from the local services tax:
(1) Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent permanent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
Armed Forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. A "reserve component of the Armed Forces" shall
mean the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy
Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast
Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania
Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
D. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may
annually file an exemption certificate with the collector of the tax for
the political subdivision levying the tax and file a copy of the certificate
with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources within
the political subdivision of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed.
E. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all of the
employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the
political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the
employee is requesting to be exempted from the local services tax.
F. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed
by the collector of the tax for the political subdivision levying the tax,
the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person during the
calendar year or remainder of the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate applies. With respect to a person who claimed an
exemption from the local services tax, upon notification to an employer
by the person or by the collector of the tax for the political subdivision
that the person has received earned income and net profits from all
sources within that political subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000
in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the
§ 223-32 SOLID WASTE § 223-32
210:501
§ 223-33. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals and individuals whose employer is not
required to withhold local taxes (certain state and federal agencies) will be
billed quarterly for the local services tax. The full amount of tax must be
paid by the date indicated on such billing. If such taxpayer qualifies for a
low-income exemption, the taxpayer may complete the required exemption
certificate or make application for a refund of the tax paid.
tax exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment
to the person of earned income within that political subdivision in
an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year,
an employer shall withhold the local services tax from the person as
follows:
(1) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the local services tax becomes subject to the tax for the
calendar year, the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year.
(2) The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll
period after receipt of the notification under the above paragraph,
a lump sum equal to the amount of the tax that was not withheld
from the person due to the exemption certificate filed by the
person, plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll
period.
(3) The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining
payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount
withheld for other employees.
(4) In the event the employment of a person subject to withholding of
the local services tax under this exception is severed in that
calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision levying the tax may
pursue collection under this act.
G. Employers shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from a local services tax.
H. Employers shall be responsible for retaining a copy of all exemption
certificates filed by employees within a given calendar year for a
minimum of three years. Employers who have failed to withhold the
local services tax from an employee or employees, and do not have
copies of the employee exemption certificate or certificates, will be held
responsible for the payment of the local services tax as if the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 223-32 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-34
210:502
§ 223-34. Employers and self-employed individuals residing beyond
the limits of Upper Allen Township.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place of
business outside Upper Allen Township, but who engage in any occupation
within the Township, do by virtue thereof agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the Township. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within the
Township and an employee of a nonresident employer may for the purpose
of this article be considered a self-employed person and, in the event this
tax is not paid, the collector shall have the option of proceeding against
either the employer or employee for collection of this tax as hereinafter
provided.
§ 223-35. Administration of tax.
§ 223-36. Suit for collection.
A. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him
from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and keep
a record of the information submitted by employers relating to the
number of employees subject to the tax, the number of employees
exempt from the tax, the employee exemption certificates and refunds
of the tax paid to individuals and employers.
B. The collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any
employer subject to this article; the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article; and any payment alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector
shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Cumberland County as in other cases provided.
C. The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer; or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event any of the tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due date set forth above, the collector may sue for the
recovery of such tax due or unpaid together with interest and penalty.
§ 223-34 SOLID WASTE § 223-36
210:503
§ 223-37. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts
in his custody and control in order to determine the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his employment, or who fails or refuses to
file any return required by this article, or fails or refuses to pay the tax
herein levied shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may
be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer
who has failed or refused to file a return required by this article.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 10%
shall be added to the flat rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where
suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor
shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection,
including, but not limited to, attorney's fees.
§ 223-36 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-37
210:504
ARTICLE VI
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 1-15-1987 by Ord. No. 389]
§ 223-38. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Upper
Allen Township."
§ 223-39. Statutory authority. [Amended 6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 474]
This article is enacted under the authority of The Local Tax Enabling Act,
being Act 511 of 1965, approved December 31, 1965, as amended, and the
Tax Reform Act of 1971, as amended.134
§ 223-40. Definitions.
The following words when used in this article shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two (2) or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory or foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding thirty (30) years, or instruments which
solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also
include a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording
under § 223-45 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least seventyfive
percent (75%) of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture
and at least seventy-five percent (75%) of each class of stock of the
corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family. The
business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
134. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq., respectively.
§ 223-38 SOLID WASTE § 223-40
210:505
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brother and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents and
grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the foregoing
and a spouse of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or
legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, ninety
percent (90%) or more of the ownership interest in which is held by thirtyfive
(35) or fewer persons and which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township, including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives sixty percent (60%) or more of its annual gross receipts from
the ownership or disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises ninety percent (90%)
or more of the value of its entire tangible asset holdings, exclusive of
tangible assets which are freely transferable and actively traded on an
established market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
§ 223-40 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-40
210:506
TOWNSHIP — Upper Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant or a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a
term of thirty (30) years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory
interest in real estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in actual consideration for the contract of sale; or
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest or any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values
to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board, or a commensurate part of the assessment where
the assessment includes other real estate; or
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 223-40 SOLID WASTE § 223-41
210:507
§ 223-41. Imposition of tax.
Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or on whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be subject
to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof or for or
in respect of the vellum parchment or paper upon which such document
is written or printed a Township tax at the rate of one-half of one percent
( 1/2 of 1%) of the value of real estate situate in Upper Allen Township
represented by such document, which Township tax shall be payable at
the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or within
thirty (30) days of acceptance of such document or within thirty (30) days
of becoming an acquired company.
§ 223-42. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 223-43. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by § 223-41 hereof shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
(1) year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the commonwealth is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at a Sheriff's sale or
Tax Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing recorded legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than his/her undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
§ 223-41 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-43
210:508
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one (1) year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his/her principal, no tax
would be imposed under this article. Where the document by which
title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth
that the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the
benefit of his/her principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that
the property is the property of the grantee in his/her individual
capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under
this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Board of Commissioners reasonably determines
that the primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held or
recorded in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his/her interest in or
§ 223-43 SOLID WASTE § 223-43
210:509
ownership of the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of
the corporation or the interest in the association has been held by
the grantee for more than two (2) years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agricultural; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or transfer pursuant to a judicial sale
in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possess a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least seventy-five percent (75%) of each class of
stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is one dollar ($1.) or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on that statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
§ 223-43 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-43
210:510
§ 223-44. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 223-43A(13), documents which make,
confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 223-45. Acquired companies.
§ 223-46. Credits against tax.
value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, ninety percent (90%) or more of
the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three
(3) years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within thirty (30) days after becoming an acquired company, the
company shall present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of
Deeds of Cumberland County for the affixation of documentary stamps
and recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in Cumberland County.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him/her within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him/her shall be given to him/her toward the amount of the
tax due upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
§ 223-43 SOLID WASTE § 223-46
210:511
§ 223-47. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 223-48. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon
which the sale is made, and the Sheriff or other officer conducting said sale
shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him/her in
connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the
entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining
tax.
§ 223-49. Documentary stamps.
building shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the demise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. The payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by the
affixing of a documentary stamp or stamps to every document by the
person making, executing, delivering or presenting for recording such
document. Such stamps shall be affixed in such manner that their
removal will required the continued application of steam or water, and
the person using or affixing such stamps shall write or stamp or cause
to be written or stamped thereon the initials of his/her name and the
date upon which such stamps are affixed or used so that such stamps
may not again be used, provided that the Board of Commissioners may
prescribe such other method of cancellation as it deems expedient.
B. The use of documentary license meter impressions or similar indicia of
payment in lieu of stamps as required by this article may be permitted
in the discretion of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 223-46 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-50
210:512
§ 223-50. Board to furnish stamps; Recorder of Deeds.
§ 223-51. Failure to affix stamps.
The Recorder of Deeds who shall record any document upon which tax is
imposed by this article without the proper documentary stamp or stamps
affixed thereto as required by this article as is indicated in such document
or accompanying statement of value shall, upon summary conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of fifty dollars ($50.) and costs of prosecution and,
in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than thirty
(30) days.
§ 223-52. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 223-53. Civil penalties.
A. The Board of Commissioners shall prescribe, prepare and furnish
stamps to the Recorder of Deeds of such denominations and quantities
as may be necessary for the payment of the tax imposed and assessed
by this article.
B. The Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County shall be the collection
agent for the tax levied by this article. On or before the 10th day of each
month, the Recorder of Deeds shall pay over to the Township all realty
transfer tax collected, less two percent (2%) for use of the county,
together with a report containing the information as is required by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collection of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to fifty percent
(50%) of the underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
§ 223-50 SOLID WASTE § 223-53
210:513
§ 223-54. Determination and notice of tax; review.
§ 223-55. Unpaid tax to become lien.
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax five percent
(5%) of the amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one (1)
month with an additional five percent (5%) for each additional month
or fraction thereof during which such failure continues, not exceeding
fifty percent (50%) in the aggregate.
A. If any person shall fail to pay any tax imposed by this article for which
he/she is liable, the Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized and
empowered to make a determination of additional tax and interest due
by such person based upon any information within its possession or that
shall come into its possession. All of such determinations shall be made
within three (3) years after the date of the recording of the document.
B. Promptly after the date of such determination, the Board of
Commissioners shall send by mail a copy thereof to the person against
whom it was made. Within ninety (90) days after the date upon which
the copy of any such determination was mailed, such person may file
with the Board of Commissioners a petition for redetermination of such
taxes. Every petition for redetermination shall state specifically the
reasons which the petitioner believes entitled him/her to such
redetermination, and it shall be supported by affirmation that it is not
made for the purpose of delay and that the facts set forth therein are
true. It shall be the duty of the Board of Commissioners within six (6)
months after the date of filing of any petition for redetermination to
dispose of the petition. Notice of the action taken upon any petition for
redetermination shall be given to the petitioner promptly after the date
of redetermination by the Board of Commissioners.
A. Any tax determined to be due by the Board of Commissioners and
remaining unpaid after demand for the same, and all penalties and
interest thereon, shall be a lien in favor of the Township upon the
property, both real and personal, of such person but only after said lien
has been entered and docketed or recorded by the Prothonotary of
Cumberland County. At any time after it makes a determination of
additional tax, penalty or interest, the Board of Commissioners may
transmit to the Prothonotary of Cumberland County certified copies of
all liens for such tax, penalties and interest. After the determination of
the Board of Commissioners becomes final, a writ of execution may be
issued directly upon such lien without the issuance and prosecution to
judgment of a writ of scire facias, provided that not less than ten (10)
days before issuance of any execution on the lien, notice shall be sent
by certified mail to the taxpayer at his/her last known post office
address.
B. The lien imposed hereunder shall have priority from the date of its
recording as aforesaid and shall be fully paid and satisfied out of the
§ 223-53 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-55
210:514
§ 223-56. Refunds.
§ 223-57. Continuation of tax.
This article and the tax imposed hereby shall become effective on January
15, 1987, and shall continue in full force during the calendar year 1987 and
each calendar year thereafter.
§ 223-58. Violations and penalties.
proceeds of any judicial sale of property subject thereto before any
other obligation, judgment, claim, lien or estate to which said property
may subsequently become subject, except costs of the sale and of
the writ upon which the sale was made and real estate taxes and
municipal claims against such property, but shall be subordinate to
mortgages and other liens existing and duly recorded or entered of
record prior to the recording of the tax lien. In the case of a judicial sale
of property subject to a lien imposed hereunder upon a lien or claims
over which the lien imposed hereunder has priority, as aforesaid, such
sale shall discharge the lien imposed hereunder to the extent only that
the proceeds are applied to its payment, and such lien shall continue in
full force and effect as to the balance remaining unpaid.
C. The lien imposed hereunder shall continue for five (5) years from the
date of its entry of record and may be renewed and continued in the
manner now or hereafter provided for the renewal of judgments or as
may be provided by law.
A. Whenever the amount due upon determination, redetermination or
review is less than the amount paid to the Township on account thereof,
the Township shall enter a credit in the amount of such difference to the
account of the person who paid the tax.
B. Where there has been no determination of unpaid tax, the Board of
Commissioners shall have the power and its duty shall be to hear and
decide any application for refund and, upon the allowance of such
application, to enter a credit in the amount of the overpayment to the
account of the person who paid the tax. Such application must be filed
within two (2) years after the date of payment.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Accept or present for recording or cause to be made, executed,
delivered, accepted or presented for recording any document
without the full amount of tax thereon being duly paid.
(2) Make use of any documentary stamp to denote payment of any tax
imposed by this article without canceling such stamp as required
by this article or as prescribed by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 223-55 SOLID WASTE § 223-58
210:515
(3) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or to violate the rules and
regulations prescribed, adopted and promulgated by the Board of
Commissioners under the provisions of this article.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection A shall be
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, upon default of the
payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
[Amended 6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 474]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Fraudulently cut, tear or remove from a document any
documentary stamp.
(2) Fraudulently affix to any document upon which tax is imposed by
this article any documentary stamp which has been cut, torn or
removed from any other document upon which tax is imposed by
this article, or any documentary stamp of insufficient value, or any
forged or counterfeited stamp, die, plate or other article.
(3) Willfully remove or alter the cancellation marks of any
documentary stamp, or to restore any such documentary stamp
with intent to use or cause the same to be used after it has already
been used, or to knowingly buy, sell, offer for sale or give away such
altered or restored stamp to any person for use, or to knowingly
use the same.
(4) Knowingly have in his/her possession any altered or restored
documentary stamp which has been removed from any document
upon which tax is imposed by this article, provided that the
possession of such stamps shall be prima facie evidence of an intent
to violate the provisions of this subsection.
(5) Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in
his/her possession any forged or counterfeited documentary
stamps.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection C shall be
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the
payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
[Amended 6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 474]
E. A person who makes a false statement of value or declaration of
acquisition when he/she does not believe the statement or declaration
to be true is guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of the payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than
30 days. [Amended 6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 474]
§ 223-58 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-58
210:516
ARTICLE VII
Tax Certifications
[Adopted 4-15-1999 by Ord. No. 525]
§ 223-59. Appointment of officer. [Amended 4-3-2013 by Ord. No.
705]
The Township of Upper Allen hereby appoints the locally elected Tax
Collector as the municipal officer authorized to provide tax certifications
upon request by the public.
§ 223-60. Compensation for service; fees. [Amended 8-1-2007 by
Ord. No. 643; 4-3-2013 by Ord. No. 705]
A. The Township of Upper Allen hereby authorizes said Tax Collector to
assess, collect, and retain, as compensation for providing such
additional tax certification service, a fee of $20 per item issued, said fee
to cover the costs of file searching, copying, faxing, mailing and
telephone conversations necessary to accomplish said requests.
[Amended 12-21-2016 by Ord. No. 757]
B. The Township hereby authorizes the Township Tax Collector to assess,
collect, and retain, as compensation for providing collection services for
the collection of delinquent checks issued in payment of taxes and other
obligations owed to said Township Tax Collector, a fee not to exceed $25
per item for said dishonored check that was issued.
C. The Township hereby authorizes the Township Tax Collector to assess,
collect, and retain, as compensation for providing duplicate tax bills, a
fee of $4 per item issued, said fee to cover the costs of file search,
copying, faxing, mailing and telephone conversations necessary to
accomplish said requests. [Amended 12-21-2016 by Ord. No. 757]
D. Hereafter fees for the issuance of tax certifications and the processing
fee for processing dishonored checks and any other fees imposed
hereafter due to the Township Tax Collector shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the Board.
§ 223-59 SOLID WASTE § 223-60
210:517

ARTICLE VIII
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 4-15-1999 by Ord. No. 527]
§ 223-61. Rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations attached hereto as Schedule 1 and incorporated
herein are hereby approved and adopted.135
§ 223-62. Disclosure statement.
The disclosure statement, substantially in the form set forth in Schedule
2 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby approved and
adopted.136
§ 223-63. Petition for appeal and refund.
The form of petition for appeal and refund, substantially in the form set
forth in Schedule 3 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.137
§ 223-64. Executive session.
The governing body hereby determines that administrative appeal
procedures relating to petitions for appeal and refund submitted by
taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund of
an eligible tax under the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights (LTBR) shall be
undertaken by the governing body in executive session.
§ 223-65. Administrative appeal procedures.
The administrative appeal procedures set forth in the rules and regulations
and substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 4 attached hereto and
incorporated herein, is hereby approved and adopted.138
§ 223-66. When effective and applicable.
This article shall become effective with the provisions of law and shall be
applicable to eligible taxes as of January 1, 1999.
135. Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is on file in the Township offices.
136. Editor's Note: Schedule 2 is on file in the Township offices.
137. Editor's Note: Schedule 3 is on file in the Township offices.
138. Editor's Note: Schedule 4 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 223-61 SOLID WASTE § 223-66
210:519

ARTICLE IX
Collection of Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 1-21-2009 by Ord. No. 663]
§ 223-67. Cost of collection schedule.
The Township hereby approves and adopts the cost of collection schedule,
attached hereto and made a part hereof,139 to be imposed by the West Shore
Tax Bureau, or other such tax collection entity hereinafter designated by the
Township for the collection of local taxes, upon any taxpayer or employer
whose taxes are or become delinquent and/or remain due and unpaid;
provided, however, that the Township, by its Board of Commissioners, may
amend said fee schedule hereafter by resolution from time to time.
§ 223-68. Retention by collector.
The West Shore Tax Bureau, or such other tax collection entity designated
by the Township, is authorized to collect and retain such costs of collection
as set forth in the attached schedule in recovering delinquent taxes and as
permitted to be assessed on delinquent taxpayers pursuant to law.
139. Editor's Note: Said schedule is available in the Township offices.
§ 223-67 SOLID WASTE § 223-68
210:521

ARTICLE X
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
[Adopted 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 682; amended in its entirety
7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 700]
§ 223-69. Title; authority; purpose.
§ 223-70. Deteriorated area.
The boundaries of the designated deteriorated area qualifying for
temporary tax abatement from Upper Allen Township under LERTA shall
consist of the plot consisting of approximately 8.56 acres more particularly
bounded and described as set forth below:
LAND DESCRIPTION
All that certain tract of land, together with the improvements thereon
erected, situate largely in the Township of Upper Allen and partly in the
Borough of Mechanicsburg, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, described
as follows:
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Allen
Township Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Ordinance."
B. This article is enacted under authority of the Local Economic
Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, Act No. 76 of 1977, as amended, 72
P.S. § 4722 et seq., otherwise known as "LERTA."
C. The purpose of this article is to affix the boundaries of a deteriorated
area located within the Township for the purpose of exempting from
real estate taxation, for specified periods, improvements of industrial,
commercial or other business property.
§ 223-69 SOLID WASTE § 223-70
210:523
Beginning at a point marked by a stake in the eastern line of
Shepherdstown Road (L.R. 21098), which said point is 359.65 feet north
of corner of lands now or formerly of Christian Hess, as measured along
the eastern line of said Shepherdstown Road; thence extending along the
eastern line of Shepherdstown Road (L.R. 21098), North 12 degrees 10
minutes 30 seconds West, 436.0 feet to a point; thence by the same in
a northwardly direction, by the arc of a circle curving to the right, said
circle having a radius of 1,612.28 feet, the arc distance of 349.63 feet
to a point; thence still by the eastern line of Shepherdstown Road, North
00 degrees 15 minutes 00 seconds East, 156.92 feet to a point at corner
of lot now or formerly of Richard Wevodau; thence along the line of said
lot now or formerly of Richard Wevodau, being also the northern line of
a 14-foot-wide dirt lane, North 71 degrees 15 minutes East, 156.6 feet
to a point; thence continuing along the northern line of said 14-foot-wide
dirt lane, being also along the southern line of lands formerly of Elizabeth
K. Golden and devised to Harry Golden and wife, North 67 degrees 15
minutes 20 seconds East, 208.84 feet to a stake; thence along the line of
other lands of the Elizabeth K. Golden estate, of which this is a part, South
11 degrees 17 minutes 25 seconds East, 894.02 feet to a stake; thence
by the same, South 64 degrees 35 minutes 30 seconds West, 430.0 feet
to a point marked by a stake in the eastern line of Shepherdstown Road
(L.R. 21098), aforementioned, at the point and place of beginning. Having
thereon erected a brick farm dwelling, frame barn and outbuildings.
Being the same premises which was awarded to Hazel G. Wevodau (also
known as Hazel R. Wevodau) and Nevin Wevodau, her husband, by
adjudication and decree amending real estate issued by the Orphans' Court
Division of the Court of Common Pleas in and for Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, on June 17, 1969, to File No. 3050, a certified copy of
which was duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and
for Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, in Deed Book "G," Volume 23, Page
570. The said Nevin Wevodau died on September 29, 1981, survived by his
wife, the said Hazel R. Wevodau (a/k/a Hazel G. Wevodau) (the decedent
herein), in whom title vested by operation of law as surviving tenant by the
entireties and whose administrator d.b.n.c.t.a. is the grantor herein.
(the "deteriorated area").
§ 223-70 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-70
210:524
ARTICLE XI
Volunteer Service Credit Program for Qualifying Volunteers Serving
the Upper Allen Township Fire Department
[Adopted 5-15-2018 by Ord. No. 779]
§ 223-71. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — A volunteer serving the Upper Allen Township Fire
Department who has complied with, and is certified under, the Volunteer
Service Credit Program.
EARNED INCOME TAX — A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the act of December 31, 1965 (P.L.1257, No.511), known
as "The Local Tax Enabling Act."140
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The timeframe when volunteers may earn credit
under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an emergency
call with the Upper Allen Township Fire Department.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a volunteer
responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's home, place
of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call was
received.
QUALIFIED REAL PROPERTY — A residential real property owned and
occupied as the domicile of an active volunteer.
VOLUNTEER — A member of the Upper Allen Township Fire Department.
§ 223-72. Volunteer Service Credit Program.
A. Establishment. Upper Allen Township hereby establishes a Volunteer
Service Credit Program. The goal of the program is to encourage
membership and service in the Upper Allen Township Fire Department.
B. Program criteria. The Upper Allen Township Board of Commissioners
shall establish, by resolution, the annual criteria that must be met to
qualify for credits under the program based on the following:
(1) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
(2) The level of training and participation in formal training and drills
for a volunteer.
(3) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on administrative
and other support services, including but not limited to:
140. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 223-71 SOLID WASTE § 223-72
210:525
(a) Fundraising.
(b) Providing facility or equipment maintenance.
(c) Financial bookkeeping.
(4) The involvement in other events or projects that aid the financial
viability, emergency response or operational readiness of Upper
Allen Township Fire Department.
C. Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to
residents of Upper Allen Township who are volunteers serving the
Upper Allen Township Fire Department.
D. Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by
resolution under this section, during the eligibility period to qualify for
the tax credit established under § 223-73. For 2018, and each
subsequent year thereafter, the eligibility period shall run from January
1 until December 31.
E. Recordkeeping. The Chief of the Upper Allen Township Fire
Department shall keep specific records of each volunteer's activities in
a service log to establish credits under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program. Service logs shall be subject to review by the Upper Allen
Township Board of Commissioners, the State Fire Commissioner and
the State Auditor General. The Chief shall annually transmit to the
Board of Commissioners a notarized eligibility list of all volunteers that
have met the minimum criteria for the Volunteer Service Credit
Program. The notarized eligibility list shall be transmitted to the Board
of Commissioners no later than January 30 of each year. The Chief shall
post the notarized eligibility list in an accessible area of the volunteer
agency's facilities.
F. Application. Volunteers that have met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program shall sign and submit an application
on or before January 15 of each year for certification to the Chief. The
Chief shall sign the application if the volunteer has met the minimum
criteria of the Volunteer Service Credit Program, and forward it to the
Township Manager. Applications shall not be accepted by Upper Allen
Township after March 1 of each year.
G. Municipal review. The Township Manager shall review the applications
for credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program and shall crossreference
them with the notarized eligibility list. The Board of
Commissioners shall approve all applicants that are on the notarized
eligibility list. All applicants approved by the Board of Commissioners
shall be issued a tax credit certificate by the Township Manager.
H. Official tax credit register. Upper Allen Township shall keep an official
tax credit register of all active volunteers that were issued tax credit
certificates. The Township Manager shall issue updates, as needed, of
the official tax credit register to the following:
§ 223-72 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-72
210:526
§ 223-73. Earned income tax credit.
(1) Board of Commissioners;
(2) Chief of the Upper Allen Township Fire Department;
(3) Tax officer for the Cumberland Tax Collection District.
I. Injured volunteers.
(1) An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency
response call may be eligible for future tax credits. The injury must
have occurred while responding to, participating in, or returning
from an emergency response call with the Upper Allen Township
Fire Department.
(2) An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation from
a licensed physician with the application required under § 223-72
stating that their injury prevents them from performing duties to
qualify as an active volunteer. In such a case, the injured
emergency responder shall be deemed an active volunteer for that
tax year.
(3) An injured emergency responder shall annually submit the
application required under § 223-72, along with updated
documentation from a licensed physician stating that the injury still
exists and prevents them from qualifying as an active volunteer.
The injured emergency responder shall again be deemed an active
volunteer for that tax year. An injured emergency responder shall
only be deemed an active volunteer for a maximum of five
consecutive tax years.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Upper Allen Township Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be
eligible to receive a tax credit of up to $250 of the earned income tax
levied by Upper Allen Township. When an active volunteer's earned
income tax liability is less than the amount of the tax credit, the tax
credit shall equal the individual's tax liability.
B. Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim
for the tax credit on their municipality's earned income tax liability
when filing a final return for the preceding calendar year with the tax
officer for the Cumberland Tax Collection District.
C. Rejection of tax credit claim.
(1) The tax officer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is
not on the official tax credit register issued by the Township
Manager.
(2) If the tax officer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in
writing of the decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the
§ 223-72 SOLID WASTE § 223-73
210:527
§ 223-74. Appeals.
rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision
pursuant to § 223-74.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the tax
officer.
A. Earned income tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 223-73 shall have a
right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
(3) All appeals of decisions under § 223-73 shall follow the provisions
of the Act of May 5, 1998, P.L.301, No. 50, known as the "Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights."141
(4) All appeals of decisions under § 223-73 shall comply with the
procedure set forth in Article VIII of this chapter.
141. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8401 et seq.
§ 223-73 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 223-74
210:528
Chapter 227
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transient merchants — See Ch. 178, Art. III. Fees — See Ch. A250.
§ 227-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes the following:[Added 4-16-1987 by Ord.
No. 394]
LICENSEE — Any natural person to whom a license has been issued
under this chapter.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS —
Sale or offering for sale of one (1) or more new, used or secondhand
items of personal property at any one (1) residential premises at
any one (1) time by the owner thereof or a group of owners of
neighboring residences who band together to conduct a joint sale
from a single or multiple residences.
(1)
All sales in residential areas entitled "garage sale," "yard sale,"
"tag sale," "porch sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "basement sale,"
"rummage sale," "flea market sale" or any similar term announcing
the casual sale of items of tangible personal property on the
conditions as noted in Subsection (1) above, shall constitute
"garage sales" hereunder.
(2)
Includes:
Engaging in peddling, selling, canvassing, soliciting or taking
orders for, either by sample or otherwise, any goods, wares
or merchandise upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds or from house to house within the Township of
Upper Allen; and
(a)
Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or
merchandise from a fixed location within the township on a
temporary basis, which shall include but shall not be limited
to such activities conducted at the time of special occasions
or celebrations for seasonal purposes or for or in advance of
particular yearly holidays.
(b)
(1)
§ 223-74 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 227-1
227:529
§ 227-2. License required; fee.
§ 227-3. Exemptions from license fee.
Shall not include "transient merchants," as defined in Chapter 178,
Pawnbrokers, Junk Dealers and Transient Merchants.
(2)
B. In this chapter, the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter,
the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular.
A. No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the
Township of Upper Allen without first having obtained from the
Secretary of the Township of Upper Allen a license.
B. Except as otherwise provided in § 227-3, the fees for licenses to engage
in transient retail businesses shall be set, from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.142
C. If any licensee shall desire to continue in such business after the
expiration of such license, he/she shall secure a new license in the same
manner and upon the same terms as the original license.
A. No license fee shall be required for the following:
(1) Farmers seeking or taking orders for the sale of their own freshgrown
produce.
(2) The seeking or taking of orders by any manufacturer or producer
for the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products
or milk and milk products.
(3) The seeking or taking of orders by insurance or real estate agents
or brokers licensed under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(4) Any person taking orders for merchandise from dealers or
merchants for resale to an ultimate consumer.
(5) Public or charitable activities in which the township is a
participant, such activities being conducted for the enjoyment and
well-being of the community.
(6) Persons whom the Secretary of the township determines, in his/her
discretion, are working without compensation and selling goods,
wares or merchandise for the sole benefit of any nonprofit
corporation or similar entity whose purpose is charitable or
philanthropic. In exercising the discretion conferred by this
subsection, the Secretary of the township shall consider the facts
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I. See Ch. A250, Fees.
§ 227-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 227-3
227:530
§ 227-4. License application.
Every person desiring a license under this chapter shall first make
application to the Secretary of the township or his/her designated agent.
If such person shall also be required to obtain a license from any state
or county officer, he/she shall, when making application, exhibit a valid
license from such state or county officer. The applicant shall give his/her
name and residence address; his/her previous criminal record, if any; the
name of the person by whom he/she is employed; the type and origin of
the goods, wares and merchandise he/she wishes to deal with in such
transient retail business; the length of time for which the license is to be
issued; the last previous municipality in which he/she has conducted such
business; the type and license number of the vehicle or vehicles to be used,
if any; and such other relevant information as the Secretary of the township
may deem necessary and proper to protect public health and safety. The
Secretary of the township may also collect an application fee in an amount
to be determined by resolution adopted by the Board of Commissioners
of the township, from time to time;143 however, such application fee shall
be credited in full toward the license fee and shall not exceed the license
fees specified in § 227-2. No such application fee shall be required for
applications under § 227-3A. Further, as to any organization qualifying
for exemption from payment of the license fee under §§ 227-3A, 227-5
and 227-6, the organization may elect, instead of each person applying
for a license, to file a single application for the organization's activity,
which single application would identify each and every person engaging in
transient retail business on behalf of the organization.
§ 227-5. Verification of application; approval or disapproval of
license.
and circumstances and shall not act in an arbitrary or capricious
manner.
B. Any person who qualifies for exemption from the registration fee under
Subsection A shall be subject to payment of the license fee imposed by
§ 227-2 for any activities not enumerated in Subsection A.
A. Upon receipt of the application and the prescribed fee, if applicable, the
Secretary of the township or his/her designated agent shall immediately
transmit the application to the Township Police Department, which
Department shall without delay take such action as may be necessary to
verify the identity and character of the applicant or persons identified
on an application for an organization filed under §§ 227-3A, 227-5 and
227-6 and to verify the statements and information contained in the
application.
B. Upon completion of the Department's investigation, the Chief of the
Township Police or his/her designated agent, if he\she is satisfied that
the applicant or persons, as the case may be, are of good character and
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. A250, Fees.
§ 227-3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 227-5
227:531
§ 227-6. Issuance of license; appeal of denial.
§ 227-7. License provisions.
Every license issued under this chapter shall be subject to the following:
§ 227-8. Revocation of license; appeals.
The Secretary of the township and the Chief of the Township Police or
their designated agents are hereby authorized to revoke any license issued
under this chapter when they deem such revocation to be beneficial to the
public health, safety or morals; or for the violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter; or for misrepresentation by a licensee to any customer
or prospective customer by making any statement not in accord with the
that the business is legitimate, shall endorse his/her approval upon
the application. If not so satisfied, the Chief of the Township Police
or his designated agent shall endorse his/her disapproval upon the
application and his/her reasons for disapproval.
A. The Secretary of the township, upon receipt of the action on any
application under this chapter from the Chief of the Township Police or
his/her designated agent, shall notify the applicant of the action taken
by the Chief of the Township Police or his/her designated agent. If the
application shall have been approved, the Secretary of the township
shall forthwith issue a license in accordance with the application.
B. Appeals from any denial of license may be made to the Board of
Township Commissioners at any time within ten (10) days after such
denial is communicated to such applicant. No license fee shall be
required if no license is issued.
A. Such license shall be issued on an individual basis to each licensee
engaging in such business, except in cases of organizations filing under
§§ 227-3A, 227-5 and 227-6 hereof, in which case the organization
would receive the license and the persons registered thereunder would
receive appropriate proof of the issuance of the license. A separate
application and license fee, if applicable, shall be required of each
natural person engaging in such business, whether as an employee,
sole proprietor or partner of any other person.
B. Such license shall be displayed on the person of the licensee at all times
when engaged in transient retail business in the township, and the
licensee shall exhibit such license upon request by all police officers,
township officials and residents.
C. Such license shall contain the statement "The issuance of this card does
not endorse or sanction the activity or the product of the bearer."
D. Such license shall specify the products to be sold, the services to be
rendered or the subscriptions to be solicited by the licensee and the
expiration date of the license.
§ 227-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 227-8
227:532
information upon such person's application for license; or for giving false
information upon any application for a license hereunder. Appeals from any
revocation may be made to the Board of Township Commissioners at any
time within ten (10) days after such revocation. No part of a license fee shall
be refunded to any person whose license shall have been revoked.
§ 227-9. Police supervision; records and reports.
The Police Department shall supervise the activities of all persons holding
licenses under this chapter and shall keep a record of all licenses issued
hereunder and shall make a report thereof each month to the Township
Board of Commissioners.
§ 227-10. Prohibited acts.
A. No person shall engage in any transient retail business at any time on
Sundays or legal holidays other than between the hours of 1:00 p.m.
and 6:00 p.m., prevailing time, for transient retail business as defined in
Subsection (1)(a) of the definition of "transient retail business" in
§ 117-1A hereof and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, for such business as defined in Subsection (1)(b) of the
definition of "transient retail business" in § 117-1A hereof, nor on any
other day of the week before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m., prevailing
time, for retail transient business as defined in Subsection (1)(a) of the
definition of "transient retail business" in § 117-1A hereof and between
the hours of 8:00 am. and 10:00 p.m., prevailing time, for such business
as defined in Subsection (1)(b) of the definition of "transient retail
business" in § 117-1A hereof, except as to any licensee who obtains the
consent of a property occupant prior to presenting himself in person.
B. No person shall maintain or keep a street or curbstone market by
parking any vehicle upon any street or alley in the township for any
longer than necessary to make his presence known to persons residing
in the immediate vicinity. No licensee shall place or deposit any refuse
on any such street, highway or alley.
C. No person shall occupy any fixed location upon any of the sidewalks,
streets, highways or alleys of the township for the purpose of engaging
in any transient retail business with or without any stand or counter.
D. No person shall engage in a transient retail business or remain on the
premises of any residence after having been asked by the occupant
thereof to leave such premises or residence.
E. No person shall engage in a transient retail business upon any premises
or residence located thereon if such premises or residence is posted
against solicitation by means of a notice prominently displayed, upon
which is printed the legend "NO SOLICITORS." A premises or residence
shall be deemed to be posted against peddling or soliciting if there is
exhibited, on or near the main entrance to the premises or on or near
the main door to any residence located thereon, a sign at least three by
§ 227-8 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 227-10
227:533
§ 227-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 227-12. Exclusions. [Added 4-16-1987 by Ord. No. 394]
four (3 x 4) inches in size, which bears the above legend in letters at
least one-third ( 1/3) inch in height.
F. No person who engages in a transient retail business shall use a plan,
scheme or ruse or make any statement which indicates or implies that
the purpose of such person's visit is other than to obtain orders for or to
make sales of goods or services.
G. No person who engages in a transient retail business shall misrepresent
the right of a buyer to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of
applicable law, and such person shall provide the buyer with all
information required by state and federal regulations.
H. No person who engages in a transient retail business shall sell any
product, service or subscription not specified in his/her license.
I. No person who engages in a transient retail business shall hawk or cry
his/her wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public
grounds in the township or use any loudspeaker or horn or any other
device for announcing his/her presence which may annoy the public.
J. No person who engages in a transient retail business shall park any
vehicle on any of the streets or alleys in the township for the purpose of
sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his/her goods, wares or
materials or for disposing of any cartons or wrapping materials or of
any goods, wares or materials or of foodstuffs which may have become
unsaleable.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof before any District Justice of the township, for
every such violation, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than six
hundred dollars ($600.) and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for
not more than thirty (30) days.144
B. The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate violation for each day of any such violation.
A. The terms and provisions of this chapter regulating and licensing
transient retail business shall not apply to garage sales, as defined
above, so that a person conducting a garage sale shall not be deemed
engaged in transient retail business as defined in this chapter and shall
not be required to file an application for a license or be subject to the
general provisions applicable herein to transient retail business.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 227-10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 227-12
227:534
Chapter 233
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
B. The terms and provisions of this chapter regulating and licensing
transient retail businesses shall not apply to certain occasional sales by
or to sales by non-on-going concerns or incidental activities of
community, charitable, religious or other organizations operating on a
non-profit occasional sales basis, including but not limited to Girl Scout
cookie sales, bake sales and rummage sales, and shall not apply to sales
by persons of home-delivered daily or periodically published mass
circulation newspapers, magazines or like publications. [Added
5-21-1987 by Ord. No. 395]
§ 227-12 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 227-12
227:535

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 233-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 233-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature, except the
designation of stop sign and yield sign intersections, shall be enacted as
ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
Upper Allen Township. Designation of stop sign or yield sign intersections
shall be made by regulation or administrative order of the Public Safety
Committee of the Board of Commissioners of Upper Allen Township or of
the Police Chief of Upper Allen Township. This section shall not affect stop
sign or yield sign intersections designated by ordinance prior to this date.
§ 233-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force or
as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Commissioners of Upper Allen Township shall have the following
powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of
emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for continuous
periods of not more than seventy-two (72) hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Commissioners and the Police Department in the same manner as
permanent regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle
or tractor in violation of any such regulations or who shall move,
remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign erected or posted to give
notice of any such regulations shall be liable to the penalty set forth in
the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and
in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than fifty dollars
($50.) and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ten (10)
days.
§ 233-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-4
227:537
§ 233-4. Experimental regulations.
§ 233-5. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Township are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the highways of the Township and at intersections thereof, to
enforce this chapter and to exercise all applicable police powers hereunder
and under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 233-6. Operation of motor vehicles on sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle longitudinally upon any sidewalk in
the Township nor shall any person operate any motor vehicle upon or across
any sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway or
alley at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have
been properly cut down for the purpose. Any person who shall violate any of
the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof before a District
Justice having jurisdiction thereover, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $50 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 10 days.
§ 233-7. Speed limits established on certain streets.
A. The Commissioners of Upper Allen Township may, from time to time,
designate places upon and along the streets and alleys in the Township
where, for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, specific traffic
and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in
force and effect and shall designate such locations by proper signs and
markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be
effective just as if they had been specified in this chapter. No person
shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected or made by
authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be, upon conviction thereof before a
District Justice having jurisdiction thereover, liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
ten dollars ($10.) and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than
five days.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the testing and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. The following speed limits are hereby established:
§ 233-4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-7
227:538
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Allendale Road 35 From Mechanicsburg
Borough line to Gettysburg
Road
Allenview Drive 25 Entire length
Beacon Circle 25 Entire length
Bumble Bee Hollow
Road
25 From West Lisburn Road to
Market Street
Cumberland Parkway
[Added 9-19-1991 by
Ord. No. 450]
35 From U.S. Route 15 to PA
Route 114, except on the Scurve
portion thereof
Cumberland Parkway
[Added 9-19-1991 by
Ord. No. 450]
25 On the S-curve portion
between U.S. Route 15 and
PA Route 114
East Elmwood Avenue 25 From Shepherdstown Road
to Mechanicsburg Borough
line
Elgin Circle 25 Entire length
Fisher Road [Amended
6-17-1993 by Ord. No.
474]
25 Entire length
Foxfire Circle 25 Entire length
Foxfire Drive 25 Entire length
Gettysburg Pike
[Amended 11-21-1991
by Ord. No. 453]
25 From a point 0.2 miles
north of Fisher Road north
to Cumberland Parkway
Gettysburg Pike [Added
10-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 769]
35 Between South Market
Street (S.R. 114) and the
traffic light located at the
intersection of East Winding
Hill Road and Gettysburg
Pike
Gettysburg Pike
[Amended 10-17-1991
by Ord. No. 452;
11-21-1991 by Ord.
No. 453]
35 From the York County line
north to a point 0.2 miles
north of Fisher Road
Independence Avenue
[Added 9-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 693]
35 From Gettysburg Road to
the cul-de-sac terminus
§ 233-7 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-7
227:539
§ 233-8. Stop intersections established. [Last amended 9-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 644]
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Kim Acres Drive
[Amended 11-21-1991
by Ord. No. 453;
5-15-2013 by Ord. No.
710]
25 From Mt. Allen Drive to
South Market Drive
Louise Drive [Added
12-18-1997 by Ord.
No. 506]
30 Entire length in the
Rossmoyne Business Park in
Upper Allen Township
Mt. Allen Drive
[Amended 11-21-1991
by Ord. No. 453]
25 From U.S. Route 15 to
Lisburn Road
Nittany Drive
[Amended 11-21-1991
by Ord. No. 453]
25 From Mt. Allen Drive to
Aspen Drive
Old Hollow Road 25 From Bumble Bee Hollow
Road to its dead end at U.S.
Route 15
Ritter Road [Added
12-18-1997 by Ord.
No. 506]
30 Entire length in the
Rossmoyne Business Park in
Upper Allen Township
Spring Run Drive 25 From Pine Tree Drive to
Nittany Drive
Stumpstown Road 35 From West Lisburn Road to
Monroe Township line
Wister Circle 25 Entire length
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor at a speed in excess of
that hereby established therefor upon any of the portions of streets
herein specified shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice
having jurisdiction thereover, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and
costs of prosecution. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit
established herein by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile per hour in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for
not more than five days.
A. The following intersections are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby
confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street, in
§ 233-7 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-8
227:540
the direction or directions hereby indicated. All vehicles and tractors
approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in the
direction or directions hereby indicated in each case, shall come to a
full stop within a reasonable distance before entering such intersection:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Alison Avenue (north
end)
East/West East Elmwood Avenue
Allegheny Drive North Kim Acres Drive
Allendale Road South Independence Avenue
Allen Glen Drive North East Lisburn Road
Allen Grange Court East Allen Glen Drive
Allenview Drive East Mt. Allen Drive
Allenview Drive North Hertzler Road
Apache Trail West Arcona Road
Appalachian Avenue
[Amended 5-15-2013
by Ord. No. 710]
South Kim Acres Drive
Arcona Road South McCormick Road
Ariel Court North Wilson Road
Ascott Way East Ellesmere Lane
Aspen Drive South South Market Street
Aspen Drive North/South Kim Acres Drive
Barbara Lane North East Winding Hill Road
Beechwood Drive South Nittany Drive
Belvedere Drive (east
end)
East Hellam Drive
Belvedere Drive (west
end)
West Hellam Drive
Berkshire Road North/South Nittany Drive
Berkshire Road South Kim Acres Drive
Big Horn Avenue West Appalachian Avenue
Boxwood Lane West South Market Street
Brad Street South East Lisburn Road
Breezewood Drive South East Winding Hill Road
Broadwell Lane South Boxwood Lane
Brookwood Drive West Arcona Drive
Cascade Road North/South Kim Acres Drive
Cascade Road North/South Nittany Drive
§ 233-8 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-8
227:541
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Cedar Avenue East South Market Street
Cedar Ridge Lane East/West Rocky Road
Cherry Street East Chestnut Street
Chestnut Ridge Drive East South York Street
Chestnut Street South East Lisburn Road
Chiltern Way West Ellesmere Lane
Circle Drive West Mt. Allen Drive
Clark Street West Ritter Road
Cockleys Drive East Stoner Drive
College Avenue North Grantham Road
Colonial View Drive West Mill Road
Conway Drive Southwest Mt. Allen Drive
Cope Drive South Grantham Road
Cope Drive North West Lisburn Road
Country Drive West Williams Grove Road
Coventry Drive North/South Fisher Road
Deerview Drive East Rolling Hills Drive
Deerview Drive East Round Ridge Road
Derbyshire Avenue West Stumpstown Road
Diehl Road145 East South York Street
Edgewood Lane West Wayne Drive
East Elmwood Avenue West Shepherdstown Road
West Elmwood Avenue North/South Broad Street
Emily Drive North/South West Lisburn Road
Emlyn Lane East South Market Street
English Drive East Gettysburg Pike
Eric Avenue South Allendale Road
Fenwick Avenue West Stumpstown Road
Fisher Road Southeast Gettysburg Pike
Fleming Drive South West Lisburn Road
Flintlock Ridge Road South East Winding Hill Road
Floribunda Lane East Gettysburg Pike
145. Editor's Note: Diehl Road was designated as a one-way street from the intersection of
Williams Grove Road east to the intersection with South York Street 7-16-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-722.
§ 233-8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-8
227:542
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Ford Farm Road North McCormick Road
Frost Road West Williams Grove Road
Geneva Drive East Lancaster Boulevard
Geneva Drive West Allendale Road
George Circle East South Market Street
Glen Court South Allen Glen Drive
Glendale Drive Southwest Mt. Allen Drive
Grandia Flora Drive East Gettysburg Pike
Grantham Avenue North Grantham Road
Greenway Drive Northeast Winding Hill Drive
Hamilton Avenue West West Elmwood Avenue
Harvest Drive South Hertzler Road
Harvest Lane North Wilson Road
Hawthorn Avenue East Gettysburg Pike
Hawthorn Avenue West Stumpstown Road
Hellam Drive North/South Conway Drive
Hemlock Drive East South Market Street
Hemlock Drive West Oakwood Avenue
Hemlock Road East Mill Road
Hemlock Road North Cockleys Drive
Herman Drive North West Lisburn Road
Herman Drive Southeast Gettysburg Pike
Hertzler Road
[Repealed 8-17-2011
by Ord. No. 691]
Hertzler Road West Mt. Allen Drive
Hickory Lane South Juniper Drive
High Street North Grantham Road
Holly Drive South Nittany Drive
Independence Avenue East Gettysburg Road
Juniper Drive West South Market Street
Kacey Court East Bumble Bee Hollow Road
Kent Drive South Kim Acres Drive
Kim Acres Drive Northeast Mt. Allen Drive
Klinedinst Road South East Lisburn Road
§ 233-8 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-8
227:543
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Klinedist Road
[Repealed 8-17-2011
by Ord. No. 691]
Lancaster Boulevard South Wilson Road
Lancaster Boulevard Southeast Wilson Road
Laurel Drive Northeast Nittany Drive
Laurel Street North Grantham Road
Lexington Avenue South Wilson Road
Lexington Avenue West Allendale Road
Low Street North/South Grantham Road
Mallard Way East Gettysburg Pike
Manor Drive Northwest Glendale Drive
Mayfield Road Southeast Gettysburg Pike
East Meadow Drive South Fisher Road
Meadowcroft Circle North Fisher Road
Merrimac Avenue East Stumpstown Road
Middle Street North Grantham Road
Midland Road West East Winding Hill Road
Milk Avenue North Grantham Road
Mill Road North College Avenue
Mill Road Northwest Gettysburg Pike
Mill Road South Gettysburg Pike
Mill Road South Grantham Road
Mimosa Drive West Aspen Drive
Myrtle Drive South East Lisburn Road
Nanroc Drive North Geneva Drive
Nanroc Drive South Wilson Road
Nittany Drive Northeast Mt. Allen Drive
Nursery Drive North East Lake Drive
Nursery Drive North North Orchard Boulevard
Nursery Drive South East Lake Drive
Nursery Drive South North Orchard Boulevard
Old Grove Road North Williams Grove Road
Old Grove Road South Diehl Road
Old Hollow Road East Round Ridge Road
§ 233-8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-8
227:544
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Old Hollow Road West Gettysburg Pike
Old Hollow Road East/West Bumble Bee Hollow Road
Old Schoolhouse Lane
(east and west end)
North Cumberland Parkway
Orchard Lane Southeast Hertzler Road
Paris Drive West Allendale Road
Park Hills Drive East East Winding Hill Road
Park Hills Drive East/West Susan Lane
Park Ridge Drive South Mill Road
Park Ridge Drive West West Lisburn Road
Peachtree Drive East Williams Grove Road
Pine Tree Drive West Aspen Drive
Pheasant Drive West Mill Road
Reservoir Road Southeast Hertzler Road
Reservoir Road West Mt. Allen Drive
Reynolds Street South East Winding Hill Road
Richard Lane West Louise Drive
Rider Lane Northwest Gettysburg Pike
Ridge Drive South Wilson Road
Rocky Road North Wilson Road
Rolling Hills Drive West Round Ridge Road
Rolo Court (three
intersections)
West Cockleys Drive
Rosegarden Boulevard
East
Northeast Floribunda Lane
Rosegarden Boulevard
North
Southwest Floribunda Lone
Rosegarden Boulevard
West
North Grantham Road
Round Ridge Road East South Market Street
Scenic Drive East Gettysburg Pike
Scott Street East Louise Drive
Seedling Court North Orchard Boulevard
Sheffield Avenue West Stumpstown Road
Shingus Circle South Grantham Rood
Sholly Drive East Mill Road
§ 233-8 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-8
227:545
§ 233-9. Maximum registered gross vehicle weight limits
established on certain streets, roads and bridges. [Amended
6-17-1993 by Ord. No. 474; 5-15-1997 by Ord. No. 502; 9-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 551]
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Stover Road West Cockleys Drive
Southpoint Drive East Shepherdstown Road
Southpoint Drive West South Market Street
Southview Drive North/South Fisher Road
Spring Run Drive North/South Kim Acres Drive
Spring Valley Lane East South Market Street
Stonehedge Lane East Allendale Road
Stoner Drive South Hemlock Road
Stumpstown Road South West Lisburn Road
Sunhaven Circle South Sinclair Road
Susan Lane North East Winding Hill Road
Thornton Drive Southeast Gettysburg Pike
Unnamed access road
across bridge from
Grantham Road to
Messiah College
South College Avenue
Wayne Drive (east and
west end)
South East Winding Hill Road
West Meadow Drive South Fisher Road
Windrush Lane North Boxwood Lane
William Way East Williams Grove Road
Wilson Road West Allendale Road
Winding Hill Drive North East Winding Hill Road
Winding Hill Drive Southeast Gettysburg Pike
Wingert Drive West Mill Road
Woodbine Street North Grantham Road
B. Any operator of a vehicle who shall fail to come to a full stop within a
reasonable distance before entering any such stop intersection, as
hereinabove required, shall, upon conviction thereof before a
Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction thereover, be sentenced
to pay a fine of $25 and cost of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such fine and cost, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than
three days.
§ 233-8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-9
227:546
§ 233-10. (Reserved)146
§ 233-10.1. Certain classes of vehicles prohibited on streets in
residential zones. [Amended 11-12-2002 by Ord. No. 561;
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 628]
A. The maximum registered gross vehicle weight of vehicles, other than
school buses, public safety (police and fire equipment) vehicles and
highway maintenance vehicles, on the following streets or bridges shall
be limited as indicated: [Amended 12-20-2001 by Ord. No. 557;
5-15-2013 by Ord. No. 710; 7-15-2020 by Ord. No. 796]
Name of Street or
Bridge
Vehicle Weight
(pounds) Location
East Winding Hill Road 10,000 From Gettysburg Pike
west to South Market
Street
Hertzler Road 10,000 Entire length
Mill Race Bridge 35,000 On Gettysburg Pike
Mill Race Bridge 8,000 On Mill Road
Wilson Road 16,000 From Lancaster Boulevard
west to Allendale Road
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
summary conviction before a District Justice having jurisdiction
thereover, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and costs of
prosecution and not more than $500 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of the payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not
more than five days; provided, however, that this penalty shall not apply
to the operation of agricultural tractors.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or
trailer, except a passenger car, a truck not exceeding 9,000 pounds
registered gross or combination weight or a camper-motor home
vehicle, upon all streets or alleys in Upper Allen Township which are
located in residential districts according to the zoning classifications
and regulations set forth in Chapter 245, Zoning, as amended;
provided, however, that motor vehicles, including school buses picking
up and discharging passengers and trailers, shall be permitted upon
any street in said residential districts for the purpose of making
deliveries to or picking up goods, wares, merchandise or materials from
and of performing work on or for premises situated upon or adjacent to
any such street or alley.
146. Editor's Note: Former § 233-10, Certain classes of vehicles prohibited on streets in
residential zones, was renumbered as § 233-10.1 on 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 628.
§ 233-9 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-10.1
227:547
§ 233-10.2. Certain classes of vehicles prohibited on streets in
industrial zones. [Added 10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 621; amended
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 628]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on the following street or parts of the street; provided,
however, nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on the street or parts of the street or from driving
a school bus picking up and discharging passengers, or from driving on
the street or parts of the street a truck or other commercial vehicle
making local deliveries to or pickups from premises located along the
street or parts of the street. [Amended 2-1-2017 by Ord. No. 763;
7-15-2020 by Ord. No. 796]
Street Between
(Reserved)
C. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof before a District Justice having jurisdiction
thereon, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 10 days.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or
trailer, except a passenger car, a truck not exceeding 16,000 pounds
registered gross or combination weight or a camper-motor home
vehicle, upon all streets or alleys in Upper Allen Township which are
located in industrial districts according to the zoning classifications and
regulations set forth in Chapter 245, Zoning, as amended; provided,
however, that motor vehicles, including school buses picking up and
discharging passengers, trucks and trailers, shall be permitted upon
any street in said industrial districts for the purpose of making
deliveries to or picking up goods, wares, merchandise or materials from
and of performing work on or for premises situated upon or adjacent to
any such street or alley.
B. It shall be unlawul for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on the following street or parts of the street; provided,
however, nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on the street or parts of the street or from driving
a school bus picking up and discharging passengers or from driving on
the street or parts of the street a truck or other commercial vehicle
making local deliveries to or pickups from premises located along the
street or parts of the street.
Street Between
Gettysburg Road Independence Avenue and its dead-end
terminus at the Pennsylvania Turnpike
§ 233-10.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-10.2
227:548
§ 233-11. Yield intersections established. [Last amended 9-5-2007
by Ord. No. 644]
C. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge having
jurisdiction thereon, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100
and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 10 days.
A. The following intersections are hereby established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are hereby
confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions hereby indicated. All vehicles and tractors
approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in the
direction or directions hereby indicated in each case, shall slow down to
a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety
to stop, shall stop before entering a crosswalk or the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering. After slowing down or stopping,
the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute a hazard
during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection of
roadways.
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Alison Avenue (south
end)
East East Elmwood Avenue
Allegheny Drive North Nittany Drive
Andes Drive East Cascade Road
Andes Drive West Appalachian Avenue
Atland Drive West Cope Drive North
Autumnwood Drive East East Meadow Drive
Autumnwood Drive West West Meadow Drive
Baker Drive West Hamilton Avenue
Barbara Lane South Park Hills Drive
Bauman Court East Fleming Drive
Beacon Circle Northwest Foxfire Drive
Beilman Court West Cope Drive North
Big Horn Avenue East Cascade Road
Bonny Lane (east end) South Cockleys Drive
Boxwood Lane North Pine Tree Drive
§ 233-10.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-11
227:549
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Bradford Court East Bradford Drive
Bradford Drive North Canterbury Drive
Bradford Drive South Canterbury Drive
Broad Circle East Broad Street
Broad Street South Miller Avenue
Broadmoor Drive East Greenway Drive
Brunswick Avenue East/West Fleming Drive
Brunswick Avenue North Merrimac Avenue
Brunswick Avenue West Merrimac Avenue
Buckingham Avenue South Hawthorn Avenue
Candlelight Drive North North Meadow Drive
Candlelight Drive South South Meadow Drive
Canterbury Drive North Canterbury Drive
Cedar Street North Woodbine Street
Charles Circle South George Circle
Cherry Street East/West Brad Street
Circle Drive West Reservoir Road (north end)
Clover Drive North Hawthorn Avenue
Clover Drive West Rye Circle
Cocklin Court West Cope Drive South
Conley Drive North Frost Road
Conley Drive South Country Drive
Conway Drive East Hellam Drive
Cope Drive South North Cope Drive (traffic circle)
Coventry Drive North Arbor Court
Coventry Court West Canterbury Drive
Coventry Drive West Canterbury Drive
Dartmouth Court East English Drive
Derbyshire Avenue North Lancelot Avenue
Dewberry Court East Wineberry Drive
Dover Court East Canterbury Drive
Drayton Court North Emlyn Lane
Elgin Circle [Amended
5-15-2013 by Ord. No.
710]
East Allenview Drive
§ 233-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-11
227:550
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Ellesmere Lane North Boxwood Lane
Emily Drive North Hawthorn Avenue
Emily Drive West Herman Drive
Emlyn Lane North/South Emlyn Lane
Fairmont Drive West Hellam Drive
Fenwick Avenue East Lancelot Avenue
Fleming Drive North Merrimac Avenue
Floribunda Lane West West Rosegarden Boulevard
Forest Drive North George Circle
Foxfire Drive North Allenview Drive
Freedom Road West Eric Avenue
Glendale Drive East Hellam Drive
Glime Drive West Cope Drive South
Glime Drive West Cope Drive North
Grandia Flora Drive East/West East Rosegarden Boulevard
Grandia Flora Drive East/West West Rosegarden Boulevard
Granada Lane East East Rosegarden Boulevard
Granada Lane West West Rosegarden Boulevard
Grandview Court South Deerview Drive
Greenway Drive East Mayfield Road
Greenway Drive North Winding Hill Drive
Gregor Court South Glime Drive
Hamilton Circle West Hamilton Avenue
Harvest Drive North Lake Drive
Hastings Drive North Canterbury Drive
Hastings Drive South Canterbury Drive
Hawthorn Avenue East Rye Circle
Hemlock Circle East Hemlock Drive
Hemlock Court West Hemlock Road
Hickory Lane West Oakwood Avenue
Hilda Court [Amended
5-15-2013 by Ord. No.
710]
North Lavina Drive
Hilltop Circle North Deerview Drive
Juniper Drive West Oakwood Avenue
§ 233-11 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-11
227:551
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Keefer Way South Old Hollow Road
Kendall Drive East West Meadow Drive
Kendall Drive West Southview Drive
Kent Drive North Nittany Drive
Knepper Drive South Country Drive
Knepper Drive North Frost Road
Kower Drive East Cope Drive (Traffic Circle)
Kower Drive West Kower Court
Lancelot Avenue West/East Buckingham Avenue/
Canterbury Drive
Laurel Drive East Spring Run Road
Lavynndon Lane East Emlyn Lane
Leyton Way South Lynnbrook Way
Lobach Drive East Cope Drive North
Lobach Drive East Cope Drive South
Loring Lane West Sunhaven Circle
Loring Lane North Peachtree Drive
Lynnbrook Way East Emlyn Lane
Lynnbrook Way South Lavynndon Lane
Manor Drive East Hellam Drive
Mayfield Road West Greenway Drive
Merrimac Avenue East Fleming Drive
Midland Road East Breezewood Drive
Mill Road North Canterbury Drive
Mill Road West Canterbury Drive
North Meadow Drive East East Meadow Drive
South Meadow Drive East East Meadow Drive
South Meadow Drive West West Meadow Drive
South Meadow Drive West Southview Drive
West Meadow Drive North North Meadow Drive
Mimosa Drive East Spring Run Drive
Norfolk Court East Fleming Drive
Orchard Lane North Circle Drive
Patricia Court North Park Hills Drive
Paul Circle North Emily Drive
§ 233-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-11
227:552
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Pine Tree Drive East Spring Run Drive
Pine Tree Drive West Spring Run Drive
Pocono Drive East Cascade Road
Pocono Drive West Berkshire Road
Ravenhill Road South Brookwood Drive
Ravenwood Road West Kylock Road
Ricky Road North Park Hills Drive
Ridge Drive North Lexington Avenue
Rolling Hills Drive North Round Ridge Road
Rosebriar Lane East Myrtle Drive
Rosegarden Boulevard
North
West West Rosegarden Boulevard
Roxbury Court West Lake Drive
St. James Circle West Knepper Drive
Sheffield Avenue East Emily Drive
Sapling Court West Nursery Drive North
San Juan Drive East Cascade Road
San Juan Drive West Appalachian Avenue
Shoff Court West Fleming Drive
Sholly Drive West Hemlock Road
Sholly Drive West Woodside Drive
Southview Drive North North Meadow Drive
Spring Run Drive North Nittany Drive
Spring Valley Lane West Rolling Hills Drive
Springwillow Drive East East Meadow Drive
Springwillow Drive West West Meadow Drive
Standlake Way North Boxwood Lane
Summerfield Drive East East Meadow Drive
Summerfield Drive West West Meadow Drive
Sunhaven Circle North/South Peachtree Drive
Sunset Court South Yorkview Drive
Susan Lane South Lavina Drive
Thornton Drive West Herman Drive
Wakefield Avenue South Sheffield Avenue
Wakefield Avenue East Emily Drive
§ 233-11 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-11
227:553
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
White Dawn Lane East East Rosegarden Boulevard
White Dawn Lane West West Rosegarden Boulevard
Wineberry Drive East Mayfield Road
Wineberry Drive North Broadmoor Drive
Winterhaven Drive East East Meadow Drive
Winterhaven Drive West West Meadow Drive
Wister Circle [Amended
5-15-2013 by Ord. No.
710]
West Allenview Drive
Wyncote Court West English Drive
Yorkview Drive West High Street
B. If a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection or
junction of roadways after driving past the yield sign, the collision shall
be deemed prima facie evidence of the failure of the driver to yield the
right-of-way. Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall fail to yield
the right-of-way before entering any such yield intersection, as
hereinabove required, shall, upon conviction thereof before a
Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction thereover, be sentenced
to pay a fine of $25 and cost of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such fine and cost, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than
three days.
§ 233-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-11
227:554
ARTICLE II
Parking Regulations
§ 233-12. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to be parked upon or
along any street, alley or other thoroughfare in the Township any vehicle:
§ 233-13. Parking prohibited in specific locations. [Amended
12-11-2001 by Ord. No. 554; 9-6-2004 by Ord. No. 602]
A. Not bearing the current license or registration tag from the state,
province, territory or other governmental unit in which such vehicle is
registered; and/or
B. In the case of a vehicle duly registered in Pennsylvania, not bearing the
current state inspection sticker.
A. Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Bumble Bee Hollow
Road
Both From South Market Street to Old
Hollow Road
East Winding Hill
Road [Added
9-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 692]
Both From a point 50 feet north of the
railroad crossing to a point 30 feet
south of the intersection of Norland
Street
Gettysburg Pike
[Added 12-21-2006
by Ord. No. 631]
South From the northwest corner of the
intersection with South York Street
northward along the entire length of
the property now known as the
Union Hotel property
Hertzler Road Both From Mt. Allen Drive eastward to the
limits of the Reservoir Hills
Development
Kim Acres Drive Both From South Market Street to Aspen
Drive
McCormick Road
[Added 5-21-2014
by Ord. No. 719]
North From East Lisburn Road to Arcona
Road
Mill Road Both From Grantham Road south to the
Township line
Mt. Allen Drive West From U.S. Route 15 to Lisburn Road
South Market Street
(PA 114, L.R. 416)
Both From Gettysburg Pike to Aspen Drive
§ 233-12 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-13
227:555
§ 233-14. Parking of commercial vehicles prohibited on residential
streets.
Name of Street Side Location
South Market Street
[Added 7-15-2020
by Ord. No. 796]
East From Cumberland Parkway north
along the entire length of property
now known as Sheetz to a point 423
feet north
South Market Street
[Added 7-15-2020
by Ord. No. 796]
East
and
west
From Lisburn Road to Yellow
Breeches Creek bridge, north and
southbound
South York Street
[Added 12-21-2006
by Ord. No. 631]
North From the northwest corner of the
intersection with Gettysburg Pike
northward along the entire length of
the property now known as the
Union Hotel property
Winding Hill Drive
[Added 4-18-2012
by Ord. No. 699]
Both From East Winding Hill Road to a
point 420 feet south
B. Parking shall be prohibited at the specified times in the following
locations: [Amended 5-15-2013 by Ord. No. 710]
Name of
Street Side Location Parking Restriction
Independence
Avenue
Both From Gettysburg
Road to the culde-
sac terminus
which is located
in the Upper
Allen Business
Park
Parking shall be
prohibited on said
Independence Avenue and
Allendale Road from
Wilson Lane to
Independence Avenue at
all times throughout the
year from sunset until
sunrise the following
morning. Any vehicle, or
combination thereof, not
removed from said streets
within 10 days of the first
issuance of filing of a
citation shall be subject to
removal as provided for in
§ 233-16B of this chapter.
Allendale
Road
Both From Wilson
Lane to
Independence
Avenue
§ 233-13 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-14
227:556
§ 233-15. Parking of boats, truck tractors, trailers and trucks
prohibited on streets in residential zones.
The parking of boats, buses, truck tractors, trailers ("trailer" being any
wheeled vehicle without its own locomotive power), trucks, campers and
motor home vehicles, equipment and machinery, except those not exceeding
9,000 pounds registered gross or combination weight, shall be prohibited
on all streets in Upper Allen Township which are located in residential
districts according to the zoning classifications and regulations set forth
in Chapter 245, Zoning, as amended; provided, however, trucks, truck
tractors, equipment and machinery, campers, motor home vehicles and
trailers shall be permitted to park upon any street in said residential
districts for the purpose of making deliveries to or picking up goods, wares,
merchandise or materials from and of performing work on or for premises
situated upon or adjacent to any such street or alley.
§ 233-16. Parking of vehicles prohibited on Township streets during
periods of snowfall. [Amended 9-17-2014 by Ord. No. 725]
A. No commercial motor vehicle or combination of vehicles over 20 feet in
length shall be parked on a residential street within Upper Allen
Township; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to a
commercial motor vehicle or combinations of vehicles in the act of
making pickups or deliveries to properties abutting the street on which
the vehicle or vehicles are parked, nor shall this prohibition apply to a
commercial motor vehicle or combination of vehicles parked on a
residential street during the time the operator thereof is actively
engaged in performing his occupation in or along said street or
properties abutting said street.
B. For the purpose of this section, a "residential street" shall be defined as
any street in or abutting a Rural Residential, Suburban Residential or
Urban Residential District as the same are delineated on the "Upper
Allen Township Zoning Map."147
A. Snow emergencies. In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to
combat the hazards of snow and ice on Township streets, the Township,
in its discretion, may declare a snow or ice emergency ("snow
emergency"). Information on the existence of a snow emergency shall
be given by the Township through radio, newspaper, its website, or
other available media, and information regarding the termination of the
snow emergency shall be given by the use of the same media.
B. It shall be unlawful to park or permit to be parked any motor vehicle or
other vehicle on any street or alley which is part of the Townshipmaintained
street system upon the commencement of a snow
emergency and until the snow has been plowed.
147. Editor's Note: Said Map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 233-14 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-16
227:557
§ 233-17. Handicapped parking.
C. Any member of the Upper Allen Township Police Department or other
employee of Upper Allen Township engaged in road work is hereby
authorized to remove any vehicle abandoned or parked upon any public
street or alley in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter
and to take any said vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of
safety. The registered owner of any said vehicle shall be promptly
notified, in writing, of the fact of the removal and of the place to which
said vehicle has been removed, where said owner may obtain the same
upon payment of any and all towing and storage charges.
A. In any public parking area maintained by Upper Allen Township, the
Chief of Police may cause to be designated, by appropriate signs,
parking spaces specifically reserved for use by vehicles operated by or
transporting handicapped persons.
B. In any privately owned parking area which is held open for parking to
the public within Upper Allen Township, the owner or person in control
thereof may, by the erection of appropriate signs, reserve certain
parking spaces for use by vehicles operated by or transporting
handicapped persons.
C. The vehicles entitled to occupy the parking spaces reserved pursuant to
Subsections A and B hereof shall be:
(1) Any vehicle bearing a handicapped registration plate, as provided
by Section 1338 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1338), when occupied by the person to whom or on behalf of
whom such plate has been issued.
(2) Any vehicle bearing a disabled veteran registration plate, as
provided by Section 1342 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 1342), when occupied by the disabled veteran to whom
such registration plate has been issued.
(3) Any other vehicle when occupied by a person who is entitled to
receive a handicapped or disabled veteran registration plate under
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
(4) Any other vehicle when occupied by a person who has a currently
valid handicapped parking placard or any like form issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or the like agency of
any other state or local government.
D. No operator of any vehicle other than those specified in Subsection C
hereof shall park such vehicle in any parking space reserved for use by
handicapped persons in accordance with this chapter.
§ 233-16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-18
227:558
§ 233-18. Parking prohibited in fire lanes.
Under provisions of the BOCA Fire Prevention Code, as amended from time
to time and as adopted by ordinance of the Township to be effective within
the Township,148 the Township is authorized to require and designate public
or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective use
of fire apparatus. Such fire lanes are to be properly designated and marked
in accordance with said Fire Prevention Code. It shall be unlawful to park
or permit to be parked any motor vehicle or other vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, in any such duly designated and marked fire lane.
§ 233-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-2005 by Ord. No.
602]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Justice having jurisdiction
thereover, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 10 days. Each day that a
violation of the parking regulations continues shall be considered a separate
offense for each said day.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 138, Fire Prevention.
§ 233-18 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-19
227:559

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Amended 10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 622149]
§ 233-20. Placement of nonvehicle items on Township streets.
§ 233-21. Effect on existing legislation.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done
or liability incurred nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted to enforce any of those repealed ordinances or regulations.
A. The placement of tan bark, mulch, landscape stone, topsoil or any other
materials to be used in landscaping on Township streets shall be
prohibited.
B. The placement of brush and yard waste to be collected by Township
employees as part of the Township’s brush recycling program or by any
other person on Township streets for a period of more than seven days
shall be prohibited.
C. Placement of any other nonvehicle item or device on or protruding into
Township streets shall be prohibited.
D. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof before a District Justice having jurisdiction
thereon, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 10 days.
149. Editor's Note: This ordinance renamed former Art. III, Interpretation, added a new
§ 233-20 and renumbered former § 233-20 as § 233-21.
§ 233-20 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 233-21
227:561
Chapter 245
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 58.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 112.
Excavations and fill — See Ch. 129.
Historic districts — See Ch. 155.
Junk and junkyards — See Ch. 160.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 189.
On-lot sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
199.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 200.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 213.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 214.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 217.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
§ 233-21 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 233-21
227:562
ARTICLE I
Short Title; Purpose; General Provisions
§ 245-1.1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Allen Township
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 245-1.2. Purposes of enactment.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, proper density of population, civil defense,
disaster evacuation, airports and national defense facilities, the
provision of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking
and loading space, transportation, water, sewage, schools, public
grounds and other public requirements, as well as fire protection.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding, blight, danger
and congestion in travel and transportation, or loss of health, life or
property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. This chapter is enacted as part of the overall plan for the orderly growth
and development of Upper Allen Township and as such seeks to
implement the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan.
D. To protect prime agricultural land.
E. To provide for the protection of natural and historic features and
resources.
F. To encourage the continuity of development and viability of agricultural
operations, the Zoning Ordinance does not restrict agricultural
operations or changes to or expansions of agricultural operations
where agriculture has traditionally been present, unless the
agricultural operation will have a direct adverse effect on the public
health and safety.
G. To protect existing residential neighborhoods.
H. To promote innovative residential design and encourage the creation of
a sense of community.
I. To encourage adaptive reuse of existing vacant structures and infill
development.
J. To provide for the reasonable development of minerals.
K. To be generally consistent with the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 245-1.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-1.3
227:563
§ 245-1.3. Conflicting regulations.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Wherever and whenever
the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted laws, rules, regulations or ordinances, the most
restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
§ 245-1.4. Applicability.
§ 245-1.5. Municipality liability.
The granting of a zoning permit for the erection and/or use of a building
or a lot shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any
kind or nature by the municipality, or an official or employee thereof, of
the safety of any structure, use or other proposed plan from any cause
whatsoever, and shall create no liability upon or a course of action against
such public official or employee for any damage that may be pursuant
thereto.
§ 245-1.6. Community development objectives.
This Zoning chapter is enacted as part of the overall plan for the orderly
growth and development of Upper Allen Township. As such, this chapter
A. Any of the following activities or any other activity regulated by this
chapter shall only be carried out in conformity with this chapter:
(1) Use, occupation, erection, construction, reconstruction, movement,
alteration, razing, demolition, removal, placement of extension
(vertical or horizontal) of a structure, building or sign, unless relief
is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure,
building or area of land.
(3) Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines.
(4) Creation of a new use.
B. This chapter shall not apply to an existing or proposed building or
extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if
upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, after a public hearing, decides that the present or
proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary
for the convenience or welfare of the public. It shall be the
responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to ensure
that both the corporation and Upper Allen Township have notice of the
hearing and are granted an opportunity to appear, present witnesses,
cross-examine witnesses presented by other parties, and otherwise
exercise the rights of a party to the proceedings.
§ 245-1.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-1.6
227:564
is based upon the expressed or implied community development goals and
objectives as contained in the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan of
2013, as amended from time to time.
§ 245-1.7. Definitions.
Definitions shall be in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Ordinance
of Land Use Definitions, Article II, of this chapter.
§ 245-1.8. Disclaimer.
It is recognized that: the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known
as the "Clean Streams Law"150; the Act of May 31, 1945 (P.L. 1198, No.
418), known as the "Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act"151;
the Act of April 27, 1966 (1st Special Session, P.L. 31, No. 1), known as
the "Bituminous Mine Subsidence and Land Conservation Act"152; the Act
of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318), known as the "Coal Refuse
Disposal Control Act"153; the Act of December 19, 1984 (P.L. 1140, No. 223),
known as the "Oil and Gas Act"154; the Act of December 19, 1984 (P.L.
1093, No. 219), known as the "Noncoal Surface Mining Conservation and
Reclamation Act"155; the Act of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43), known as
the "Agricultural Area Security Law"156; the Act of June 10, 1982 (P.L. 454,
No. 133), entitled "An act protecting agricultural operations from nuisance
suits and ordinances under certain circumstances"157; and the Act of May
20, 1993 (P.L. 12, No. 6), known as the "Nutrient Management Act"158
preempt zoning ordinances. Thus, suggestions, recommendations, options
or directives contained herein are intended to be implemented only to the
extent that they are consistent with and do not exceed the requirements of
those Acts. Nothing contrary to those Acts shall be mandated by this Zoning
chapter.
§ 245-1.9. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that if a court of competent
jurisdiction declares any provisions of this chapter to be invalid or
ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited
to those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid
or ineffective, and all other provisions of this chapter shall continue to be
separately and fully effective.
150. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
151. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 1396.1 et seq.
152. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 1406.1 et seq.
153. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
154. Editor's Note: This Act was repealed February 14, 2012, by P.L. 87 No. 13 § 3(2), and
provided that the repeal would take effect in 60 days (April 16, 2012).
155. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 3301 et seq.
156. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 901 et seq.
157. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 951 et seq.
158. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 7-6-2005 by P.L. 112, No. 38. See now 3 Pa.C.S.A. §
501 et seq.
§ 245-1.6 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-1.10
227:565
§ 245-1.10. Repealer.
The preexisting Zoning chapter of Upper Allen Township, as amended, is
hereby expressly repealed; provided, further that nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any permit issued or approved
granted or any cause or causes of action arising prior to the enactment of
this chapter. All ordinances or parts of ordinances and all resolutions or
parts of resolutions which are inconsistent herewith by virtue of references
or incorporation of requirements contained in the preexisting Zoning
chapter as amended shall, as nearly as possible, be construed to reference
this chapter.
§ 245-1.11. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon its enactment by the Upper Allen
Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 245-1.10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-1.11
227:566
ARTICLE II
Land Use Definitions
§ 245-2.1. Word usage and definitions.
A. Word usage. In this chapter, when not inconsistent with the context:
(1) Words in the present tense also imply the future tense.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The male gender includes the female gender.
(4) The word "person" includes a partnership or corporation as well as
an individual.
(5) The term "shall" or "must" is always mandatory.
(6) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
(7) The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied."
(8) The word "erected" shall be construed to include the words
"constructed, altered or moved."
(9) The word "building" shall include any structure or part thereof.
B. Specific words and phrases. The following words are defined in order to
facilitate the interpretation of the chapter for administrative purposes
and in the carrying out of duties by appropriate offices and by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Those vehicles without registration and/or
inspection which have been parked on private and/or public property.
For the purpose of this definition, vehicles missing essential driving
parts shall be considered "abandoned."
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property or a cessation of
the use of the property by the owner with the intention neither of
transferring rights of the property to another owner nor of resuming
the use of the property.
ABUTTING — Having property or district lines in common, or having a
common border with, or being separated from such a common border
by a right-of-way, alley, railroad, waterway, or other easement.
ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTER, MEDICAL MARIJUANA
— An accredited medical school within this Commonwealth that
operates or partners with an acute care hospital licensed within this
Commonwealth.
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or
pedestrian physical entrance and exit to a property.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:567
ACCESS DRIVE — A paved surface or other surface, other than a street,
which provides vehicular and/or pedestrian access from a street or a
private road to a lot or contiguous lots containing any use other than
a single-family dwelling unit or a farm. Access drives shall be located
and constructed so as to provide safe ingress and egress with respect to
the lot. If the access drive provides access to a state highway, issuance
of a highway occupancy permit by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation shall be required prior to the issuance of any permit
under this chapter.
ACCESSORY AGRICULTURAL USE — An agricultural use or building
that specifically supports the agriculture activity on the same farm or
lot.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A second dwelling unit either in or added
to an existing single-family detached dwelling for use as a complete,
independent living facility with provision within the accessory
apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping. Such a dwelling
is an accessory use to the main dwelling.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A building or use customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building
and located on the same lot with the principal use.
ACCESSORY DAY CARE — A subordinate building or a portion of the
main building on a lot which serves primarily as a group day-care
facility, as defined herein, and is accessory to a house of worship, a
place of employment or a public or nonpublic school. A state-licensed
and/or registered facility in which care is provided or is intended to
be provided for six or more children and/or four or more adults in
accordance with the definition of "group day-care home" or "older adult
daily living center" herein.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — See definition of "structure, accessory."
ACT — The latest version of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (MPC), as amended.159
ADAPTIVE REUSE OF FEDERALLY OR LOCALLY DESIGNATED
HISTORIC BUILDINGS — The reuse of a building (designated as an
historic building by the National Register of Historic Places,
Cumberland County Historical Society or a local historic organization)
for one of the following purposes: any permitted use under the district
in which it is located or a cultural facility, including art gallery/studio,
museum, or library.
ADDITION — Any construction which increases the size of a building,
such as a porch, attached garage or carport, or a new room or wing.
ADJOIN — To be separated by common property lines, district lines, lot
lines, rights-of-way, railroad, alley, waterway, or other easement.
159. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:568
ADJUSTED TRACT AREA APPROACH — One of two methods of
determining the maximum number of permitted dwelling units in
conservation subdivisions where the adjusted tract area of the site
equals the gross tract area minus the constrained land on the site. The
actual methodology is provided in § 245-11.7 herein. The other method
is the yield plan.
ADULT REGULATED FACILITY — An establishment open to the general
public of the age of 18 years or older, where more than 20% of the
occupied area of the facility is used for one or more of the following
purposes:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Establishment which offers for sale, for
rent, for lease, for view on the premises or for loan, pictures,
photographs, drawings, sculptures, motion-picture film, or similar
visual representation of sexual conduct or sexual excitement, or
books, pamphlets, magazines, printed matter or sound recordings
containing explicit and detailed descriptions or narrative accounts
of sexual conduct or sexual excitement, or which offers for sale
devices, equipment, stimulants or other materials for use in sexual
conduct or sexual excitement.
(1)
ADULT THEATER — An establishment in which there is offered for
view motion-picture film, videotape or similar visual representation
of sexual conduct or excitement, commonly referred to as "XRated"
movies, peep shows, or the equivalent thereof.
(2)
CABARET — An establishment, club restaurant, theater or hall
which features topless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or
female impersonators or similar entertainers exhibiting specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities for observation by
patrons therein.
(3)
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR or ADULT MASSAGE STUDIO — A
commercial establishment whose business emphasis is the
administration of sexually oriented massage to patrons by
employees.
(4)
The following definitions relate to the further understanding of the
adult regulated facility:
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals
or pubic area or buttocks with less than fully opaque covering
of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple or the
depiction of covered male genital in a discernibly turgid state.
(a)
PORNOGRAPHY — The depiction or dissemination of nudity,
sexual conduct, sadomasochistic abuse or explicit and detailed
verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of nudity, sexual
excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse which,
to the average person applying contemporary community
(b)
(5)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:569
ADVERTISING SIGN — See definition for "sign."
AGENT — Any person other than the developer who, acting for the
developer, submits to the Planning Commission and Township
Commissioners land development plans for the purpose of obtaining
approval thereof.
AGRIBUSINESS — Activities, including the distribution of farm
equipment and supplies, and the processing, storage and distribution of
farm commodities. Agribusiness operations do not include the raising
of live animals or the display and retail sale of agricultural products.
AGRICULTURAL LAND, PRIME (PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND) —
Land used for agricultural purposes that contains soils of the first,
second or third class as defined by the United States Department
of Agriculture natural resource and conservation services county soil
survey.
AGRICULTURE OPERATION — An enterprise that is actively engaged
in the commercial production and preparation for market of crops,
livestock and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and
preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural,
silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The term
includes an enterprise that implements changes in production practices
and procedures or types of crops, livestock, livestock products or
commodities produced consistent with practices and procedures that
are normally engaged in by farmers or are consistent with technological
development within the agricultural industry. See "agriculture,
intensive" for further description of specific agriculture activities.
AGRICULTURE, INTENSIVE (INTENSIVE AGRICULTURAL USE) —
Intensive agricultural uses include, but are not necessarily limited to:
slaughter areas; areas for processing of manure; concentrated animal
feeding operations, as defined herein.
standards, has as its dominant theme, taken as a whole, an
appeal to prurient interest.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or
upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre
costume or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
(c)
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of masturbation, sexual
intercourse or physical contact with a person's clothed or
unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such a person is
female, breast.
(d)
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or
female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.
(e)
Confined livestock operations or concentrated animal feeding
operations (CAFO). Federal regulations define a CAFO as an animal
(1)
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:570
AGRITOURISM ENTERPRISE — An accessory use to an agricultural
operation at which activities are offered to the public or to invited
groups for the purpose of recreation, entertainment, education or
active involvement in agricultural operation. These activities shall be
related to agriculture or natural resources and incidental to the primary
operation of the site. These activities may include a fee for participants.
Uses may include, but are not limited to, hay rides, corn mazes, farm
tours, rodeo, educational exhibits, agriculturally related events,
recreation-related tours and activities.
AIRPORT — A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually
equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various
accommodations for passengers.
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking
spaces.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare other than a side street, which affords
only a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, any change or
rearrangement in the total floor area, in the structural parts, or in the
exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or
by increasing in height, or by moving from one location or position to
another.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders.
AMENDMENT — A change in use in a district which includes revisions
to the zoning text and/or the Official Zoning Map; the authority for any
amendment lies solely with the Township Commissioners.
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA) — Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, Public Law 101-336.
ANIMAL — Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal or any
household pet. Any of a kingdom (Animalia) of living beings typically
feeding operation that: (a) confines more than 1,000 animal units
(AU); or (b) confines between 301 to 1,000 AU and discharges
pollutants into waters of the United States through a man-made
ditch, flushing system or similar man-made device, or directly into
waters of the United States that originate outside of and pass over,
across or through the facility or otherwise come into direct contact
with the animals confined in the operation. Animal quantities
equivalent to 1,000 AU are 1,000 slaughter and feeder cattle; 700
mature dairy cattle; 2,500 swine each weighing more than 25
kilograms (55 pounds); 30,000 laying hens or broilers (if a facility
uses a liquid manure system); and 100,000 laying hens or broilers
(if a facility uses continuous overflow watering).
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:571
differing from plants in capacity for spontaneous movement and motion
in response to stimulation.
ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (AFO) — Federal regulations define an
AFO as a facility where animals have been, are or will be stabled or
confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any
twelve-month period, and where crops, vegetation, forage growth, or
post-harvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season
over any portion of the lot or facility.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building used for the treatment, housing or
boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and
birds or fowl by a veterinarian. Boarding of such animals shall be for
medical or surgical treatment only.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The care, raising, and keeping of livestock
(animals such as cattle, sheep and swine) and poultry with the intent
of producing capital gain or profit or the intent of selling any livestock
or poultry products, provided that the keeping of livestock or poultry as
farm pets or for domestic purposes pursuant to the regulations of this
chapter shall not be construed as animal husbandry.
ANIMAL WASTE (MANURE) STORAGE FACILITIES — A detached
structure or other improvement built to store manure for future use
or disposal. Types of storage facilities are as follows: underground
storage, in-ground storage, trench silo, earthen bank, stacking area,
and aboveground storage.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels,
dishes, whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or
reception of wireless signals. An antenna may include an
omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic
antenna (disc) or any other wireless antenna. An antenna shall not
include tower-based wireless communications facilities.
APARTMENT — A building occupied by three or more dwelling units
(see "dwelling").
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application for development, including his or her personal
representatives, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to the
start of construction or development, including, but not limited to, an
APARTMENT, CONVERSION — A multifamily dwelling constructed
by converting an existing single-family dwelling into no more than
two additional dwelling units, which does not substantially alter the
exterior of the building.
(1)
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building arranged, intended or designed
to be occupied by three or more families living independently of
each other.
(2)
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:572
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plot
or plan, or for the approval of a development plan.
APPROXIMATED FLOODPLAIN — Those portions of land within the
FP-Floodplain District subject to inundation by the one-hundred-year
flood where a detailed study has not yet been performed but where a
one-hundred-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Where
the specific one-hundred-year flood elevation cannot be determined for
this unique area using other sources of data such as the United States
Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, United States
Geological Survey Flood Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant
for the proposed use, development, and/or activity shall determine
this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Only professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications shall undertake hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Township. In addition, information from other federal,
state and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine a
floodway area, if possible.
ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL — Regulations governing the appearance
or architectural style of buildings or structures.
AREA — The total outside surface of anything, as measured in square
feet.
AVERAGE GROSS RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling
units per acre in a planned residential development, computed by
dividing the number of dwelling units which the applicant proposes to
construct by the number of acres in the development which are not
planned to be devoted to commercial use. If the developer is required
to dedicate land for sites for schools or other public facilities, such land
shall be included in the total land area used in computing maximum
permissible average gross density. If he is required to set aside land for
such purposes, it shall not be included in the computation of average
gross density. If such land is not acquired by the appropriate body by
the date of the sale or rental of 51% of the dwelling units in the planned
residential development, then, at the option of the developer, the land
may be used for residential purposes, subject to the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of
individual parcels of land shown on a subdivision plan, excluding
any area within a street right-of-way and including the area of any
easement or future street right-of-way.
(1)
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane
at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps
(gross living area).
(2)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:573
BAFFLE — A freestanding randomly located structure, fence-like in
nature and materials of construction, except that it is not normally
attached to any building, does not particularly follow lot lines, nor
enclose a particular area, but rather screens one segment of one
property from another for the primary purpose of ensuring privacy;
a baffle or screen of this nature may be utilized for the support of
various types of living plant materials such as vines, climbing roses or
espaliered trees and shrubs.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 or
more of its height (measured from floor to ceiling) above the average
level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story
for the purpose of height measurement if the vertical distance between
the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than
five feet or if used for business or dwelling purposes, other than a game
or recreation room.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME — An owner-occupied residence where
not more than five guest rooms are rented to not more than 10
overnight guests on a daily basis for periods not exceeding one week.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INNS — An owner-occupied residence where
not more than 10 guest rooms are rented to not more than 20 overnight
guests on a daily basis for periods not exceeding one week.
BERM — A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to obstruct
views.
BILLBOARD — See "sign."
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded on one side by a street and on
the other sides (normally three) by streets, railroad rights-of-way,
waterways, unsubdivided areas and other definite barriers.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Upper Allen.
BOARD or ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Upper Allen Township
Zoning Hearing Board.
BOARDING STABLE — A structure designed for the feeding, housing
and exercising of horses not owned by the owner of the premises and
for which the owner of the premises receives compensation.
BOARDINGHOUSE — An owner-occupied housing unit where, for
compensation, provisions are made for lodging and meals for no more
than five persons in an existing building and its appurtenant structures
specifically designed or otherwise suitable in whole or in part for the
accommodation of roomers.
BUFFER AREA — A strip of land which is planted and maintained in
shrubs, bushes, trees, grass or other landscaping material and within
which no structure is permitted except a wall or fence.
BUFFER YARD — An open area whose dimensions normally exceed
the normal building setback or yard requirement used to protect low-
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:574
density uses and zoning districts from adjacent higher-density uses and
districts.
BUILDING — Any structure on a lot having a roof supported by columns
or walls and designed and/or intended for the shelter, housing or
enclosure of persons, animals or chattel and including covered porches
or bay windows and chimneys. Multiple structures connected with a
covered walkway shall be considered as one building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal area measured within the
outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and
accessory buildings on a lot.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line set
so as to provide the required yard.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE (SETBACK) — The line within a property
defining the required minimum distance between any enclosed
structure and the adjacent right-of-way, and the line defining side and
rear yards, where required.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building
nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and
covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include
steps.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The mean grade at the front of the structure
to the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A structure enclosed within exterior walls
or fire walls; built, erected and framed of component structural parts,
designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure, and support of individuals,
animals or property of any kind; main structure on a given lot; a
building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is
situated.
BUSINESS SERVICES — Those activities limited to the service and
repair of furniture, office equipment, medical supplies and equipment
and commercial appliances; the supply and servicing of vending
machines; frozen food lockers; the painting and assembly of signs;
printing, copy and photocopying services; arts, crafts, drafting and
stationary supplies; food catering; interior decorating; taxidermy;
upholstering and personal dry-cleaning services. Uses which shall not
be interpreted to be business service establishments are retail shops
and stores; gasoline and motor vehicle stations; vehicular sales, service
and repair; mortuaries; warehouses and distribution facilities; and
contractor's offices.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches six inches
above ground level for trees up to four inches in diameter and 12 inches
above ground level for trees over four inches in diameter.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:575
CAMP or CAMPGROUND — A state-permitted facility, through the
Pennsylvania Department of Health, in which a portion of land is used
for the purpose of providing a space for trailers or tents for camping
purposes, regardless of whether a fee has been charged for the leasing,
renting or occupancy of the space, in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Code, Title 28, Chapter 19. The campground may be an organized camp
which includes a combination of programs and facilities established for
the primary purpose of providing an outdoor group living experience
for children, youth and adults with social, recreational, and educational
objectives and operated and used for five or more consecutive days
during one or more seasons a year.
CAREGIVER, MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The individual designated by a
patient to deliver medical marijuana.
CARPORT — An accessory building or part of the main structure open
on three sides and primarily designed or used for parking automobiles.
CARTWAY or ROADWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way which is
paved, improved, designated or intended for vehicular traffic.
CELLAR (BASEMENT) — A story partly underground having more than
1/2 of its clear height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
A cellar shall not be considered in determining the required number of
stories.
CEMETERY — A parcel of land used as a burial ground for human or
animal remains.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — The certificate issued
by a duly authorized Township officer which permits the use of a
building in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and
which certifies compliance with the provisions of law for the use and
occupancy of the land and structure in its several parts, together with
any special stipulations or conditions of the building permit.
CERTIFIED MEDICAL USE, MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The acquisition,
possession, use or transportation of medical marijuana by a patient, or
the acquisition, possession, delivery, transportation or administration of
medical marijuana by a caregiver, for use as part of the treatment of the
patient's serious medical condition, as authorized by certification by the
Commonwealth.
CHANGE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A statement or permit signed
by a duly authorized Township officer, setting forth that a building,
structure or use legally complies with the Zoning Ordinance and other
applicable codes and regulations and that the same may be used for the
purposes stated therein.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by the center lines of the streets and by a line of
sight between points on their center lines at a given distance from the
intersection of the center lines.
CLINICAL REGISTRANT, MEDICAL MARIJUANA — An entity that:
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:576
CLUB, CLUBHOUSE or LODGE, PRIVATE — A building, structure, or
part thereof, used to house an organization catering exclusively to
members and their guests, or premises or buildings for social,
recreational and administrative purposes which are not conducted for
profit, provided there are not conducted any vending stands,
merchandising or commercial activities except as required for the
membership or fund-raising of such club. Clubs shall include, but not be
limited to, service and political organizations, labor unions, as well as
social and athletic clubs. This definition does not include "night clubs."
The private clubs or lodges, as defined, shall not be an adjunct to,
operated by or in connection with a tavern, cafe or other public place.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including
antennae, on an existing tower-based WCF, or on any structure that has
been approved by the Township.
COLLEGES or UNIVERSITIES — See "school, college."
COMMERCIAL, RECREATIONAL or ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — A
building housing an activity operated as a business, open to the public
for the purpose of public recreation or entertainment, including, but
not limited to, bowling alleys, theaters, swimming pools, health clubs,
museums, etc. This does not include adult-related uses, amusement
arcades, nightclubs or golf courses, as defined herein.
COMMISSION — The Upper Allen Township Planning Commission,
unless otherwise noted.
COMMISSION STAFF — The Township of Upper Allen Engineer, Zoning
Officer and/or other personnel retained by the Planning Commission.
COMMISSIONERS — Upper Allen Township Board of Commissioners.
COMMON AREA — The area in a subdivision or planned residential
development, including common open space, owned or leased and
maintained by an association or other combination of persons for the
benefit of the residents of the planned residential development and, if
owned under the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act, including all common
elements designated for the use of all dwelling unit owners.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Includes:
(1) Holds a permit both as a grower/processor and a dispensary; and
Has a contractual relationship with an academic clinical research
center under which the academic clinical research center or its
affiliate provides advice to the entity, regarding, among other
areas, patient health and safety, medical applications and
dispensing and management of controlled substances.
(2)
The land on which a building is located and portions of the building
which are not included in a unit;
(1)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:577
COMMON FACILITIES — When referring to a development, these
facilities are common or community open space, recreational facilities,
community sewage facilities, community water supply facilities,
stormwater management facilities, common parking areas and
driveways, preservation areas, private streets, or other community
facilities.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area
of water, or a combination of land and water, within a development
plan, designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of
the development plan and, where designed, the community at large.
Common open space does not include rights-of-way, off-street parking
areas, and areas set aside for public facilities. Common open space
shall be substantially free of structures, but may contain such
improvements as approved in the development plan that are
appropriate to recreational and other open-space uses of the land,
and shall not include playground, athletic field or other open space
areas of any schools or churches to be included within the proposed
development.
COMMUNICATION FACILITIES (PUBLICLY REGULATED) — Including
telephone or telegraph exchanges, communications antenna, which are
regulated by the Pennsylvania Utilities Commission (PUC).
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, WIRELESS — See "wireless
communications facility (WCF)."
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature from two or more lots and the treatment and/or disposal
of the sewage or industrial waste on one or more of the lots or at any
other site, and which shall comply with all applicable regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A public or private utility
system designated to transmit potable water from a common source
to multiple users. Such systems shall be in compliance with the
The foundations, structural parts, supports, main walls, roofs,
basements, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairways and entrances and
exits of a building;
(2)
(3) The yards, parking area and driveways;
Portions of land and building used exclusively for the management,
operation or maintenance of the common elements;
(4)
(5) Installations of all central services and utilities;
All other elements of a building necessary or convenient to its
existence, management, operation, maintenance and safety or
normally in common use; and
(6)
(7) Such other facilities as are designated as "common elements."
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:578
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) or the Township,
whichever is more stringent.
COMPOSTING — The mixing of decomposing refuse matter for the
purpose of creating fertilizer material.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official public document prepared in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
of July 31, 1968, P. L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted,160
consisting of maps, charts and textual material, that constitutes
decisions about the physical and social development of the Township of
Upper Allen, as amended from time to time.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary presentation and attendant
documentation of a proposed subdivision or site plan of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which the Board of Commissioners is
permitted to authorize in specific instances listed in this chapter, under
the terms, procedures and conditions prescribed herein.
CONDOMINIUM — Ownership in common with others of a parcel of
land and certain parts of a building thereon which would normally be
used by all the occupants, together with individual ownership in fee
of a particular unit or apartment in such building or on such parcel
of land and may include dwellings, offices and other types of space in
commercial buildings or on property.
CONSERVATION AREAS — Undeveloped and undisturbed areas set
aside for the preservation and/or continuation of the natural
environment, to promote recreational use, agricultural use and
retention of open space and undeveloped floodplain areas and to
provide areas of wildlife habitat.
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION — A land development process that
seeks to identify and permanently protect special natural and/or
environmental features and open space in designated conservation
areas, greenway areas or preserves.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
CONSTRUCTION, NEW — For the purpose of complying with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, new
construction shall be identified as structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after January 30, 1980, and includes any
subsequent improvements thereto.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A community
licensed by the appropriate commonwealth agencies offering a range
of housing, support and health care services so older people do not
160. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:579
have to move when their needs change. Many offer independent living
(single or multifamily units) and personal care units as well as longterm
care nursing centers, all at one campus and developed as a
planned unit development.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — A tract of land where a dealer stores new
and/or used material, machinery, equipment and other supplies for
use by builders, developers, erectors, excavators and other artisans.
Such material, machinery, equipment and other supplies may be made
available for wholesale or retail purposes or rental programs.
CONVENIENCE STORE, WITH OR WITHOUT GAS DISPENSING — An
establishment that primarily sells routine household goods, groceries,
magazines, lottery tickets, prepared ready-to-eat foods, drinks, and
similar miscellaneous items to the general public, but that is not
primarily a restaurant. A convenience store may involve the sale of
gasoline. This term does not include a business which is solely or
primarily a restaurant, a business which has at least 10,000 square feet
of retail floor space, and specifically prohibits the repair of automobiles
and the storage of inoperable automobiles on site.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
development or conservation subdivisions.
CONVERSION APARTMENT — See "apartment, conversion."
COOPERATIVE — Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land
and of a building or buildings thereon which would normally be used
by all the occupants, together with individual rights of occupancy of a
particular unit or apartment in such building or buildings or on such
parcel of land, and may include dwellings, offices and other types of
space in commercial buildings or on property, and where the lease,
sale or exchange of a unit is subject to the agreement of the group of
persons having common ownership.
COUNTY — County of Cumberland, Pennsylvania.
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same
lot with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls
of such buildings.
COURT, INNER — A court which does not extend to a street, alley, yard
or outer court.
COURT, OUTER — A court which extends to a street, alley, yard or other
outer court.
COVERAGE — That portion or percentage of the plot or lot covered by
the building area.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and having the other
end for the reversal of traffic movement.
CULTURAL FACILITIES — Includes art galleries/studios, auditoriums,
museums, community centers, adult education centers or other similar
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:580
facilities open to the public or connected with a permitted educational,
philanthropic or religious use.
CURB — The raised edge of a pavement to confine surface water to the
pavement and to protect the abutting land from vehicular traffic.
CURBLINE — The outside edge of the cartway.
DAY CARE — Care provided for individuals, either children or adults,
by an unrelated individual. Care is provided for part of a twenty-fourhour
day. The following definitions apply to different types of child
and adult day care in accordance with Chapter 3270, Child Day Care
Centers, of Title 55, Public Welfare, of the Pennsylvania Code, and the
Pennsylvania Department of Aging, Pennsylvania Code, Title 6, Chapter
11, as revised or amended.
GROUP DAY-CARE CENTER — A state-certified facility, not used as
a family residence, providing care for six or more children.
DAY-CARE HOME — A state-certified facility in which care is
provided at one time for more than six but fewer than 16 older
school-age-level children or more than six but fewer than 11
children of another age level who are unrelated to the operator,
including:
Care provided to a child at the parent's work site when the
parent is not present in the child-care space.
[1]
Care provided in private or public, profit or nonprofit
facilities.
[2]
Care provided before or after the hours of instruction
in nonpublic schools and in private nursery schools and
kindergartens.
[3]
(a)
OLDER ADULT DAILY LIVING CENTERS — A facility licensed
through the Pennsylvania Department of Aging and operated
for profit or not-for-profit to provide daily living services for
part of twenty-four-hour day to four or more older adults who
are 60 years of age or older or 18 years and older with a
dementia-related disease and who are not a relative of the
operator, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Code, Title 6,
Chapter 11, as revised or amended.
(b)
(1)
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A state-certified single-family home
operated for profit or not-for-profit, in which child day care is
provided for no more than six children at one time, including
those residing in the home under the age of 16 years. The family
day care shall be an accessory use to the residential dwelling,
and operated by the owner of the property or legal renter of the
dwelling. The family day care shall meet all state and federal
licensing and registration requirements and shall provide proof of
compliance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:581
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any successor agency.
DCNR — The Department of Conservation and Natural Resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any successor agency.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance of this chapter to do so,
either by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of
appeals from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the
Court of Common Pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the
municipality lies.
DECK or PATIO — A platform which is not covered by a roof or
permanent awning and is designed, intended or used for outdoor living
purposes as an accessory use to a structure.
DEDICATION — An act transmitting property or interest thereto.
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any successor agency.
DESIGN FLOOD — The relative size or magnitude of a major flood of
reasonable expectancy which reflects both flood experience and flood
potential and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway, the flood
hazard area, and the water surface elevations.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Standards that set forth specific improvement
requirements.
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural water-collector facility
designed to collect surface and subsurface water in order to impede
its flow and to release the same gradually at a rate not greater than
that prior to the development of the property into natural or man-made
outlets.
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged
with the administration of any land use ordinance or applications
thereunder, except the following: the Commissioners; or the Zoning
Hearing Board. Determinations shall be appealable only to the Boards
designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or land development or submits a development plan
under the terms of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — A planning or construction project involving
substantial property improvement and, usually, a change of land use
character within the site; the act of using land for building or extractive
purposes.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT — A zoning and/or building permit
authorizing the construction, repair, demolition, relocation and
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:582
reconstruction of a structure, or any other permit requested or issued
in connection with any of the activities defined under "development"
herein.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of land under
the provisions of this chapter, including a plat of subdivision; all
covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other
structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways
and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The
phrase "provisions of the development plan," when used in this chapter,
shall mean both the written and graphic materials referred to in this
definition.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Zoning, subdivision, site plan,
Official Map, floodplain regulation, or other governmental regulation of
the use and development of land.
DISPENSARY, MEDICAL MARIJUANA — A person, including a natural
person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or
any combination thereof, which holds a permit issued by the
Department of Health (DOH) of the Commonwealth to dispense medical
marijuana. For purposes of this chapter, this use shall meet the
requirements of retail establishments.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — A network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
DISTRICT ZONE — A district includes all buildings, lots and surface
areas within certain designated boundaries as indicated on the Zoning
Map.
DISTURBANCE OF VEGETATIVE COVER — Removal, destruction or
damaging of plants, including trees, shrubs herbaceous growth, by
methods including, but not limited to, cutting, bulldozing, plowing,
regrading, digging or intensive use of herbicides (in which selective
species are intended to be eradicated or which the intent is to
defoliate).
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL — A relatively docile animal kept by humans
for work or food or as a pet, especially one of a breed notably different
from the wild form.
DORMITORY — A building used as living quarters for a student body,
religious order, or other group as an associated use to a college,
university, boarding school, or orphanage, convent, monastery, farm
labor camp, or other similar use. Dormitories may include a group
kitchen facility to serve all residents. Dormitories constructed as part
of a college or university may include kitchen facilities for groups or
residents.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot fronting on two streets other than a
corner lot.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:583
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading, or other means.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, pipe, culvert, storm sewer
or other structure designed, intended, or constructed for the purpose
of diverting surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets,
public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas, or any part of any land
development or contiguous land areas.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial business, including an
eating establishment, offering refreshments, entertainment or services
to patrons, who purchase and/or consume such refreshments,
entertainment or services on the premises and/or outside of the
building, including patrons who may be served in their automobiles.
DRIVE-IN FACILITIES FOR PERMITTED USES — Accessory to the
permitted use to provide additional services for public use.
DRIVE-IN STAND — A building no larger than 400 square feet for the
sale of farm, nursery or greenhouse products produced on the premises
where offered for sale; not to be located closer than 50 feet to any
intersection nor within 10 feet of any right-of-way.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a
residential parking space, garage, single-family dwelling, two-family
dwelling or other residential accessory structure within a lot or
property.
DRIVEWAY/ACCESS ROAD — A cartway or traveled path, improved
or unimproved, by means of which ingress and egress to and from
private property is gained and which intersects with a Township, state
or county right-of-way.
DRUGSTORE — A retail store where medicines, prescriptions and
miscellaneous articles such as food, cosmetics and film are sold.
DRY SPACE — Definitions related to floodplain management
regulations, including completely and essentially dry spaces, as follows:
DUSK — The state or period of partial darkness between day and night.
DWELLING — A building or structure designed for living quarters
for one or more families, including manufactured homes which are
supported either by a foundation or are otherwise permanently
attached to the land, but not including hotels, boardinghouses/rooming
houses or other accommodations used for transient occupancy.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally
dry during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to
prevent the passage of water and water vapor into said structure.
(1)
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space that will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor
seepage into the structure; the structure is substantially
impermeable to the passage of water.
(2)
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:584
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more one-family or multiple
dwelling structures occupying a lot under one ownership and having
any yard in common.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes and having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities and toilet
and bathroom facilities and arranged for occupancy by not more than
one family.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOUSING — Any structure designed
primarily for residential occupancy, which is wholly or in substantial
part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities
for installation or assembly and installation on the building site in such
a manner that all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot
be inspected at the site without disassembly, damage or destruction.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building designed, occupied or used
by three or more families living independently of each other, wherein
each dwelling unit or apartment shall contain private bath and kitchen
facilities; including apartment houses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSE/ROW
HOUSE) — A dwelling designed, occupied or used by one family, having
two party walls in common with other buildings and no side yards,
commonly called "row houses" or "townhouses," except that end units
have one party wall.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED — A building used by one
family, having only one dwelling unit, and having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, SEMIDETACHED — A building used by
one family, having one side yard and one party wall in common with
another building.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) — A building used by two
families, with one dwelling unit arranged on top of each other and
having two side yards, or one dwelling unit arranged beside the other
and having one side yard and one party wall in common with the other
dwelling unit.
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION — A legal agreement a property owner
makes to restrict the type and amount of development that may take
place on his or her property. The easement spells out the rights the
landowner retains and the restrictions on use of the property.
EASEMENT, UTILITY — A right-of-way granted for the limited use of
land for public, quasi-public or private purposes.
EDGE OF ROOF — On a pitched roof, the lowest portion of the fascia
board covering the roof rafters or, if no fascia board exists, the lowest
point of the roof rafters. On a flat roof, the top of the parapet wall or
three feet above the roof deck, whichever is less.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment for purposes
other than generation or utilization, through which electric energy
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:585
in bulk is passed for the purposes of switching or modifying its
characteristics to meet the needs of the general public.
EMERGENCY — A condition that constitutes a clear and immediate
danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public or has caused or
is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and result
in loss of the services provided.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TREATMENT FACILITY — Any building or
group of buildings occupied by medical practitioners and related
services for the purpose of providing emergency health service to
people on an outpatient basis.
ENGINEER, REGISTERED — See "professional engineer."
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — A professional engineer, licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for
the Township.
ENGINEERING LAND SURVEYS — Surveys for the development of any
tract of land, including the incidental design of related improvements,
such as line and grade extension of roads, sewers and grading but
not requiring independent engineering judgment; provided, however,
that tract perimeter surveys shall be functions of the professional land
surveyor; the determination of the configuration or contour of the
earth's surface, or the position of fixed object thereon or related thereto
by means of measuring lines and angles and applying the principles
of mathematics, photogrammetry or other measurement methods;
geodetic or cadastral survey, underground survey and hydrographic
survey; sedimentation and erosion control surveys; the determination
of the quantities of materials; tests for water percolation in soils; and
the preparation of plans and specifications and estimates of proposed
work as described in this subsection.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS — Features, natural resources or
land characteristics that are sensitive to improvements and may require
conservation measures or the application of creative development
techniques to prevent degradation of the environment, or may require
limited development, or in certain instances may preclude
development.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT — An assessment of the
impact of a use on the natural environment, i.e., geology, topography,
soils, hydrology, vegetation, wildlife, wetlands, and air quality; and
the cultural environment, i.e., lot use, utilities, traffic, population,
economics, services, historic assets, and general character of the
neighborhood. The assessment of traffic impact must include a
complete traffic analysis prepared and sealed by a professional traffic
engineer, identifying the impact of the proposed development on
existing traffic and circulation patterns and proposing solutions to
problems which may arise as consequence of the proposed
development.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:586
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — An area with one or more
of the following environmental characteristics: floodway, rock
outcroppings, steep slope, one-hundred-year floodplain or wetlands.
ESCROW — A deed, a bond, money or a piece of property delivered to a
third person to be delivered by him to the grantee only upon fulfillment
of a condition.
EXACTION — A contribution or payment required as an authorized
precondition for receiving a development permit.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXOTIC WILDLIFE — Includes, but is not limited to, reptiles and all
bears, coyotes, lions, tigers, leopards, jaguars, cheetahs, cougars,
wolves and any crossbreed of these animals which have similar
characteristics in appearance or features. The definition is applicable
whether or not the birds, animals or reptiles were bred or reared in
captivity or imported from another state or nation.
EXTRACTIVE OPERATIONS — Includes any open excavations such as
quarries, strip mines, and borrow pits.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal
guardianship, licensed or court-appointed foster care or legal adoption,
including any domestic servants or gratuitous guests thereof, who
maintain one common household and reside in one dwelling unit; or
no more than two persons who are not related to each other by blood,
marriage, legal guardianship, licensed or court-appointed foster care,
or legal adoption, in addition to any respective minor children, domestic
servants or gratuitous guests thereof, residing in one dwelling unit and
living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit. A roomer,
boarder or lodger is not considered a family member; any number of
persons possessing a handicap within the meaning of the Fair Housing
Act [42 U.S.C. § 3602(h), or successor legislation] who reside in one
dwelling unit and live and cook together as a single housekeeping unit.
FAMILY CARE FACILITY — A dwelling inhabited by a group of people
who are not handicapped, without regard for age, with or without
specialized needs, who are unrelated or related by legal marriage,
birth or adoption, and who are not afforded protection by the Fair
Housing Act. This group of people typically requires extended periods
of or twenty-four-hour adult supervision and guidance by persons who
may be, but are typically not, legal custodians. This definition does not
include persons occupying a hotel, dormitory, lodge or boarding home.
FARM — Any parcel of land which is used for agriculture operations as
defined herein.
FARM PRODUCT, VALUE-ADDED — A product processed by a producer
from a farm product, including, but not limited to, baked goods, jams
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:587
and jellies, canned vegetables, dried fruit, syrups, salsas, salad
dressings, flours, cheeses, milk products, coffee and other beverages,
smoked or canned meats or fish, sausages, or prepared foods.
FARM PRODUCTS — Items sold at a farmers market from a producer.
Farm products shall include, but are not limited to, agricultural
products such as fruits, vegetables, mushrooms, herbs, nuts, eggs,
honey or other bee products, flowers, nursery stock, livestock food
products (including meat, milk, cheese and other dairy products), and
seafood.
FARMERS MARKET — A retail sales use operated by a governmental
agency, a nonprofit organization, or one or more producers that
primarily sells farm products and value-added farm products directly
to consumers. Farmers markets can include indoor and outdoor display
and sales. A farmers market may be a principal or accessory use of a
site.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
FENCES — Any freestanding and uninhabitable device supported by
posts and constructed of wood, glass, metal, plastic materials, wire,
wire mesh or masonry, singly or in combination, erected for the purpose
of screening or dividing one property from another to ensure privacy or
to protect the property so screened or divided or to define and mark the
property line when such device is permitted to be erected on or within
two feet of any front, side or rear line; for the purpose of this chapter, a
freestanding masonry wall when so located is considered to be a fence;
also for the purpose of this chapter, when the term "lot line" is used
in relation to fences, it shall be synonymous with "rear lot lines," "side
yard lines," and "front lot lines."
FINDING — A determination or conclusion based on the evidence
presented and prepared by a hearings body in support of its decision.
FLAG LOT — See "lot, flag."
FLOOD BOUNDARY, FIVE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The outer boundary of
an area of land that is likely to be flooded once every 500 years (i.e.,
that has 1/5 of one-percent chance of being flooded each year). A
study by the Federal Insurance Administration, the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, the United States Department of Agriculture's
Soil Conservation Service, the United States Geological Survey, the
Susquehanna River Basin Commission, the Department of
Environmental Protection, or a licensed professional registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such a study is necessary to
define this boundary.
FLOOD BOUNDARY, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The outer boundary of
an area of land that is likely to be flooded once every 100 years
(i.e., that has a one-percent chance of being flooded each year). A
study by the Federal Insurance Administration, the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, the United States Department of Agriculture's
Soil Conservation Service, the United States Geological Survey, the
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:588
Susquehanna River Basin Commission, the Department of
Environmental Protection, or a licensed professional registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such a study is necessary to
define its boundary.
FLOOD ELEVATION, FIVE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The water surface
elevations of the five-hundred-year flood.
FLOOD ELEVATION, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The water surface
elevations of the one-hundred-year flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map indicating that an official
flood hazard may be issued or approved by the Federal Insurance
Administrator.
FLOOD OF RECORD — The flood which has reached the highest flood
elevation above mean sea level at a particular location.
FLOOD, FIVE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood which is likely to be equaled
or exceeded once every 500 years (i.e., that has a 1/5 of one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A study by
the Federal Insurance Administration, the United States Army Corps
of Engineers, the United States Department of Agriculture's Soil
Conservation Service, the United States Geological Survey, the
Susquehanna River Basin Commission, the Department of
Environmental Protection, or a licensed professional registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such a study is necessary to
define this flood.
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR (BASE FLOOD) — A flood which is
likely to be equaled or exceeded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a
one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year). A
study by the Federal Insurance Administration, the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, the United States Department of Agriculture's
Soil Conservation Service, the United States Geological Survey, the
Susquehanna River Basin Commission, the Department of
Environmental Protection, or a licensed professional registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such a study is necessary to
define this flood.
FLOODPLAIN — A floodplain may be either or a combination of a
relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete
inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse,
during a one-hundred-year-design-frequency storm any area subject to
the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from
any source.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A land area adjoining a river,
stream, watercourse, ocean, bay or lake which is likely to be flooded.
Floodplain area special flood hazards means that maximum area of the
floodplain that, on average, is likely to be flooded once every 100 years
(i.e., that has a one-percent chance of being flooded each year).
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:589
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduces or
eliminates flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. With regard to
nonresidential structures, the term "floodproofing" shall also mean that
the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
be designed so that any space below the regulatory flood elevation
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydromatic loads and effects of buoyancy.
FLOODWAY — The areas identified as floodway in the Flood Insurance
Study prepared by the FEMA. The term shall also include floodway
areas which have been identified in the other available studies or
sources of information for those floodplain areas where no floodway has
been identified in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — Those portions of land within the FP-Floodplain
District subject to inundations by the one-hundred-year flood, beyond
the floodway in areas where detailed study and profiles are available.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING (GROSS) — The sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of a building and its accessory
buildings on the same lot, excluding cellar and basement floor areas
not devoted to residential use, but including the area of roofed porches
and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior
faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA RETAIL, NET — All that space relegated to use by the
customer and the retail employee to consummate retail sales and to
include display area used to indicate the variety of goods available for
the customer, but not to include office space, storage space and other
general administrative areas.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The aggregate of the horizontal areas of
all rooms used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen,
bedroom, but not including hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service
rooms or utility rooms, closets, nor unheated areas such as enclosed
porches. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have
a ceiling height of not less than six feet, and floor area of that part of
any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be
considered as part of the habitable floor area.
FLOOR, LOWEST — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental
storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.
FLORIST — One who sells or grows for sale flowers and ornamental
plants.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:590
FORESTRY (TIMBER HARVESTING) — The management of forests and
timberlands, when practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural
principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting
and selling trees for commercial purposes, which does not involve land
development.
FORM OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The characteristics of the medical
marijuana recommended or limited for a particular patient, including
the method of consumption and any particular dosage, strain, variety
and quantity or percentage of medical marijuana or particular active
ingredient.
FRONTAGE — The horizontal or curvilinear distance along the street
line upon which a lot abuts.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way width required for the
expansion of existing streets to accommodate anticipated future traffic
loads; a right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
GARAGE —
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
storage, sale, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. (Also see "solid
waste.")
GARDEN STRUCTURES — Any accessory structure which may be used
or occupied for other than sleeping or general housekeeping purposes.
GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or vegetables,
excluding the keeping of livestock.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A building on a lot or part thereof
that is used primarily for the retail sale of gasoline, oil or other fuel
and which may include facilities used for polishing, greasing, washing,
dry-cleaning or otherwise cleaning or servicing automobiles and other
vehicles, not to include mechanical repairs or body work.
GOLF COURSE — Any regulation eighteen-hole, nine-hole or executive
(par three) golf course, including any driving ranges, chip-n-putt, ninehole,
or miniature golf courses.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Upper Allen, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building for the storage of one
or more motor vehicles accessory and incidental to the primary use
of the premises, provided that no business, occupation or service is
conducted for profit therein.
(1)
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage not a private garage and which is
used for storage, repair, rental, servicing or supplying of gasoline
or oil to motor vehicles.
(2)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:591
GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY — Any federal, state or local agency
having authority over health factors, such as sewers, water and other
related matters.
GREENWAYS — A greenway may be any one or combination of the
following:
GROSS BUILDING AREA — The total area of a building available
for construction or use, as measured from the exterior walls of the
building. Gross building area should be used in computing all square
footage measurements for buildings as well as dimension requirements.
GROUND FLOOR — The floor of a building nearest the mean grade of
the front of the building.
GROUP CARE FACILITY — A facility providing shelter, counseling,
and other rehabilitative services in a family-like environment for more
than nine but fewer than 15 residents, plus such minimum supervisory
personnel as may be required to meet standards of the licensing
agency. Residents may not be legally related to the facility operators or
supervisors and, by reason of mental or physical disability, chemical or
alcohol dependency, or family or school adjustment problems, require a
minimal level of supervision but do not require medical or nursing care
or general supervision. A group care facility must be licensed and/or
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
GROUP HOME — A dwelling inhabited by handicapped persons, as
identified and provided for by the Fair Housing Act and this chapter.
This definition does not include persons occupying a hotel, dormitory,
lodge, halfway house, boardinghouse or institution. A group home
involves persons functioning as a common household unit, providing
nonroutine support services and oversight to persons who need such
assistance to avoid being placed within an institution because of
physical disability, old age, or mental retardation/developmental
disability, or that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer meets the definition of "handicap," as defined by applicable
federal law. (Note: The Federal Fair Housing Act amendments define
"handicap" as follows: "(1) a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, (2)
a record of having such an impairment, or (3) being regarded as having
A linear open space established along either a natural corridor,
such as a riverfront, stream valley or ridgeline, or over land along
a railroad right-of-way converted to recreational use, a canal, a
scenic road, or other route;
(1)
(2) A natural or landscaped course for pedestrian or bicycle passage;
An open space connector linking parks, natural reserves, cultural
features or historic sites with each other and with populated areas;
and
(3)
(4) Strip or linear parks designated as a parkway or greenbelt.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:592
such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use
of or addiction to a controlled substance (as defined in section 802 of
Title 21)."161 This definition was subsequently adjusted by Section 512
of the Americans with Disabilities Act162 to address certain situations
related to substance abuse treatment.
GROUP QUARTERS — Any dwelling or portion thereof which is
designed or used for persons unrelated to each other occupying the
dwelling unit and having common eating facilities. Group quarters
include, but are not limited to, boardinghouses or lodging houses,
fraternity and sorority houses, theme houses and other quarters of an
institutional nature. Group quarters owned and operated by a parent
religious, educational, charitable or philanthropic institution. Group
quarters shall exclude hotels, motels, dormitories, emergency shelters,
student housing, nursing facilities and personal care facilities. In
zoning districts where group quarters are permitted, other than
institutional, group quarters shall be limited to no more than 10
persons.
GROWER/PROCESSOR, MEDICAL MARIJUANA — A person, including
a natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other
entity, or any combination thereof, which holds a permit from the DOH
to grow and process medical marijuana. For purposes of this chapter,
this use shall meet the requirements of manufacturing uses.
HALFWAY HOUSE — A noninstitutional living arrangement with
treatment and support services for persons with substance abuse
problems or for inmates and parolees approaching parole release date
or release from a corrections institution. The halfway house
(community corrections center) operates under the rules and
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Health or Department
of Corrections or similar authorities. The residents are provided fulltime
supervision and counseling on employment, vocations, finances
and community living.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Materials which are classified by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, or the Township as having
the potential to damage health or impair safety. Hazardous materials
include, but are not limited to, inorganic mineral acids or sulphur,
fluorine, chlorine, nitrogen, chromium, phosphorous, selenium, arsenic
and their common salts, lead, coal tar acids, such as phenols and
cresols and their salts, petroleum products, and radioactive material.
Also included are floatable materials with the potential to cause
physical damage, such as logs, storage tanks and large containers,
located in flood-prone areas.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any substance classified by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, the Pennsylvania Department of
161. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 3602(h).
162. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:593
Environmental Protection or the Township as having the potential to
damage health or impair safety, including garbage, refuse, sludge from
an industrial or other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water
supply treatment plant or air pollution facility, and other discarded
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
material resulting from municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional,
mining or agricultural operations, and from community activities, or
any combination of the above, which, because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may:
HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY — Any structure, group of structures,
aboveground or underground storage tanks, or any other area or
buildings used for the purpose of permanently housing or temporarily
holding hazardous waste for the storage or treatment for any time span
other than the normal transportation time through the Township.
HEIGHT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning regulations that
limit the maximum height of buildings within particular zones.
HEIGHT of a TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured
from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on
a tower-based WCF, including antennae mounted on the tower and any
other appurtenances.
HELIPORT — An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure,
licensed by the federal government or an appropriate state agency
and approved for the loading, landing, and takeoff of helicopters, and
including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and
maintenance equipment.
HELISTOP — A heliport but without auxiliary facilities such as parking,
waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment.
HIGHWAY — See "street."
HISTORIC SITE — A structure or place of historical significance. May
be designated as such by local, state or federal government.
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population;
or
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
(Note: "Hazardous waste" shall also include any added
components from the Solid Waste Management Act of July 7,
1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, as amended.163)
(2)
163. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:594
HOME GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or
vegetables on a piece of ground adjoining the dwelling, excluding the
keeping of livestock and permitting the sale of produce raised thereon.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business or commercial activity that is
conducted as an accessory use in a principal unit clearly incidental
and secondary to the residential living use. The occupation shall be
conducted entirely within a dwelling and meeting the criteria set forth
in this Zoning Ordinance. No goods are to be publicly displayed on the
premises other than a sign as provided herein.
HONEYBEE — Honeybees are limited to European races of Apis
mellifera.
HONEYBEE APIARY — A place where honeybee colonies and/or hives,
and other beekeeping equipment, are kept.
HONEYBEE COLONY — An aggregate of worker bees, drones, queen,
and developing brood living together in a social family unit in a hive.
HONEYBEE COMB — A mass of six-sided cells made of wax by
honeybees in which a brood is reared and honey and pollen are stored;
composed of two layers united at their bases.
HONEYBEE HIVE — A box or receptacle with movable frames, used for
housing a colony of bees.
HORTICULTURE — The growing of fruit, vegetables, flowers,
ornamental plants or trees for a profit.
HOSPITAL — A building or part thereof used for medical, psychiatric,
obstetrical, or surgical care on a twenty-four-hour basis. The term
"hospital" shall include facilities used for medical research and training
for health-care professions, general hospitals, mental hospitals,
tuberculosis hospitals, children's hospitals, and any such other facilities
which provide inpatient care. The term "hospital" shall not include
any facility in which is conducted the housing of the criminally insane
or provides treatment for persons actively charged with or serving a
sentence after being convicted of a felony. A hospital shall be licensed
as such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
HOTEL — A building designed for occupancy primarily as the
temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without
meals. A conference/convention center may be part of the hotel.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building, structure, or group of buildings
or structures, including accessory uses, designed, intended or used
for public worship. This definition shall include temples, rectories,
chapels, convents, cathedrals, parish houses, synagogues, and churchrelated
educational and/or day-care facilities. Use as a residence is
not permitted except as a rectory for one family or as a convent or
monastery.
IDENTIFICATION CARD, MEDICAL MARIJUANA — A document issued
by the DOH that permits access to medical marijuana.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:595
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — That area of the lot covered by impervious
surface.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that does not absorb rain,
including all buildings and other structures, parking areas, driveways,
roads, sidewalks, storage areas and areas of concrete, nonporous
asphalt and compacted stone and other such areas as shall be
determined to be nonporous by the Board of Commissioners and/or
Township Engineer.
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — Any street for which the Township,
county, or commonwealth has maintenance responsibility and which is
paved with an approved hardtop surface.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions, installations and
changes required to render land suitable for the use intended, including
grading, paving, curbing, streetlights and signs, fire hydrants, water
mains, electric service, gas service, sanitary sewers, storm drains,
sidewalks, crosswalks, driveways, culverts, and other public utilities
and street shade trees.
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC — Streets, pavements, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, grading, street
signs and plantings, and other items required for the welfare of the
property owners and the public.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Sound of short duration, usually less than one
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of impulsive
sound include explosions, drop force impacts, punch presses, and the
discharge of firearms.
INDIVIDUAL ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system of piping, tanks
or other facilities serving on a single lot and collecting and disposing
of sewage in whole or in part into the soil and any waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by means of conveyance to another
site for final disposition, and which is located upon the lot which it
serves.
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY; THEATER; POOL PARLOR — An
establishment in which any recreational activities, be it ping-pong,
billiards, or a play or movie is carried out for pure entertainment
purposes for both the participants as well as the audience.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A tract of land laid out in accordance with an
overall plan for a group or community of industries, including the
servicing of those industries, with separate building designed and
arrange to ensure compatibility between the industrial operations in
the park and the surrounding area through such devices as
landscaping, architectural control, setbacks and use requirements.
INDUSTRY — The manufacturing, compounding, processing,
assembling or treatment of materials, articles or merchandise.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle intended to be selfpropelled
that shall not be operable under its own power for any
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:596
reason, or a vehicle that shall be without a valid current registration
plate or valid current certificate of inspection, or any vehicle in a major
or severe state of disrepair.
INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY — A public or private benevolent
establishment devoted to the shelter, maintenance or education and
care of minor children, homeless, aged or infirm persons, or members
of a religious community. This classification shall not include
almshouses, penal or reformatory institutions, nursing homes, hospitals
or institutions for the custody, care or treatment of persons suffering
from dementia, mental derangement or drug or alcoholic addiction.
INTERIOR WALK — The right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from
a street into a block or across a block to another street.
INTERSTATE SYSTEM — That portion of the national system of
international and defense highways located within Pennsylvania, as
officially designated or as may hereafter be designated by the Secretary
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and approved by the
United States Secretary of Transportation, pursuant to the provisions
of Title 23, United States Code, titled "Highways."
JUNK — Discarded materials, articles or things possessing value in
part, gross or aggregate, and including, but not limited to, scrapped
and inoperable motor vehicles and parts thereof, but not including
garbage or other organic waste or farm machinery; provided that said
farm machinery is used in connection with a bona fide agricultural
business, or objects or materials accumulated on any premises as the
by-products, waste or scraps of a legitimate business, other than a
"junkyard," as defined in this article, conducted thereon.
JUNK-VEHICLE — A motor vehicle or trailer from which parts or
accessories have been removed or that shall be inoperable as a result
of damage thereto. A junk vehicle may also meet the definition of a
dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle.
JUNKYARD — Any place or establishment where junk is stored or
accumulated out of doors or in any manner other than within a building,
edifice or structure that is enclosed on all sides, where the business
of selling, buying or dealing in junk is carried on or where 10 or more
motor vehicles which are unlicensed, inoperable and do not have a
current and valid inspection sticker as required by the Motor Vehicles
Laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are stored out of doors; but
not including any place where inoperable motor vehicles intended to be
repaired are stored for a period not in excess of 30 days in connection
with a bona fide automotive repair business.
KENNEL — A state-licensed facility through the Department of
Agriculture, containing indoor and outdoor housing facilities for the
sheltering of four or more canines in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Code, Title 7, Chapter 21, as amended or revised.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:597
LAND-USE CONTROLS — A term generally referring to the use of
police power techniques to control and guide land use and
development.
LANDFILL — See "sanitary facility, landfill."
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
other person having a proprietary interest in the land.
LANDSCAPE PLAN — A component of a development plan, if required,
on which is shown proposed landscape species (such as number,
spacing, size at time of planting, and planting details); proposals for
protection of existing vegetation during and after construction;
proposed treatment of hard and soft surfaces; proposed decorative
features, grade changes, buffers and screening devices; and any other
information that can reasonably be required in order that an informed
decision can be made by the Board of Commissioners.
LANDSCAPING AND GARDEN SERVICE, NONRETAIL — A business
establishment which specializes in the installment and/or care of lawns,
landscaping, and general property maintenance, including snow
removal, with all retail transactions occurring off-site. The business
may also offer design and implementation services for sidewalks,
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any other purpose involving:
Groups of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively; or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominium, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Land development shall not include:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium; or
(a)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building.
(b)
(3)
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:598
walkways, decks, retaining walls, patios, lighting, and other external
design elements outside of a building.
LANDSCAPING AND GARDEN SERVICE, RETAIL — A retail or
wholesale business establishment which specializes in the sale of
plants, soils, landscaping tools, hardscaping and other landscaping and
garden accessories. Greenhouse structures may be made chiefly with
transparent or translucent roof and/or wall panels intended for raising
plants. The business may also offer design and implementation services
for sidewalks, walkways, decks, retaining walls, patios, lighting, and
other external design elements outside of a building.
LARGE COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — A commercial
establishment, whether for retail or wholesale purposes or any
combination of retail establishments, in a single building, occupying
more than 25,000 gross square feet of lot area. A commercial
establishment of 25,000 gross square feet or greater in existence as of
the effective date of this chapter shall be classified "a large commercial
establishment" when the establishment's gross floor area is increased
by 50% or more and shall meet the standards set forth in the Upper
Allen Township Zoning Ordinance.
LAUNDERETTE — A business premises equipped with individual
clothes-washing machines for the use of retail customers, exclusive of
laundry facilities, provided as an accessory use in an apartment house
or an apartment.
LAUNDRY AND DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS — A business
premises equipped with large-scale clothes-washing and dry-cleaning
equipment.
LAUNDRY AND DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS (PERSONAL) — A
business premises equipped with individual clothes-washing equipment
for the use of retail customers or the dropoff and pickup of clothing for
dry cleaning by retail customers.
LIBRARY — A place in which literary, musical, artistic or reference
materials (such as books, manuscripts, recordings or films) are kept
for use but not for sale. Ancillary uses may include spaces for public
meetings, learning programs, and other social activities.
LIGHTING —
DIFFUSED — That form of lighting wherein the light passes from
the source through a translucent cover or shade.
(1)
DIRECT or FLOOD — That form of lighting wherein the source is
visible and the light is distributed directly from it to the object to
be illuminated.
(2)
INDIRECT — The form of lighting wherein the light source is
entirely hidden, the light being projected to a suitable reflector
from which it is reflected to the object to be illuminated.
(3)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:599
LIVESTOCK — Any wild or domestic animal that is customarily kept and
housed outside the home or in enclosures such as pens, barns, corrals
or paddock areas. Livestock includes, but is not limited to, animals of
the bovine, swine or sheep family.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space on the same lot with a building
or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of
a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials, and which abuts on or has access to a street.
LONG-TERM NURSING CARE FACILITY — A facility defined and
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Health
in accordance with Title 28 of the Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 201. The
facility provides skilled or intermediate nursing care services 24 hours
a day and seven days a week to individuals who do not require more
intensive hospital-based care.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT, AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot,
as shown on a subdivision plan, excluding space within any street
but including the area of any easement.
(1)
LOT, CORNER — A lot with two adjacent sides abutting on streets
which has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection
of the two street lines. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be
considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of
intersection of the side lot lines with the street line intersect at an
interior angle of less than 135°.
(2)
LOT, FLAG — A large lot not meeting minimum frontage
requirements and where access to the public road is by a narrow
private right-of-way or driveway.
(3)
(4) LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the
side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a
straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required
building setback line.
(5)
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot the area or dimension of which
was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or
amendment.
(6)
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A through lot that is not accessible
from one of the parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which
it fronts. In the case of a lot fronting on streets of different
classification, access to the lot shall be from the lower classified
(7)
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:600
LOT COVERAGE — The total of impervious areas, including building
area divided by lot area.
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance measured between the street
right-of-way line and the closest rear property line. On corner and
reverse frontage lots, the depth shall be measured from the street rightof-
way line of the street of address to the directly opposite property
line.
LOT LINES — The boundary lines of a lot as defined herein.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which has been recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
roadway in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan Classification of Roadways.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or
that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries
of the lot. Lots fronting on a street and an alley are not considered
"through lots."
Example of Lot Types
(8)
FRONT LOT LINE — The lot line separating a lot from a street
right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot or a lot abutting a street
right-of-way on more than one side, the front lot line shall be
determined based on the street address assigned by the post office.
(1)
REAR LOT LINE — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45°
of being parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself
a street line. In the case of a corner lot, the owner shall have the
option of choosing which of the two lot lines which are not street
lines is to be considered a "rear lot line." In the case of a lot having
no street frontage or a lot of an odd shape, only the one lot line
furthest from any street shall be considered a "rear lot line."
(2)
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line which is not a street line or a rear
lot line.
(3)
STREET LINE — A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way
and separating the street from abutting property or lots; commonly
known as the "street right-of-way line."
(4)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:601
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines at the
required or proposed building setback line. When there is only one side
lot line, as in the case of single-family semidetached or some singlefamily
attached dwellings, the lot width shall be measured between the
side lot line and the center line of the party wall. For interior singlefamily
attached dwellings, lot width shall be measured between the
center lines of party walls. On corner lots, lot width shall be measured
between the right-of-way line for the non-address street and the directly
opposite property line.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps,
together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and
protect the lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply.
MANUFACTURED HOME — See "dwelling, manufactured housing."
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a manufactured
home park improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single
manufactured home. (See also "mobile home lot.")
MANUFACTURING — The processing and/or converting of raw,
unfinished or finished materials or products, or any or either of them,
into an article or substance of different character or for use for a
different purpose; industries furnishing labor in the case of
manufacturing or the refinishing of manufactured articles.
MANUFACTURING USES — Manufacturing and storage uses that do
not constitute an unusual fire or explosion hazard or create a nuisance
by reason of smoke, odor, dust, noise or glare. Also, manufacturing
uses that do not cause dust, smoke, fumes, gas or offensive odors
to be disseminated beyond the lot boundaries; vibration beyond lot
boundaries; noise exceeding that of off-street traffic at the front lot line;
or a glare observable from beyond the lot boundaries. These include,
but are not limited to, food processing; manufacture of furniture,
textiles, leather, rubber, paper, fabricated metals, machinery and glass;
stone and clay processing; printing, polishing, photography and related
industries; instrument, tool-and-die and cabinetmaking; metal and
wood fabrication; assembly of electronic apparatus; electroplating,
molding and other related industries; warehousing and distribution.
MANURE — The fecal and/or urinary excrement of livestock and
poultry, often containing some spilled feed, bedding or litter.
MANURE STORAGE FACILITIES — See "animal waste (manure)
storage facilities."
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — Minor streets, parallel and adjacent to
major traffic streets, which provide access to abutting properties and
control intersections with major traffic street.
MARKET MANAGER — A person or organization that manages the
operation of the farmers market, assigns space to producers and
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:602
sellers, directs the maintenance of premises and records, and performs
related duties as required.
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment whose business emphasis is
the administration of nonsexually oriented massage to patrons by
employees.
MEDICAL AND SIMILAR LABS AND CLINICS — Any building for which
the use has 10,000 square feet or larger; 90% or more of the occupying
use is medically related; surgical or testing facilities are present; and
crisis care services with accommodations for ambulances or emergency
vehicles or services offered more than 60 hours per week.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as legally
prescribed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with Act 16.164
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ORGANIZATION — A dispensary or a grower/
producer of marijuana for medical purposes.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TRANSPORT VEHICLE OFFICE — Any facility
used to house delivery vehicles for supplying marijuana plants or seeds
to one or more marijuana growers/processors and/or dispensaries.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — An area of land or building used by a
recreational, civic, social, fraternal, religious, political or labor union
association of persons for meetings and routine socializing and
recreation that is limited to members and their occasional guests, but
not including members of the general public. These uses are restricted
to those not conducted primarily for gain, although a restaurant may be
operated primarily to serve members and their guests. This use shall
not include a boardinghouse, tavern, restaurant open to the general
public, or auditorium, unless that particular use is permitted in that
district and the applicable requirements of that use are met.
MICROBREWERY — A restaurant with facilities for brewing beer onsite
that produces less than 15,000 barrels annually and is licensed by
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. It may include a tasting room
and retail space to sell the beer to patrons on site.
MICRODISTILLERY — A business known as a craft or designer
distillery that manufactures spirituous liquors on site for distribution
off site in quantities not to exceed 10,000 gallons of liquor annually and
is licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. It may include a
restaurant, tasting room, and retail space to sell the liquors to patrons
on site.
MILL — A building or group of buildings equipped with machinery for
processing raw materials into finished or industrial products.
MINI STORAGE WAREHOUSES — A facility providing for the enclosed
storage of household items or recreational equipment, where said items
are retained for direct use by their owner, who shall have direct access
thereto without intermediate handling by the proprietor of the facility.
164. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:603
MIXED USE — Occupancy of a building or land for more than one use.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land under
single ownership which has been so designated and improved that it
contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of
mobile homes for nontransient use.
MOBILE HOME SALES LOT — An open lot for the outdoor display of
new or used mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME STAND OR PAD — That part of an individual mobile
home space which has been reserved for the placement of a mobile
home and appurtenant structures and connections.
MODULAR/MANUFACTURED HOME — A type of dwelling that is in
substantial part but not wholly produced in sections off the site and
then is assembled and completed on the site. This shall not include
any dwelling that meets the definition of mobile home, nor shall it
include any dwelling that does not rest on a permanent foundation, nor
any dwelling intended to be able to be moved to a different site once
assembled, nor any dwelling that would not fully comply with any and
all applicable building codes. A modular home also shall not include a
building that includes only one substantial piece prior to delivery on the
site.
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennae and connecting appurtenances.
MORTUARY or UNDERTAKING FACILITY — A place in which human
remains are prepared and stored prior to burial.
MOTEL — A group of attached or detached buildings containing
sleeping rooms or living units with accessory facilities designed for
temporary use by automobile tourists or transients, including auto
courts, motor lodges and similar establishments.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL — A terminal that is primarily centered
around the storage and distribution of motor freight.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A means of transportation designed for the
conveyance of persons or property requiring a registration under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for operation upon public
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:604
highways, including an automobile, truck, bus, motor home, motorcycle
or travel trailer.
MUNICIPAL USES AND BUILDINGS — Includes public and semipublic
uses of welfare and educational nature, such as parks, fire stations,
municipal buildings and municipal garages, etc.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Municipal waste as defined in the Municipal
Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste Reduction Act of July 28, 1988,
as may be amended and supplemented.
MUNICIPAL WASTE PLANNING, RECYCLING AND WASTE
REDUCTION ACT — The Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 556, No. 101, 53 P.S.
§ 4000.101 et seq., as the same may be amended and supplemented.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) — The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
amended and reenacted, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Upper Allen.
NATURAL FEATURE — A component of a landscape existing or
maintained as part of the natural environment and having ecologic
value in contributing beneficially to air quality, erosion control,
groundwater recharge, noise abatement, visual amenities, growth of
wildlife, human recreation, reduction of climatic stress or energy costs.
Such features include those which, if disturbed, may cause hazards or
stress to natural habitats, property or the natural environment.
NATURAL PRODUCTION USES — A lot or parcel of land or part thereof
used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand, clay, gravel or topsoil
for sale, and excluding the process of grading a lot preparatory to the
construction of a building for which application for a building permit
has been made.
NEWSPAPER AND PRINTING ESTABLISHMENTS — Any
establishment that is engaged in the printing of newspaper or similar
material on a regular basis.
NIGHTCLUB — Any building used for on-site consumption of alcoholic
or nonalcoholic beverages where live entertainment can be offered.
For the purposes of this definition, "live entertainment" is meant to
include the use of disc jockeys for the purposes of supplying musical
entertainment. Nightclubs may also provide for on-site consumption
of food. Additionally, nightclubs can offer the retail sale of carry-out
beer and wine as an accessory use. Nightclub includes an "under 21"
club which features entertainment. Nightclubs shall not include adult
businesses or adult regulated uses of any type.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in excess
of those normally associated with residential use. Requirements set
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:605
forth in Article XIV shall be met in order to determine if a home
business is a no-impact business.
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NONTOWER
WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications facilities,
including, but not limited to, antennae and related equipment. Nontower
WCFs shall not include support structures for antennae or any
related equipment that is mounted to the ground or at ground level.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of which the area or dimension was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which does not conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — See "structure, nonconforming."
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this
chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to
its location by reason of annexation.
NONCONFORMITY, DIMENSIONAL — Any aspect of a land use that
does not comply with any size, height, bulk, setback, distance,
landscaping, coverage, screening, or any other design or performance
standard specified by this chapter, where such dimensional
nonconformity lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this chapter or
amendment thereto.
NUISANCE — Anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of
property, endangers personal health or safety, or is offensive to the
senses.
NURSERY, HORTICULTURE — Any lot or parcel of land used to
cultivate, propagate, grow and/or sell trees, shrubs, vines and other
plants, including the buildings, structures and equipment customarily
incidental and accessory to the primary use.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit stating that all work indicated on
a building permit has been satisfactorily completed or, in cases not
involving construction, a proposed new use is in conformity with this
chapter and the building or lot may be occupied.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) that is the subject of a
development application, or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property that is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:606
OFF-STREET PARKING — Parking of motor vehicles as an accessory
use located upon the same lot as a permitted principal use or, in
the case of joint parking, within close proximity to serve the parking
requirements and needs of the principal use.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A parking space provided in a parking
lot, parking structure or private driveway.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building designed or used primarily for office
purposes, no part of which is used for manufacturing or for dwelling
other than by a watchman or janitor.
OFFICE CENTER — A group of offices planned and designed to function
as a unit for the lot(s) on which it is located, with off-street parking
provided as an integral part of the unit.
OFFICES, CONTRACTORS — An office or shop, with an accessory
storage yard, of a building, electrical, or mechanical contractor.
OFFICES, CORPORATE — Executive and administrative offices of
business firms.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article IV
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.165
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-STREET PARKING SPACE — A parking space that is located on a
dedicated or private street right-of-way.
OPEN PIT MINING — Open pit mining shall include all activity which
removes from the surface or beneath the surface of the land materials,
mineral resources, natural resources or other elements of economic
value by means of mechanical excavation necessary to separate the
desired material from an undesirable one or to remove the strata or
material which overlies or is above the desired material in its natural
condition and position. Open pit mining includes, but is not limited
to, excavation necessary to the extraction of sand, gravel, topsoil,
limestone, sandstone, coal, clay, shale and iron ore.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for the
public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of
owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring on such open
space.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING — An illumination source outside any building,
including, but not limited to, an incandescent bulb, mercury, sodium or
neon-filled bulb, and the hardware containing the illumination source
and supporting it. Lighting fixtures underneath a roof of an open-sided
building, including, but not limited to, storage sheds, canopies and gas
station marquees over gas pumps, are deemed to be "outdoor lighting."
165. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:607
OUTDOOR LIGHTING FIXTURE — Lighting fixture located outside any
building, whether the fixture is freestanding on its own pole or other
structure or is attached to any part of the facade or roof of a building.
Includes the hardware that houses the illumination source and into
which the illumination source is attached; also includes, but is not
limited to, the hardware casing and the neck of a fixture that is attached
to a pole, the side of a building or some other surface.
OUTDOOR RECREATION AREAS, PRIVATE AND SEMIPUBLIC — The
use of open land for leisure-time activities, such as a beach, swimming
pool, tennis courts, golf courses or similar establishments that are not
publicly owned.
OUTDOOR STORAGE or DISPLAY — Storage of materials necessary
and incidental to the normal operation of a primary use.
OVERLAY ZONES — A set of zoning requirements that is described
in the ordinance text is mapped and is imposed in addition to those
of the underlying district. Developments within the overlay zone must
conform to the requirements of both zones or the more restrictive of
the two.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with other
persons, has legal title to any premises. This does not include a lessee,
sublessee or other person who merely has the right to occupy or
possess the premises.
OWNER OCCUPIED — The property owner, as reflected in title records,
makes his or her legal residence at the site, as evidenced by voter
registration, vehicle registration or similar means.
PARCEL — A lot or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or
under single control and usually considered a unit for purposes of
development.
PARKING GARAGE — A building where passenger vehicles may be
stored for short-term, daily or overnight off-street parking.
PARKING LOT — Any lot, municipally or privately owned, for off-street
parking facilities, providing for the transient storage of automobiles or
motor-driven vehicles. Such parking services may be provided as a free
service or for a fee.
PARKING SPACE — The area required for parking one motor vehicle.
PARTY — A person or group taking one side of a question, dispute or
contest.
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — An improved thoroughfare designated
exclusively for pedestrian traffic.
PERFORMANCE BOND — An agreement by and between a contractor
and a bonding company in favor of the developer and the Township
Board of Commissioners, guaranteeing the completion of physical
improvements.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:608
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — A minimum requirement or maximum
allowable limit on the effects or characteristics of a use, usually written
in the form of regulatory language.
PERMEABLE SURFACE — Any area paved with porous asphalt,
pervious concrete, open-jointed blocks, or other materials designed to
allow infiltration of at least 50% of surface runoff during a typical rain
event into an underlying stone reservoir that temporarily stores surface
runoff before it infiltrates into the subsoil.
PERMISSIBLE USE — A use by right which is specifically authorized in
a particular zoning district.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, partnerships,
associations, organizations, corporations, legal representatives,
trustees in bankruptcy or receivers.
PERSONAL CARE FACILITY — A personal care facility that requires
a building larger than a single-family residential unit to accommodate
the number of residents served and special and accessory commercial
services provided; often called an "assisted-living center." The personal
care center may be a stand-alone facility or may be part of a continuing
care retirement community.
PERSONAL CARE HOME — A facility defined and licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare in
accordance with Title 55 of the Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 2600. A
personal care home is a premises in which food, shelter and personal
assistance or supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours
for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who do
not require the services in or of a licensed long-term-care facility, but
who do require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing,
bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of a residence in the
event of an emergency or medication prescribed for self-administration.
A "halfway house" is not a personal care home.
PERSONAL CARE HOME, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED DWELLING
— A personal care home occupying a single-family residential unit,
provided the unit is similar in size and character as the surrounding
residential units and is in compliance with all district and bulk and area
regulations. These personal care homes shall be permitted by right in
any district which allows single-family dwellings.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Service activities shall
include and be similar to barbershops, beauty salons, health spas,
massage parlors; photographic studios; self-service laundry and drycleaning
establishments, laundromats; radio and television repair;
repair shops for home appliances and tools, bicycles, guns, locks, shoes
and watches; tailor and dressmaking shops; and pet grooming with
no overnight boarding. Personal service establishments shall not be
construed to be adult regulated facilities as defined herein.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that permits full or partial
absorption of stormwater.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:609
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended for
use in preventing, destroying, repelling, sterilizing, or mitigating any
insects, rodents, nematodes, predatory animals, fungi, weeds or other
forms of plant or animal life.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT — Oil or petroleum of any kind and in any
form, including crude oil and derivatives of crude oil. It may be alone,
as sludge, as oil refuse, or mixed with other wastes.
PLAN — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
sketch, preliminary or final.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A contiguous area of land
controlled by a landowner to be developed as a single entity for a
number of residential and nonresidential units, the development plan
for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling,
density, lot coverage and required open space to the regulations
established in any one residential district created from time to time
under the provisions of a municipal zoning ordinance.
PLANNING AGENCY — The Planning Commission of Upper Allen
Township.
PLANNING MODULE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — A revision to, or
an exception to a revision to, the Township's Official Sewage Facilities
Plan, submitted in connection with the request for approval of a
subdivision or land development in accordance with Department
regulations.
PLAT — See "plan."
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY — Water suitable for drinking or cooking
purposes.
POULTRY — A domestic fowl, including chickens, turkeys, geese and
ducks.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact land development plan,
prepared for official recording, to define property rights and
proposed streets and other improvements.
(1)
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative land development plan, in
lesser detail than a final plan, showing the salient existing features
of a tract and its surroundings and approximate proposed street
and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a
final plan.
(2)
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal land development plan, not
necessarily to scale, indicating salient existing features of a tract
and its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed land
development for discussion purposes only and not to be presented
for approval.
(3)
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:610
POWER-GENERATION FACILITY — A facility that generates electric
power for the purpose of transmission of such electricity to other users
not located at the site where the electricity is generated.
PRACTICE OF ENGINEERING — The application of the mathematical
and physical sciences for the design of public or private buildings,
structures, machines, equipment, processes, works of engineering
systems, and the consultation, investigation, evaluation, engineering
surveys, planning and inspection in connection therewith; the
performance of the foregoing acts and services being prohibited to
persons who are not licensed under the laws of the commonwealth
as professional engineers unless exempt under other provisions of the
laws of the commonwealth. The term "practice of engineering" shall
also mean and include related acts and services that may be performed
by other qualified persons, including, but not limited to, municipal
planning, incidental landscape architecture, teaching, construction,
maintenance and research, but licensure under the laws of the
commonwealth to engage in or perform any such related acts and
services shall not be required.
PRACTICE OF LAND SURVEYING — The practice of that branch of
the profession of engineering which involves the location, relocation,
establishment, reestablishment or retracement of any property line or
boundary of any parcel of land or any road right-of-way, easement
of alignment, the use of principles of land surveying, determination
of the position of any monument or reference point which marks a
property line boundary or corner setting, resetting or replacing any
such monument or individual point, including the writing of deed
descriptions, procuring or offering to procure land surveying work for
himself or others, managing or conducting managers, proprietors or
agents of any place of business from which land surveying work is
solicited, performed or practiced; the performance of the foregoing
acts and services being prohibited to persons who are not granted
certificates of registration under the laws of the commonwealth as a
professional land surveyor unless exempt under other provisions of the
laws of the commonwealth.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — An initial meeting between
developers and the Planner, Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer
which affords applicants and/or developers the opportunity to present
their proposals informally.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights prior to
final approval after specific elements of a development plan have been
agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT — A map indicating the proposed
layout of a development and related information that is submitted for
preliminary approval.
PREMISES — The property upon which the activity is conducted, as
determined by physical facts rather than property lines.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:611
PRIMARY RESIDENCE — The premises where a person has legal
residency.
PRIMARY SYSTEM — The portion of connected main highways located
within Pennsylvania which now or hereafter may be designated
officially by the Secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and approved by the Secretary of Transportation of
the United States pursuant to Title 23, United States Code, titled
"Highways."
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
PRIVATE CLUB — Operated for members only and not for profit.
PRIVATE or NONPUBLIC STREET — All streets which are not public,
including, but not limited to, streets maintained by private agreements,
by private owners, or for which no maintenance responsibility has been
established.
PRIVATE RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A privately owned facility for
recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, such uses as parks,
nature trails and wildlife sanctuaries and excluding uses which would
commonly be considered a nuisance because of noise, pollution, etc.,
such as racing, touring and promotion of motor vehicles.
PRODUCER — The person or entity that (a) raises or produces farm
products on the land that the person or entity farms and owns, rents,
or leases; or (b) a person or entity that creates (by cooking, canning,
baking, preserving, roasting, etc.) value-added farm products.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — An individual licensed and registered
under the laws of this commonwealth to engage in the practice of
engineering. A professional engineer may not practice land surveying
unless licensed and registered as a professional land surveyor, as
defined and set forth in this chapter; however, a professional engineer
may perform engineering land surveys.
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR — An individual licensed and
registered under the laws of this commonwealth to engage in the
practice of land surveying. A professional land surveyor may perform
engineering land surveys but may not practice any other branch of
engineering.
PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION — The practice of a profession by an
attorney, physician, surgeon, osteopath, chiropractor, dentist, optician,
optometrist, chiropodist, engineer, surveyor, architect, landscape
architect, or city planner entitled to practice under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — Includes, but are not limited to, offices for
real estate, stock and bond brokers, accountants, adjusters, appraisers,
utility companies, physicians, lawyers, clergymen, teachers, dentists,
architects, engineers, insurance agents, opticians, banks, financial
institutions, contractors (excluding storage) and similar office-oriented
uses.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:612
PROFILE LINE (STREET CENTER LINE) — The profile of the center
line of the finished surface of the street, which shall be midway between
the side lines of the street.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a governmental agency
(federal, state or local, including a corporation created by law for
the performance of certain specialized governmental functions and the
Department of Education).
PUBLIC AND OTHER TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION
FACILITIES — Public, semipublic and private utility transmission and
distribution facilities, including substations, pump stations, booster
facilities, etc.
PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES — An activity operated as a
gainful business open to the public for entertainment or recreation,
including, but not limited to, motion-picture theaters, health clubs and
miniature golf courses.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the governing body or Planning Commission, intended to inform and
obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance with this
chapter.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — An improvement that has been or will
be dedicated for public use or that is designed to provide adequate
transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection or recreational
facilities or to serve other public requirements in accordance with
the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.166
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under 65
Pa.C.S.A., Chapter 7, relating to open meetings.
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice, in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,167 published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas;
(1)
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities; and
(2)
(3) Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
167. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:613
PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS — Locations for leisuretime
activities, including, but not limited to, sports and entertainment,
that are open to anyone without restriction, except for the rules and
standards of conduct and use.
PUBLIC RECREATION FACILITY/PUBLIC GROUNDS — Recreation
facilities owned and/or operated by an agency of the municipality or
other governmental body, including, but not limited to, parks,
swimming pools, golf courses, etc.
PUBLIC SEWER — A municipal sanitary sewer system, or a comparable
common or package sanitary facility approved by the State of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection.
PUBLIC STREET/ROAD — A street ordained or maintained or dedicated
and accepted by the Township, county, state or federal governments
and open to public use.
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES — Any structure
which belongs to a public utility for uses such as electrical, telephone,
gas, water and sewer which are regulated by the PUC or any other
governmental agency.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support
overhead electricity transmission lines.
PUBLIC WATER — A municipal water supply system, or a comparable
common water facilities approved by the State of Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
RACETRACK — A facility built for racing of vehicles, athletes, or
animals. A racetrack may include seating, concession areas, suites, and
parking facilities, but does not include accessory offices, residences, or
retail facilities.
RECREATION — Any activity, whether structured or not, in which
individuals voluntarily engage during their leisure, including, but not
limited to:
RECREATION AREA, ACTIVE — Any area developed in such a manner
as to be conducive to those activities that fall within the range of active
recreation. Examples: athletic fields and hard-surfaced courts, pools,
Sports (individual, dual, team, coed recreational, and combative),
athletics; both land- and water-based.
(1)
Arts and crafts, spectating, picnicking, nature study, and board
games.
(2)
Dance, drama, music, games, social recreation, special events,
hiking/walking, cycling, hobbies, outdoor educational activities,
and cultural activities.
(3)
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:614
large dams, bicycle and walking trails, open turf areas, and apparatus
areas.
RECREATION AREA, PASSIVE — Any area developed in such a manner
as to be conducive of those activities that fall within the range of
passive recreation. Examples: scenic vistas, natural areas, craft areas,
meeting areas, sitting areas, walkways, sunbathing, gardens, streams
and impoundments, social events, picnicking, and spectating areas.
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Any recreational activity that requires some
physical exertion on the part of the participant.
RECREATION, OPEN SPACE — The area of land suitable for the
development of specific active recreation facilities for leisure-time
activities, usually of a formal nature and often performed with others,
requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or
fields, including, but not limited to, baseball fields, soccer fields,
football fields, tennis, basketball and other court games, hockey
facilities, multipurpose fields and community swimming pools and
attendant facilities.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Any recreational activity that requires little
or no physical exertion on the part of the participant.
RECYCLING YARD — A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used
primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal or discarded material, or for the collecting, dismantling, storage
and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, and for
the sale of parts thereof.
REFUSE — See "solid waste."
REGISTRY, MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The registry established by the
DOH for all medical marijuana organizations and practitioners.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental
to, or necessary for the operation of a tower-based WCF or non-tower
WCF. By way of illustration, not limitation, related equipment includes
generators and base stations.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE — Any method, process or substance
whose supply is rejuvenated through natural processes and, subject to
those natural processes, remains relatively constant, including, but not
limited to, hydroelectric energy and excluding those sources of energy
used in the fission and fusion process.
RESEARCH TESTING/EXPERIMENTAL LAB — Including experimental
study, testing and analysis of soils, medicines, new technology, products
and similar items and areas of research.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A "subdivision" or "land
development," as those terms are defined in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,168 whether initially or cumulatively, of a
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:615
tract under single or separate ownership, for the purpose of erecting
residential dwelling units.
RESORT — A hotel or motel that serves as a destination point for
visitors. A resort generally provides recreational facilities for persons
on vacation. A resort shall be self-contained and provide personal
services customarily furnished at hotels, including the serving of meals,
and a conference/convention center. Buildings and structures in a
resort should complement the scenic qualities of the location in which
the resort is situated.
RESTAURANT — An establishment that primarily or solely provides
food and drink to patrons and that routinely involves the consumption
of at least a portion of such food and drink on the premises. A
restaurant may include a drive-up or drive-through service. A
restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic beverages.
However, if such sale is a primary or a substantial portion of the total
trade, the requirements of a tavern, microbrewery, microdistillery or
nightclub, as applicable, shall apply.
RETAIL BUSINESS — An establishment which sells goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal and household
consumption and provides accessory repair services for goods or
merchandise that is similar to that which is sold on the premises and
render services incidental to the sale of such goods. This does not
include adult regulated facilities and restaurants, as defined herein.
Retail business shall include variety stores, apparel stores, florists,
drugstores, grocery stores, liquor stores, antique shops, music shops,
sporting goods stores, book, stationary, magazines, candy and tobacco
shops, and other outlets that sell goods or merchandise on a retail
basis.
RETAINING WALL — A structure erected between lands of different
elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the washing down or
erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or basin used for the permanent
storage of water runoff.
RIDING ACADEMY or BOARDING STABLE — An establishment where
horses are kept for riding or driving, or are stabled for compensation,
or incidental to the operation of any club, association, farm or similar
establishment.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or
for another special use. If the right-of-way involves maintenance by a
public agency, it shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the
plat on which such right-of-way is established.
168. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:616
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A public or private thoroughfare for
vehicular traffic and/or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a
street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, land
or otherwise.
SANITARY FACILITY, LANDFILL OR INCINERATOR — Land, structures
and other appurtenances or improvements where municipal or residual
waste disposal or processing is permitted or takes place or where
hazardous waste is treated, stored or disposed. The term includes land
thereby used or affected during the lifetime of operations, including
areas where solid waste management actually occurs, support facilities,
offices, equipment sheds, air and water pollution control and treatment
systems, access roads, associated on-site or contiguous collection,
transportation and storage facilities, closure and post-closure care and
maintenance activities, contiguous borrow areas and other activities in
which the natural land surface has been disturbed or used as a result
of or incidental to operation of the facility. A waste facility must meet
the requirements of Title 25 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Code, Articles VII to Article IX, and any state or federal act or laws, as
applicable and amended, such as the Solid Waste Management Act,169
the Clean Streams Law,170 and all applicable federal regulation, such
as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 U.S.C.
§§ 6901 to 6992 and 40 CFR Parts 260 to 279. A waste disposal
or processing plant may include landfills, incinerators, impoundment,
transfer facilities, composting facilities or resource recovery facilities,
as defined in the Pennsylvania Code.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A device incorporating a reflective
surface, which is solid, open mesh or bar-configured and is in the shape
of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia, and including its pedestal
and other attachments. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or
receive radio or other electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/
or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include, but not be
limited to, what are commonly referred to as "satellite earth stations,"
"televisions receivers only" or TVROs, and "satellite microwave
antennas."
SCHOOL — Any place offering instruction in any branch of knowledge
under the supervision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a
lawfully constituted ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership
or corporation meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way established by the
state or other appropriate governing authority and currently in
existence.
(1)
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY (ULTIMATE) — The right-of-way deemed
necessary by the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan.
(2)
169. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
170. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:617
SCREEN PLANTING — A vegetative material of sufficient height and
density to conceal from the view of adjoining property owners the
structures and uses on the premises on which the screen planting is
located.
SCREENING — The provision of a barrier to visibility, airborne
particles, glare and noise between adjacent properties, uses and/or
districts, composed entirely of trees, berm, shrubs, hedges, sight-tight
fences and/or other similar-type materials.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter
is accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once
this matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually
referred to as "sediment."
SEMITRAILER PARKING LOT — An area of land or a structure used
for the purpose of providing temporary, daily or overnight off-street
COLLEGE — The same as elementary and secondary school, except
general education and/or research is provided above the level of
the secondary school and may include junior college, college or
university, and is authorized to grant academic degrees. A college
may include dormitories.
(1)
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL — A school conducted for profit for such
instruction as business, art, music, trades, handicraft, dancing or
riding.
(2)
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY — Any school having regular sessions
with employed instruction which teaches those subjects that are
fundamental and essential in general education for elementary
grades.
(3)
SCHOOL, NONPUBLIC — An educational facility not operated by a
public agency.
(4)
SCHOOL, NURSERY (DAY-CARE CENTER) — A facility not in a
private residence, enrolling four or more children no more than five
years of age and where tuition or other forms of compensation for
the instruction and care of the children is charged. Such facility
shall employ licensed personnel and shall be licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(5)
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — A public place of instruction other than a
commercial school operated by a public agency.
(6)
SCHOOL, SECONDARY — The same as elementary school, except
general education is provided for secondary grades.
(7)
(8) SCHOOL, TRADE/PROFESSIONAL — See "school, commercial."
SCHOOL, VOCATIONAL — The same as elementary and secondary
school, except that the primary activity is training in a trade or
vocation.
(9)
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:618
parking of semitrailers when operated in connection with an existing
warehouse, transportation terminal, trucking terminal, manufacturing,
or other industrial use located on another lot.
SETBACK (BUILDING SETBACK LINE) — The line within a property
defining the required minimum distance between any enclosed
structure and the adjacent dedicated right-of-way, and the line defining
rear and side yards, where required.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (ON SITE) — Any system designed to
eliminate sanitary sewage within the boundaries of the lot.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (PUBLIC OR COMMUNITY) — A sanitary
sewage collection method in which sewage is carried from the site by a
system of pipes to the central treatment and disposal plant.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — The Sewage
Enforcement Officer of the Township.
SEWER — A public or private utility system designed to collect,
centrally treat and dispose of sewage from customers in compliance
with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection regulations
or regulations of the Township, whichever is more stringent. See also
"community sewage system" and "individual on-lot sewage system."
SHADE TREE — A tree in a public place, street, special easement,
private property or right-of-way adjoining a street that provides shade.
SHARED DRIVEWAY — A path or road extending from a public or
private road to two lots, buildings, dwellings or structures, intended to
provide shared or joint ingress and egress primarily for the occupants
thereof.
SHOPPING CENTER, MALL or PLAZA — A group of stores planned and
designed to function as a unit for the lot(s) on which it is located, with
off-street parking provided as an integral part of the unit.
SHOTGUN, RIFLE, PISTOL, or ARCHERY RANGE — An indoor or
outdoor facility specifically designed for the purpose of target practice,
sport shooting, and/or military/law enforcement training.
SIDEWALK — See "walkway."
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established
at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or
allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SIGN — Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify,
display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:619
means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures,
colors, illumination or projected images. This excludes national or state
flags, window displays, graffiti, athletic scoreboards, or the official
announcements or signs of government. Additional sign definitions are
as follows:
ABANDONED — A sign which has not identified or advertised a
current business, service, owner, product, or activity for a period
of at least 180 days in the case of off-premise signs, or at least 360
days in the case of on-premise signs.
(1)
ADVERTISING SIGN, OFF-PREMISES (BILLBOARD) — A sign
which directs attention to a business, product, service, activity or
entertainment sold or offered not upon the premises where such
sign is located.
ELECTRONIC DISPLAY BILLBOARDS (DIGITAL
BILLBOARDS) — An off-premises sign or portion thereof that
displays electronic, static images, static graphics or static
pictures, with or without text information, defined by a small
number of matrix elements using different combinations of
light-emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other
illumination devices within the display area where the message
change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of
fade. Electronic graphic display signs shall include computerprogrammable,
microprocessor-controlled electronic or digital
displays. Electronic graphic display signs include projected
images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings
or other objects.
(a)
VIDEO BILLBOARD — A billboard that changes its message or
background in a manner or method of display characterized
by motion or pictorial imagery, which may or may not include
text, and depicts action or a special effect to imitate movement,
the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a
progression of frames which mimic the illusion of motion,
including, but not limited to, moving objects, moving patterns
or bands of light, or expanding and contracting shapes and/or
fade, dissolve, travel or scrolling features. "Video billboards"
include projected images or messages with these
characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
(b)
(2)
BANNERS — Temporary signs composed of cloth, plastic, wood or
other similar material and supported along one or more sides or at
two or more corners by staples, tape, wires, ropes, strings, or other
materials that are not fixed or rigid, and used to announce events
on the premises.
(3)
BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which directs
attention to a business, product, service, activity or entertainment
sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
(4)
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:620
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of or attached to a structure
made of fabric, plastic, metal or similar material that is supported
by posts, columns, or other means necessary and attached to a
structure or building, such as, but not limited to, gas station
canopies, porte cocheres, or similar structures.
(5)
FLAG SIGN — Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic, canvas,
or other like material with distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols
attached to a pole or staff and anchored along only one edge or
supported or anchored at only two corners.
(6)
GROUND SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business,
profession, industry or activity conducted upon the property in
which the sign is located.
(7)
GROUND POLE SIGN — A freestanding sign supported in a fixed
location by a structure of one or more poles, posts, uprights, or
braces from the ground and not supported by a building or base
structure.
(8)
MESSAGE BOARD SIGN — An on-premises sign (mostly used for
product advertising and public service messages) in which one or
more illuminated or nonilluminated letters, pictures or characters
can be electronically or manually changed, provided that the
message shall not change more than once every 10 seconds, shall
not have a transition from one message to another exceeding two
seconds, and shall not have flashing, blinking or strobe lights,
except that displays of time and temperature may change more
frequently. Electronic (digital) "message board signs" shall be
turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
(9)
MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding sign composed of stone, brick
or masonry, with the entire base of the sign structure in contact
with the ground or supported by a base constructed of permanent
material such as stone or block, and landscaped to enhance the
overall attractiveness of the area.
(10)
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent
upon a building for support and that projects more than 12 inches
from such building.
(11)
REAL ESTATE SIGN, TEMPORARY — A temporary sign erected to
advertise the availability for sale, rental or lease of the property or
a portion of the property where the sign is located.
(12)
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected and maintained on or above the roof
of a building.
(13)
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign, banner, cardboard or other
material carrying an advertisement or announcement which is
displayed or intended to be displayed for a limited period of time as
specified in this Zoning Ordinance.
(14)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:621
SIGN AREA — The sign area shall be the area of the smallest triangle,
rectangle or circle which can wholly enclose the surface area of the
sign, including all letters and symbols. All visible faces of a multifaced
sign shall be counted separately and then totaled in calculating sign
area. Three-dimensional signs shall be treated as dual-faced signs, such
that the total area shall be twice the area of the smallest triangle,
rectangle or circle which can totally circumscribe the sign in the plane
of its largest dimension. This area does not include the main support of
the sign, but all other ornamental attachments, inner-connecting links,
etc., which are not part of the main supports of the sign, are to be
included in determining sign area.
SINGLE-LOADED STREETS — Streets having houses only on one side.
[Comment: When lots are trimmed down in width developers can easily
reserve certain street lengths for single-loading, such as alongside
conservation areas or around village greens or commons, without
increasing the average house-lot-to-street-length ratios. Single-loading
provides home buyers with views that are more uplifting than their
neighbors' garage doors staring back at them. It also provides all
subdivision residents with welcome views of their conservation land
as they drive, bike, jog or walk through their neighborhood on a daily
basis, increasing everyone's quality of life as well as their property
values.171]
SITE — A parcel of land located in the Township, established by a plat
or otherwise as permitted by law, which is the subject of an application
for development. A site may include more than one lot.
SITE PLAN — An accurately scaled development plan that illustrates
the existing conditions on a land parcel as well as depicting details of a
proposed development.
WALL SIGN — A sign fastened to, displayed on, or painted on
the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall
becomes the supporting structure for or forms the background
surface of the sign.
(15)
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign that is applied, painted, or affixed to a
window, or placed inside a window, within three feet of the glass,
facing the outside of the building, and easily seen from the outside.
Customary displays of merchandise or objects and material without
lettering behind a store window are not considered signs.
(16)
YARD SIGN — A temporary freestanding sign supported in a fixed
location by a structure of one or more poles, posts, uprights, or
braces from the ground and not supported by a building or base
structure.
(17)
171. Arendt, Randall G., Conservation Design for Subdivisions: A Practical Guide to Creating
Open Space Networks, Washington, D.C., Island Press, 1996.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:622
SKEET, RIFLE OR ARCHERY RANGE — Any area (usually in a
sportsmen's or outdoor club) in which skeet shooting, rifle shooting, or
archery is practiced.
SKETCH PLAN — See "plan, sketch."
SKILLED or INTERMEDIATE NURSING CARE — Professionally
supervised nursing care and related medical and other health services
provided for a period exceeding 24 hours to an individual not in need of
hospitalization, but whose needs are above the level of room and board
and can only be met in a long-term-care nursing facility or an inpatient
basis because of age, illness, disease, injury, convalescence or physical
or mental infirmity.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet over
100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL CEMENT — A mixture of Portland cement and locally available
soil; it serves as a soil stabilizer.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment designed
to increase or maintain the stability of a mass of soil or otherwise to
improve its engineering properties.
SOLAR EASEMENT — A solar easement means a right, expressed
as an easement, restriction, covenant, or condition contained in any
deed, contract, or other written instrument executed by or on behalf of
any landowner for the purpose of ensuring adequate access to direct
sunlight for solar energy systems.
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffuse and/or reflective)
received from the sun.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic cell, module, or array,
or solar hot air or water collector device, which relies upon solar
radiation as an energy source for collection, inversion, storage, and
distribution of solar energy for electricity generation or transfer of
stored heat.
SOLAR CELL — The smallest basic solar electric device which
generates electricity when exposed to light.
(1)
SOLAR MODULE — A grouping of solar cells with the purpose of
harvesting solar energy.
(2)
SOLAR ARRAY — A grouping of multiple solar modules with
purpose of harvesting solar energy.
(3)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:623
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACCESSORY (ASES) — An area of land
or other area used for a solar collection system principally used to
capture solar energy, convert it to electrical energy or thermal power
and supply electrical or thermal power primarily for on-site use. An
accessory solar energy system consists of one or more freestanding
ground-, or roof-mounted solar arrays or modules, or solar-related
equipment and is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of
utility power or fuels.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials,
including, but not limited to, solid and liquid waste materials resulting
from municipal, industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential
activities.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT — The Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380,
No. 97, as amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., as may be amended and
supplemented.
SOLID WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY — A processing facility that
provides for the extraction and utilization of materials or energy from
municipal waste that is generated off site, including, but not limited
to, a facility that mechanically extracts materials from municipal waste,
a combustion facility that converts the organic fraction of municipal
waste to usable energy, and any chemical and biological process that
converts municipal waste into a fuel product. The term also includes
any facility for the combustion of municipal waste that is generated off
site, whether or not the facility is operated to recover energy.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A special exception shall be the permission
or approval granted by the Zoning Hearing Board in situations where
provision therefor is made by the terms of this Zoning Ordinance of
Upper Allen Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.172
SPECIAL OCCASION FACILITY — A facility located on a property
containing a structure of historical and/or architectural significance
which is available for private rental for occasions such as business
meetings, weddings, receptions, banquets, private parties, fund-raising
events, conferences and similar functions, including overnight guests,
although not otherwise open to the general public.[Added 2-7-2018
by Ord. No. 776]
SPECIAL OCCASION HOME — An owner-occupied residence of
historical and/or architectural significance which is available for private
rental for occasions such as business meetings, weddings, receptions,
banquets, private parties, fund-raising events, conferences and similar
functions, including overnight guests, although not otherwise open
to the general public. The rental use must be as secondary and
subordinate to the residential use.
172. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:624
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
STABLE, PRIVATE — An accessory building in which horses are kept for
private use of the landowner and not for hire, remuneration, exhibition
or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC — A building in which any horses are kept for
remuneration, hire, or sale.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennae and other facilities which render
them more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the
existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render
it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but
are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennae,
building-mounted antennae painted to match the existing structure and
facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.
STEEP SLOPE — Land with a fifteen-foot or greater change in elevation
within 100 feet or less in horizontal distance or, in other terms, 15% or
greater on the average. The following formula is the acceptable method
of determining average slope:
S = (0.0023 I x L) - A
S = Average percent slope of site
I = Contour interval in feet
L = Sum of the length of contours in feet
A = Land area in areas of parcel being considered
STOOP — A covered or uncovered area at the front, side or rear door.
STORAGE SHED — A structure not intended for residential occupancy
which is necessary to the principal use of the property as a place to
store personal property.
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater
runoff and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood
or storm.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
regions; buttocks; and female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts.
(3)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:625
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it
and including those basements used for the principal use.
STORY, HALF — A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than
two feet above the floor of such story.
STREET — Street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway,
lane, alley, viaduct, and any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private. Streets are
classified in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive
Plan and are defined as follows:
INTERSTATE HIGHWAY — Limited access highways designed for
traffic between major regional areas or larger urban communities
of 50,000 or more; these highways extend beyond state boundaries,
with access limited to interchanges located by the United States
Department of Transportation.
(1)
FREEWAY — Limited access roads designed for large volumes of
traffic between communities of 50,000 or more to major regional
traffic generators (such as central business districts, suburban
shopping centers and industrial areas); freeways should be tied
directly to arterial roads, with accessibility limited to specific
interchanges to avoid the impediment of through traffic.
(2)
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A principal arterial provides
land access while retaining a high degree of through traffic
mobility and serves major centers of urban activity and traffic
generation. These highways provide a high-speed, high-volume
network for travel between major destinations in both rural and
urban areas. Also referred to as a "regional arterial highway" as
designated in the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan.
(3)
MINOR ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A minor arterial gives greater
emphasis to land access with a lower level of through traffic
mobility than a principal arterial and serves larger schools,
industries, hospitals and small commercial areas not incidentally
served by principal arterials. Also referred to as a "community
arterial highway" as designated in the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan.
(4)
COLLECTOR HIGHWAY — A collector road serves dual functions,
collecting traffic between local roads and arterial streets and
providing access to abutting properties. It serves minor traffic
generators, such as local elementary schools, small individual
industrial plants, offices, commercial facilities and warehouses not
served by principal and minor arterials. Also referred to as a
"neighborhood collector highway" and "community collector
(5)
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:626
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of other
streets upon which the lot abuts, at the midway of the frontage of the
lot thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade
of the street at some midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET WIDTH — The distance between street lines measured at right
angles to the center line of the street.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
STRUCTURE ALTERATION — See "alterations, structural."
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A structure subordinate to and detached
from the main building on the same lot, the use of which is customarily
incidental to that of the principal structure on the lot. An accessory
structure shall exclude any vehicle as defined by the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code.173
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — A structure or part of a structure
that does not comply with the applicable provisions in this chapter
or amendment theretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment or
prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by
reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are
not limited to, nonconforming signs.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — Tent, construction shanty, or similarly
portable or demountable structure, intended for continuous use for not
longer than one year.
STUDENT — An individual registered for instruction from an
educational institution, whether public or private, within a given
calendar year.
STUDENT HOUSING — A living arrangement for no more than four
students located in a dwelling having a floor area of at least 1,500
square feet not including basement, garages and accessory buildings.
Students living in student housing shall mean students, typically
unrelated, living independently from parents or guardians while
attending an education institution.
STUDIO, DANCING OR MUSIC — The use of a premises by a teacher
of music or dancing where students are taught these arts for a fee and
highway" as designated in the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan.
LOCAL ROADS — Those that are local in character and serve
farms, residences, businesses, neighborhoods and abutting
properties.
(6)
173. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:627
where more than one student may be taught in a class at one time.
The term is synonymous with "dancing school" and "music school," and
other similar expressions.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or authorized agent of the owner of the lot,
tract or parcel of land to be subdivided for sale or development under
the terms of this chapter. See "applicant" or "developer."
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease petition of the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or
lot development; provided, however, the subdivision by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving
any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall
be exempt.
SUBGRADE — The natural ground lying beneath a road.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either: (1) before the improvement
or repair is started; or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is
being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
Zoning Ordinance of Upper Allen Township, "substantial improvement"
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either state or local health, sanitary
or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe
living conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — (1) Any
increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein
if necessary to avoid interference with existing antennae; or (2) any
further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array.
SUPPLY YARDS — A commercial establishment storing or offering for
sale building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:628
grain, and similar goods. Supply yards do not include the wrecking,
salvaging, dismantling or storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.
SWIMMING, BATHING OR OTHER POOL, PRIVATE — Any pool or open
tank not located within a completely enclosed building and containing,
or normally capable of containing, water to a depth of two feet. Farm
ponds and/or lakes are not included, provided that swimming and/or
wading was not the primary purpose for their construction.
TAVERN — An establishment which serves primarily alcoholic
beverages for mostly on-premises consumption and which is licensed
by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. Taverns may also serve food.
Taverns may include, but not limited to, beer gardens, brew pubs, bars,
barrooms, pubs, cocktail lounges, saloons, and taprooms. Taverns shall
not include adult businesses or adult regulated uses of any type.
TEMPORARY ROADSIDE STANDS — A prospective use, intended for
limited duration, for the display and retail sale of agricultural products
grown and produced by the seller.
TEMPORARY USE — A prospective use, intended for limited duration,
to be located in a zoning district permitting such use and not continuing
a nonconforming use or building.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
moving pictures or theatrical productions on a commercial basis.
THEATER, OUTDOOR DRIVE-IN — An open lot or part thereof, with
its associated facilities, devoted primarily to the showing of moving
pictures or theatrical productions, on a paid-admissions basis, to
patrons seated in automobiles or on outdoor seats.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennae, including, but not limited to, selfsupporting
lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and
light poles. DAS hub facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, Board of Commissioners (Township Commissioners), its
agents or authorized representatives.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Upper Allen.
TRACT — In certain districts and uses, the tract is the minimum amount
of land required prior to subdivision into allowed lots.
TRAILER — See "mobile home."
TRANSFORMER SUBSTATION — An electric substation containing an
assemblage of equipment for purposes other than generation or
utilization, through which electric energy in bulk is passed for the
purpose of switching and modifying its characteristics to meet the
needs of the general public.
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:629
TRANSPORTATION TERMINALS — Land and buildings used as a relay
station for the transfer of a load from one vehicle to another or one
party to another. The terminal cannot be used for permanent or longterm
accessory storage for principal land uses at other locations. The
terminal facility may include storage areas for trucks and buildings or
areas for the repair of trucks associated with the terminal. The terminal
may also serve as a passenger station that is central to an area and
serves as a junction at any point with another line. A bus terminal would
be a central point for passengers, and a truck terminal would be a
central point for freight.
TRUCK TERMINAL — A facility designed primarily to handle freight,
with limited warehousing of freight for no more than 30 days, with
secondary allowances for service, repair and storage of vehicles
involved in the normal operation.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not
been graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a
building.
UNIT — A part of the property, structure or building designed or
intended for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a
public street or way or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a
public street or way, and includes a proportionate undivided interest in
the common elements which is assigned to the property, structure or
building.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
VALUE-ADDED FARM PRODUCT — See "farm product, value-added."
VARIANCE — The permission granted by the Zoning Hearing Board,
following a public hearing that has been properly advertised, for an
adjustment/relief to some regulation or provision of the Zoning
Ordinance which, if strictly adhered to, would result in an unnecessary
hardship, and where the permission granted would not be contrary
to the public interest and would maintain the spirit and intent of the
ordinance. (Also see the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.174)
VEGETATIVE COVERAGE — An area covered with a vegetative
material: grass, shrubs, vines and trees.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use, building or structure and located on the same
lot with this principal use, building or structure.
(1)
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary use of property, buildings
or structures.
(2)
174. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:630
VEHICLE BODY SHOP — A building on a lot that is used for the
repair or painting of bodies, chassis, wheels, fenders, bumpers and/or
accessories of motor vehicles, provided that all repair and paint work
is performed within an enclosed building and all motor vehicle parts,
refuse and similar articles are stored within a building or enclosed area.
Mechanical repairs, the sale of lubricants, etc., may or may not be
included as accessory uses.
VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — A building on a lot designed and/or
used primarily for mechanical repairs, storage, rental or servicing of
automobiles, trucks and similar motor vehicles.
VEHICLE WASHING — A building on a lot, designed and used primarily
for the washing and polishing of automobiles and which may provide
accessory services as set forth herein for gasoline service stations.
VEHICLE, DISMANTLED OR NONOPERABLE — A vehicle which does
not display the current Pennsylvania state inspection certificate and is
manifestly incapable of being locomotive in its existing condition. This
does not include agricultural machinery and equipment, or any other
vehicles for which the state regulations do not require an inspection
sticker. A dismantled or nonoperable vehicle may also meet the
definition of junk vehicle.
VEHICLE, MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME AND/OR TRAILER
SALES LOT — An open lot used for the outdoor display or sales of new
or used automobiles or mobile homes and where minor and incidental
repair work (other than body and fender) may be done.
VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL — A vehicular-type unit primarily designed
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use;
self-propelled motor coach; travel trailer whether solid-sided or popup
and whether connected to power source by fifth-wheel or tongue;
towing trailers for transportation of boats, motorcycles, snowmobiles,
personal water craft, and/or other recreational devices; detachable
living quarters made mobile by attachment to another motor vehicle;
and which is licensed under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The term shall not include a mobile home when located
in a mobile home park or when otherwise complying with the concept
of a detached dwelling house.
VENDOR — A farmer or other person designated as having the right to
participate in the market.
VETERINARIAN — A qualified professional trained in the care and
treatment of animals and, in particular, domestic animals. For the
purpose of this Zoning Ordinance of Upper Allen Township, the term
"veterinarian" includes the office, waiting room, examination room,
treatment area and overnight quarters for the usual house pets (dogs,
cats, birds, hamsters and the like). See also "animal hospital."
VETERINARY — See "animal hospital."
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:631
VIEWSHED — That portion of the landscape which can be readily
viewed by the observer from one or more vantage points. The extent
of area that can be viewed is commonly delineated by landform,
vegetation and/or distance.
WADING POOL — A portable or permanent structure designed to hold
water for wading purposes, not to exceed 12 inches in depth and
may be located above or recessed below ground level. See "swimming,
bathing or other pool, private."
WALKWAY — An area designed for pedestrians, constructed to the
standards set forth in the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.175
WATER FACILITY — Any waterworks, water supply works, water
distribution system or part thereof, designed, intended or constructed
to provide or distribute potable water.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use
of groundwater and subsurface resources within the municipality.
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water, river, brook, creek, or channel or
ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.)
WETLANDS — Areas that are inundated or saturated by groundwater
or surface water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WHOLESALING, STORAGE AND WAREHOUSING — A lot, building
or group of buildings primarily used for the storage, transfer and
distribution of products and materials.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or
radio signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennae,
nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
electronics and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting,
receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless
communications services.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF
APPLICANT) — Any person that applies for a wireless communication
facility building permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the
public right-of-way (ROW) or other Township-owned land or property.
175. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:632
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such
as a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the Township.
YARD — A space open to the sky and unoccupied by any building,
structure or merchandise for display, sale or storage, located on the
same lot with a building or structure.
YIELD PLAN — One of two methods of determining the maximum
number of permitted dwelling units in a conservation subdivision,
where the yield plan is a conceptual layout plan in accordance with
the standards of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
containing proposed lots, streets, rights-of-way and other pertinent
features. Although the yield plan is drawn to scale, it need not be based
on a field survey. The yield plan is based on a chosen density factor of a
given conservation subdivision option and is applied to the gross tract
YARD, BUFFER — A space open to the sky and unoccupied by
any building, structure or merchandise for display, sale or storage,
located on the same lot with a building or structure, but in addition
to and outside of the required front yard, rear yard and side yards.
(1)
YARD, EXTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between the
buildings of a dwelling group or its accessory buildings and the
project boundary or street line.
(2)
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with
a main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the street line and the required building setback line. The
depth of the front yard shall be measured from the street line into
the required building setback line. On a corner lot, there shall be a
front yard along the street line.
(3)
YARD, INTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between the
buildings of a dwelling or its accessory buildings; not a front, side
or rear yard.
(4)
YARD, REAR — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with
a main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the rear line of the lot and required building setback line.
The depth of the rear yard shall be measured between the rear line
of the lot and the required building setback line. A building shall
not extend into the required rear yard. On a corner lot, the rear
yard should be the yard area opposite the street of address.
(5)
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space in the same lot with
the building between the side line of the lot and required building
setback line. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be
deemed a side line. A building shall not extend into the required
side yards. On a corner lot, there should only be one side yard.
(6)
§ 245-2.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-2.1
227:633
acreage. The actual methodology is provided in § 245-11.7 herein. The
other method is the adjusted tract area approach.
ZONING — A police power measure, enacted primarily by general
purpose units of local government, in which the community is divided
into districts or zones within which permitted and special uses are
established as well as regulations governing lot size, building bulk,
placement and other development standards. (Also see the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.176)
ZONING DISTRICT — A section of a municipality designated in the
Zoning Ordinance text and delineated on the Zoning Map, in which
requirements for the use of land and building and development
standards are prescribed.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of Upper
Allen Township.
ZONING MAP — The Map delineating the boundaries of districts which,
along with the zoning text, comprises the Zoning Ordinance.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer appointed by the Board
of Commissioners to administer the Zoning Ordinance and issue zoning
permits. (Also see Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.)
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by a Zoning Officer, as required
in the Zoning Ordinance, as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use, or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
restoration, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or
building, that acknowledges that such use, structure or building
complies with the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or
authorized variance therefrom.
176. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-2.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-2.1
227:634
ARTICLE III
Designation of Districts
§ 245-3.1. Districts designated.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Upper Allen is hereby
divided into districts, which shall be designated as follows:
Agricultural District
A Agriculture District
Residential Districts
R-1 Low-Density Residential District
R-2 Medium-Density Residential District
R-3 High-Density Residential District
Commercial and Mixed Use Districts
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
VIL Village District
PO Professional Office District
INS Institutional District
Industrial Districts
IND Industrial District
Overlay Districts
PRD Planned Residential Development District
SSP Steep Slope Protection District
FLOOD Floodplain District
CSO Conservation Design Overlay District
AO Airport Overlay District
SRC Scenic River Corridor Overlay District
§ 245-3.2. Purpose of zoning districts.
In addition to the overall purposes and community development objectives
stated in Article I of this chapter, the purpose for each designated Zoning
District is as follows:
A. Agriculture District (A). To permit, protect and encourage the
continued use of the land for agricultural uses. The intent is to use a
conservation subdivision design approach by conserving blocks of land
large enough to allow for efficient farm operations and associated
enterprises, protecting groundwater resources and providing for the
conservation of environmentally sensitive areas. Those areas
designated as the A District are to be used primarily for agriculture
§ 245-3.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-3.2
227:635
purposes and limited residential, nonresidential and accessory uses in
general conformance to the current Comprehensive Plan.
B. Low-Density Residential (R-1). To preserve and encourage continued
peaceful low-density neighborhoods and rural settings. This district will
encourage flexible design standards to help conserve blocks of land
large enough to allow for integrated greenways, the conservation of
environmentally sensitive areas, farmettes, and estate lots. This district
will provide for the orderly expansion of residential development in
those areas where public services are adequate and exclude uses not
compatible with such residential development.
C. Medium-Density Residential (R-2). To permit residential development
that results in an enhanced living environment. This district is to
provide reasonable standards to encourage the orderly expansion of
suburban-type residential development in the Township; prevent the
overcrowding of the land; exclude activities of a commercial or
industrial nature and any activities not compatible with residential
development; and to otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying
out the purpose of this chapter.
D. High-Density Residential (R-3). To provide reasonable standards for the
harmonious development of garden and high-rise apartments and other
uses and accessory uses which are compatible with high-density
housing; regulate the density of population; provide for public
convenience, such as public water and public sewer; avoid undue
congestion in the streets; and to otherwise create conditions conducive
to carrying out these and the other broad purposes of this chapter.
E. Neighborhood Commercial (C-1). To provide for neighborhood
convenience shopping where retail business or service establishments
supply commodities or perform services to meet the daily needs of the
neighborhood. These uses can serve as transitional uses between more
intensive and less intensive uses. This District is intended to be limited
to uses which do not generate large volumes of traffic or have extended
hours of operation.
F. Highway Commercial (C-2). To provide suitable locations for highwayoriented
retail, service, and entertainment uses. The uses provided in
this District are meant to serve local residents as well as tourists and
highway travelers passing through the Township. In addition to these
objectives, this District is intended to provide appropriate development
standards within the district to protect adjacent residential
neighborhoods.
G. Village (VIL). To preserve the character of villages by allowing the
compatible mix of residential, commercial and professional office uses.
Development is limited to medium concentration (typical of the existing
lot sizes and densities), and permitted uses are typically single- and
two-unit dwellings, plus certain additional nonresidential uses such as
§ 245-3.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-3.2
227:636
schools, parks, churches, commercial convenience services and
professional offices which service the residents of the village.
H. Professional Office (PO). To provide reasonable standards for the
harmonious development of business and professional offices, and
other similar and accessory uses; provide for the public convenience
and avoid undue congestion in the streets; and to otherwise create
conditions conducive to carrying out these and other broad purposes of
this chapter.
I. Institutional (INS). To accommodate institutional development and
construction which will serve and benefit organizations or entities of an
institutional nature. Such a district is intended to: encourage a
harmonious pattern of institutional development which can mutually
benefit the Township and the institution; encourage the development of
institutional uses in accordance with approved governmental and
professional regulatory standards, and to promote the planning for the
location of future institutional uses; and allow for institutional uses,
which shall include, but not be limited to, educational facilities,
retirement facilities, cultural facilities, churches and the like uses.
J. Industrial (IND). To permit and encourage appropriate sites to be used
for industrial development. Such district is further intended to
encourage the harmonious and appropriate physical development of the
Township by providing for gradual transitions between adjacent land
uses and to consolidate locations of industrially related land uses
which, because of their shipping, storage and other requirements, exert
special demands on the Township. Further, the district is intended to
contribute to the soundness of the economic base of the Township by
encouraging the construction on and continued use of land for
industrial purposes. The establishment of this District is also intended
to discourage and minimize air and water pollution, noise, glare, heat,
vibration, fire and safety hazards and other detriments to the
environment.
K. Planned Residential Development Overlay District (PRD). To encourage
a more efficient use of land and public services. See Article VIII.
L. Steep Slope Protection Overlay District (SSP). To conserve and protect
areas within the Township that have slopes of 15% or greater. See
Article IX.
M. Floodplain Overlay District (FLOOD). To protect properties located
within designated flood zones. See Article X.
N. Conservation Design Overlay District (CSO). To conserve open land and
areas containing unique and sensitive natural features and reduce the
infrastructure needs of development. See Article XI.
O. Airport Overlay District (AO). To consider safety issues around an
airport, regulate and restrict the height of constructed structures and
objects of natural growth. See Article XII.
§ 245-3.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-3.2
227:637
§ 245-3.3. Zoning Map.
The locations and boundaries of said districts shall be as shown upon
the Map attached to and made part of this chapter, which Map shall be
designated the "Upper Allen Township Zoning Map." The said Map and
all notations, references and other data shown thereon are hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter as if all were fully described
herein.
§ 245-3.4. District boundaries.
The boundaries between districts are as shown by lines properly identified
as district boundary lines and shown on the Zoning Map. Where uncertainty
exists as to boundaries of any districts as shown on said Map, the following
rules shall apply:
§ 245-3.5. Interpretation of boundaries.
In case of any uncertainty, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the
intent of the Zoning Map as to location of district boundaries.
§ 245-3.6. Use adjustment on district boundaries.
In unsubdivided land where a district boundary line divides a lot held in
single and separate ownership, the following rules shall apply:
P. Scenic River Corridor Overlay District (SRC). To protect, enhance, and
promote the Yellow Breeches Creek. See Article XIII.
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding
with the center lines of streets, highways, railroad lines or streams,
such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries, or where district boundaries are extensions of lot lines or
connect the intersection of lot lines, such lines shall be said district
boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to center lines of streets and highways, such district
boundaries shall be construed as parallel thereto and at such distances
therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map.
D. For unsubdivided land or where a district boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless dimensions indicate the same, shall
be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Map.
A. The use in a less restrictive district may extend over the portion of the
lot in the more restrictive district a distance of not more than 50 feet
beyond the district boundary line, providing such extension does not
extend the frontage of the less restrictive district along a street.
§ 245-3.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-3.6
227:638
§ 245-3.7. Application of regulations.
Except as herein provided:
§ 245-3.8. Permitted uses by zoning district.
B. The frontage of the less restricted district may extend over the portion
of the lot in the more restricted district a distance of not more than 50
feet beyond the district line, providing a special exception is granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building
or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in
conformance with the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located, with the exception of existing nonconformities as of
the effective date of this chapter, which may be altered in compliance
with Article XV Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Buildings herein.
B. No building shall hereafter be erected, altered or moved:
(1) That would exceed the height;
(2) That would occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
(3) That would have narrower, smaller rear yards, side yards or front
yards;
(4) That would provide less than the minimum habitable floor area;
(5) That would fail to meet any other dimensional requirement of this
chapter.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law or specifically stated in this Zoning
Code, including, but not limited to, Article XIV, Specific Standards for
Designated Uses, land or a structure shall only be used as or occupied
by a use specifically listed in this chapter as being permitted in the
respective Zoning District.
B. Any use shall only be permitted if it complies with all other
requirements of this chapter. Where different requirements are stated
for the same use or structure in this chapter, the most restrictive
requirement upon the use or structure shall apply.
C. For purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations shall have the
following meanings:
P = Permitted Use
SE = Special Exception
C = Conditional Use
N = Not Permitted
§ 245-14._____ = See Specific Standards
§ 245-3.6 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-3.8
227:639
§ 245-3.9. Uses not provided for.
Whenever under this chapter a use is not specifically permitted, the Zoning
Officer shall refer to the North American Industry Classification System
Manual (1997 printing or edition and current revisions) for the appropriate
classification in accordance with the approved uses in that zoning district;
however, in those cases that the use is not described or classified and/or
the zoning permit has been denied and an applicant makes an application
to the Zoning Officer for such use, the Zoning Officer shall refer the case
to the Zoning Hearing Board to hear and decide such request as a special
exception (provided that the applicant pays the appropriate fees and meets
conditions of the special exception procedure). The Zoning Hearing Board
shall have the authority to permit the use or deny the use in accordance
with the standards governing special exception applications. The use may
be permitted if it is similar to and compatible with the permitted uses in
the district in which the subject property is located; is not permitted in any
other district under the terms of this chapter; and in no way is in conflict
with the general purposes and intent of this chapter. The burden of proof
shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate that the proposed use meets the
foregoing criteria and would not be detrimental to the public health, safety
and welfare of the neighborhood.
D. Any list of prohibited uses in this chapter is intended to provide
examples but is not intended to be exhaustive.
§ 245-3.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-3.9
227:640
ARTICLE IV
Agriculture District (A)
§ 245-4.1. Area of application.
The following regulations shall apply to the areas designated Agricultural
District (A) on the Zoning Map.
§ 245-4.2. Permitted uses.
The following table (Table IV-1) lists all permitted, special exception, and
conditional uses in the Agriculture (A) District. Permitted, special exception,
and conditional uses shall meet the requirements of Article XIV, § 245-14.1,
and specific regulations for each use. All uses shall be permitted in the
designated development areas only unless otherwise noted:
Table IV-1
Agriculture District (A)
Use
# Use
Use
Regulation Specific Criteria
Agriculture and Conservation Uses
1 Active and low-impact
passive commercial
recreation areas (also
permitted in the
conservation area)
C § 245-14.5
2 Agribusiness P
3 Agriculture, excluding
confined livestock operations
(conservation area only)
P § 245-14.8
4 Confined livestock
operations (conservation
area only)
C § 245-14.17
5 Conservation of open land in
its natural state
(conservation area only)
P
6 Pasture land for horses used
for recreational purposes
P
7 Timber harvesting P § 245-16.3
Residential Uses
8 Single-family, detached P
Nonresidential Uses
9 Animal hospital SE § 245-14.11
10 Bed-and-breakfast home or
inn
SE § 245-14.12
§ 245-4.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-4.2
227:641
Table IV-1
Agriculture District (A)
Use
# Use
Use
Regulation Specific Criteria
11 Camp and campgrounds C § 245-14.14
12 Cemetery P § 245-14.15
13 Contractor's offices, shops
and yards
SE
14 Cultural facilities SE § 245-14.51
15 Golf course (development or
conservation area)
C § 245-14.24
16 House of worship P § 245-14.51
17 Kennel P § 245-14.11
18 Landscaping and garden
service, nonretail
SE § 245-14.35
19 Municipal uses and buildings P § 245-14.51
20 Natural production uses C § 245-14.44
21 Nursery, horticulture P
22 Private and semipublic
outdoor recreation areas
SE § 245-14.47
23 Public parks and recreation
areas
P
24 Public uses and buildings SE § 245-14.51
25 Public utility buildings and
structures (development or
conservation area)
C § 245-14.52
26 Riding academy and
boarding stable
P § 245-14.55
27 School, public or nonpublic SE § 245-14.50
28 Shotgun, rifle, pistol, or
archery range
C § 245-14.60
29 Wireless communications
facilities (conservation area
only)
C § 245-14.16
Accessory Uses
30 Accessory buildings and
structures
P § 245-16.2 and
§ 245-16.3
§ 245-4.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-4.2
227:642
Table IV-1
Agriculture District (A)
Use
# Use
Use
Regulation Specific Criteria
31 Agricultural uses, including
uses on the farmstead
(farmhouse, accessory
apartment, barns),
outbuildings and farm
structures. (conservation
area)
P § 245-14.2
32 Agritourism enterprise P § 245-14.9
33 Apartment, accessory SE § 245-14.3
34 Boardinghouse SE § 245-14.13
35 Day care, accessory SE § 245-14.4
36 Exotic wildlife, keeping of in
a designated conservation
area
P § 245-14.34
37 Family day-care home P
38 Farmers market P § 245-14.23
39 Honeybee apiaries P § 245-14.29
40 Keeping of animals and
animal structures for
noncommercial use
P § 245-14.32
41 Keeping of chickens or
poultry
P § 245-14.33
42 Professional and other home
occupations, no impact
P § 245-14.49
43 Professional and other home
occupations, other than noimpact
home-based
businesses (development and
conservation area with a
farmstead area)
P § 245-14.48
44 Sale of agricultural products
in a designated conservation
area
P § 245-14.56
45 Solar energy systems P § 245-14.62
46 Special occasion home SE § 245-14.64
§ 245-4.3. Development options, use and lot requirements.
§ 245-4.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-4.3
227:643
A. Development options. Two conservation subdivision development
options are provided to retain the majority of the land for agriculture
activity and provide limited development potential for permitted,
special exception, and conditional nonagricultural uses.
(1) Option 1, Basic Density and Conservation, provides for a minimum
of 60% of the tract to remain in agriculture use and allocates the
remaining lands for the development of moderate-density
residential and nonagricultural uses.
(2) Option 2, Enhanced Density with Greater Conservation, provides
for a larger percentage of the tract to remain in agricultural use, a
minimum of 70%, in exchange for higher densities of residential
uses.
B. Each tract shall have a minimum conservation area and a maximum
development area. Determination of the minimum conservation area
and the maximum development area, including the maximum permitted
residential density, shall be by the adjusted tract method or the yield
method in accordance with § 245-11.7 herein.
(1) The conservation requirement shall be the minimum open space
requirement (percentage of the adjusted tract area) plus all of the
constrained land. The minimum open space requirement shall be as
follows:
(a) Option 1: 60%.
(b) Option 2: 70%.
(2) The residential density factor to be applied for the calculation of
the maximum residential density in the development area shall be
in accordance with the following standards. To provide space for
parking, stormwater management and buffering, each acre of
nonresidential use shall be equal to two residential units and shall
be subtracted from the maximum residential density.
(a) Option 1: 80,000 square feet/dwelling unit.
(b) Option 2: 60,000 square feet/dwelling unit.
C. Permitted, special exception and conditional uses.
(1) Permitted, special exception and conditional uses shall meet the
requirements of Article XIV, § 245-14.1, and specific regulations for
each use.
(2) No more than one principal use shall occupy a lot in the
development area. The following standards shall apply to
developments where both residential and nonresidential lots are
occupying the development area.
§ 245-4.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-4.3
227:644
(a) No more than 20% of the development area on the tract shall
be devoted to lots with nonresidential uses.
(b) The maximum permitted residential dwelling units shall be
reduced by two units for each nonresidential acre.
(c) The nonresidential development shall meet all buffering
requirements in Article XVI, § 245-16.5, herein.
D. More than one principal use shall be allowed in the conservation area.
E. Lot requirements shall be in accordance with the following standards.
(1) On tracts of less than six acres existing on the effective date of this
chapter, single-family detached dwellings are permitted on
conventional sixty-thousand-square-foot lots with no required
greenway land. The following dimensional requirements shall be
met.
(a) Minimum street frontage: 125 feet.
(b) Minimum setbacks.
[1] Front yard: 50 feet.
[2] Side yard: 30 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 30 feet.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage: 35% of the lot area.
(2) Lot size. To maximize flexibility in design, no minimum lot sizes
shall be required in the development area. With the exception that,
for lots using on-lot wastewater disposal systems, the minimum lot
size shall be the size required by the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer. The septic field may be located on the
conservation area if it is held as common open space in the
development.
(3) Minimum setbacks.
(a) Minimum front yard setbacks shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
[1] Conservation area: 50 feet.
[2] Development area: 25 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard setbacks shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
[1] Conservation area: 30 feet.
[2] Development area: Distance between residential buildings
on adjacent lots shall be not less than 10 feet; however, no
§ 245-4.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-4.3
227:645
residential lot shall have a minimum side setback less than
five feet. A nonresidential building shall be no closer than
20 feet to an adjacent building, with no nonresidential lot
having a side setback less than 10 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setbacks shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
[1] Conservation area: 30 feet.
[2] Development area: 15 feet.
(4) Lot coverage.
(a) Option 1 development areas. Not more than 30% for
impervious coverage for residential uses; not more than 30%
building coverage and 50% impervious coverage for
nonresidential buildings.
(b) Option 2 development areas. Not more than 35% for
impervious coverage for residential uses; not more than 35%
building coverage and 55% impervious coverage for
nonresidential buildings.
(c) Conservation area. Not more than 10% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings and impervious surface.
(5) Buffers. Buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements contained in § 245-16.5, General buffer regulations.
All grazing and pasture area shall be fenced to prevent livestock
from roaming.
(6) Building height limit. The maximum height of buildings hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
(a) One- or two-family dwelling: 35 feet.
(b) Church or similar place of worship: 45 feet for the principal
building.
(c) Nonresidential: 35 feet.
(d) Other structures shall comply with provisions of § 245-16.6 of
this chapter.
F. Developments in the A District shall meet the general regulations and
design standards for conservation subdivisions in accordance with
§ 245-11.8 herein.
G. In order to preserve a concentration of farmed land in Upper Allen
Township, conservation land shall be designed to include prime
agricultural soils as identified in the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan, contiguous farmed portions of the same tract and,
§ 245-4.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-4.3
227:646
§ 245-4.4. Sign requirements.
Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Article XVIII, Signs, of this
chapter.
§ 245-4.5. Off-street parking requirements.
Off-street parking and access requirements shall be provided in accordance
with Article XVII, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter.
§ 245-4.6. Agricultural nuisance disclaimer.
Lands within the Agricultural District are located within an area where land
is used for commercial agricultural production. Owners, residents and other
users of this property may be subjected to inconvenience, discomfort and
the possibility of injury to property and health arising from normal and
accepted agricultural practices and operations, including, but not limited
to, noise, odors, dust, the operation of machinery of any kind, including
aircraft, the storage and disposal of manure, the application of fertilizers
and soil amendments. Owners, occupants and users of this property should
be prepared to accept such inconveniences, discomfort and possibility of
injury from normal agricultural operations, and are hereby put on official
notice that Section 4 of the Pennsylvania Act 133 of 1982, as amended,
otherwise known as the "Right to Farm Law,"177 may bar them from
obtaining legal judgment against such normal agricultural operations used
in a prudent manner.
where adjoining another farm parcel, farmed land contiguous to farmed
portions of the adjoining tract.
H. Conservation area easements. Designated conservation areas shall be
permanently protected through a conservation easement in accordance
with § 245-11.9 herein.
I. Ownership and maintenance of conservation areas and common
facilities. The ownership and maintenance of designated conservation
areas and common facilities shall be in accordance with § 245-11.10
herein.
177. Editor's Note: See 3 Pa. Stat. §§ 951-957.
§ 245-4.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-4.6
227:647

ARTICLE V
Residential Districts
§ 245-5.1. Area of application.
The following regulations shall apply to the areas designated as Low-
Density Residential (R-1), Medium-Density Residential (R-2), and High-
Density Residential (R-3) Districts on the Zoning Map.
§ 245-5.2. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-7-2018 by Ord. No. 776]
The following table (Table V-1) lists all permitted, special exception, and
conditional uses in the Low-Density Residential (R-1), Medium-Density
Residential (R-2), and High-Density Residential (R-3) Districts. Permitted,
special exception, and conditional uses shall meet the requirements of
Article XIV, § 245-14.1, and specific regulations for each use.
Table V-1
Residential Districts
Use Regulation
Use
# Use R-1 R-2 R-3
Specific
Criteria
Agriculture and Conservation Uses
1 Active and low-impact
passive commercial
recreation areas
(greenway area only)
P N N § 245-14.5
2 Agriculture, excluding
confined livestock
operations (greenway
area only)
P N N § 245-14.8
3 Conservation of open
land in its natural state
(for example, woodland,
fallow field, timber
harvesting, or managed
meadow)
P N N
4 Pasture land for horses
used for recreational
purposes (greenway
area only)
P N N
5 Timber harvesting P N N § 245-16.3
Residential Uses
6 Conservation
subdivision
P P N Article XI
§ 245-5.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-5.2
227:649
Table V-1
Residential Districts
Use Regulation
Use
# Use R-1 R-2 R-3
Specific
Criteria
7 Continuing care
retirement community
N C SE § 245-14.18
8 Conversion apartments N N SE § 245-14.20
9 Group homes and family
care facilities
P P P § 245-14.26
10 Group quarters N N SE § 245-14.27
11 Halfway house N N P § 245-14.28
12 Long-term-care nursing
center and personal
care centers
N C SE § 245-14.36
13 Mobile/ manufactured
home park
N N SE § 245-14.40
and Chapter
220
14 Multifamily N N P § 245-14.43
15 Single-family, attached
(townhouse, max 8 du
per building)
N P P § 245-14.61
16 Single-family, detached P P P
17 Single-family,
semidetached (duplex, 2
du)
N P P
18 Student housing (in a
permitted residential
unit)
N SE SE § 245-14.65
19 Two-family detached N P P
Nonresidential Uses
20 Adaptive reuse of
federally or locally
designated historic
building
P P P § 245-14.6
21 Animal hospital C N N § 245-14.11
22 Bed-and-breakfast home SE SE N § 245-14.12
23 Camp and campgrounds C N N § 245-14.14
24 Cultural facilities P N N § 245-14.51
25 Farmers market P N N § 245-14.23
§ 245-5.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-5.2
227:650
Table V-1
Residential Districts
Use Regulation
Use
# Use R-1 R-2 R-3
Specific
Criteria
26 Golf course (greenway
or conservation area)
C N N § 245-14.24
27 Group day-care center N SE N § 245-14.25
28 Group day-care homes
and older adult living
centers
N N SE § 245-14.25
29 Hospitals N N SE § 245-14.30
30 House of worship P P P § 245-14.51
31 Kennel C N N § 245-14.11
32 Landscaping and garden
service, nonretail
P N N § 245-14.35
33 Library P P P § 245-14.51
34 Mixed uses N P P § 245-14.39
35 Municipal uses and
buildings
P P P § 245-14.51
36 Public parks and
recreation areas
P P P
37 Public uses and
buildings
P P N § 245-14.51
38 Public utility buildings
and structures (R-1 only:
greenway or
conservation area)
C N SE § 245-14.52
39 Resort C N N § 245-14.54
40 Riding academy and
boarding stable
SE N N § 245-14.55
41 School, public or
nonpublic
SE P P § 245-14.50
42 Special occasion facility P N N § 245-14.63.5
43 Wireless
communications
facilities (greenway area
only)
C N N § 245-14.16
Accessory Uses
§ 245-5.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-5.2
227:651
Table V-1
Residential Districts
Use Regulation
Use
# Use R-1 R-2 R-3
Specific
Criteria
44 Accessory buildings,
structures and uses,
including timber
harvesting
P P SE § 245-16.2
and
§ 245-16.3
45 Agricultural uses,
including uses on the
farmstead (farmhouse,
accessory apartment,
barns), outbuildings and
farm structures,
(greenway/ conservation
area)
P N N § 245-14.2
46 Apartments, accessory SE SE P § 245-14.3
47 Day care, accessory SE SE SE § 245-14.4
48 Family day-care home P P P
49 Honeybee apiaries P P N § 245-14.29
50 Keeping of animals and
animal structures for
noncommercial use
P N N § 245-14.32
51 Keeping of chickens or
poultry
P P P § 245-14.33
52 Professional and other
home occupations, noimpact
P P P § 245-14.49
53 Professional and other
home occupations, other
than no-impact homebased
businesses
P P P § 245-14.48
54 Sale of agricultural
products
P N N § 245-14.56
55 Solar energy systems P P P § 245-14.62
56 Special occasion home SE N N § 245-14.64
§ 245-5.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-5.2
227:652
Table V-1
Residential Districts
Use Regulation
Use
# Use R-1 R-2 R-3
Specific
Criteria
57 Water supply and
sewage disposal systems
and stormwater
detention areas,
designed, landscaped,
and available for use
and an integral part of
the greenway
P N N
§ 245-5.3. Low-Density Residential (R-1) District.
A. Permitted uses. See Table V-1 for a complete list of allowed uses within
the R-1 District.
(1) No more than one principal use shall occupy a lot in the
development area. The following standards shall apply to
developments where both residential and nonresidential lots are
occupying the development area.
(a) No more than 20% of the development area on the tract shall
be devoted to lots with nonresidential uses.
(b) The maximum permitted residential dwelling units shall be
reduced by two units for each nonresidential acre.
(c) The nonresidential development shall meet all buffering
requirements in Article XVI, § 245-16.5, herein.
(2) More than one principal use shall be allowed in the greenway area.
(3) Uses within conservation subdivision developments that maintain
existing historic, cultural or environmentally sensitive resources
may reduce minimum open space requirements by a maximum of
5% with approval by the Board of Commissioners.
B. Development options. Three conservation subdivision development
options are provided to retain greenways and provide development
potential for permitted, special exception, and conditional uses.
(1) Option 1, Basic Density and Conservation, provides for a minimum
of 50% of the tract to remain in open space and allocates the
remaining lands for the development of moderate-density
residential and nonresidential uses.
(2) Option 2, Enhanced Density with Greater Conservation, provides
for a larger percentage of the tract to remain in conservation use, a
§ 245-5.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-5.3
227:653
minimum of 60%, in exchange for higher densities of residential
uses.
(3) Option 3, Estate Lots, provides for rural residential uses at a
reduced density on larger lots in conventional layouts, where
homes and streets are located carefully to minimize impacts on
resource lands.
(4) Combining the design options. The various layout and density
options described in this article may be combined, at the discretion
of the Board, based upon demonstration by the applicant that such
a combination would better fulfill the intent of this chapter, in
particular, the stated purposes of this article, as compared with
applying a single option to the property. The developer shall
delineate clearly the tract area to be utilized for each option and
the applicable density calculations in accordance with § 245-5.3C.
C. Each tract shall have a minimum greenway (open space) area and a
maximum development area. Determination of the minimum greenway
area and the maximum development area, including the maximum
permitted residential density, shall be by the adjusted tract method or
the yield method in accordance with § 245-11.7 herein. The greenway
requirement shall be the minimum open space requirement
(percentage of the adjusted tract area) plus all of the constrained land.
(1) The minimum open space requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Option 1: 50%.
(b) Option 2: 60%.
(c) Option 3: 0%. Open space is considered to be a part of each
estate lot.
(2) The density factor to be applied for the calculation of the maximum
residential density in the development area shall be in accordance
with the following standards. To provide space for parking,
stormwater management and buffering, each acre of nonresidential
use shall be equal to two residential development rights and shall
be subtracted from the maximum residential density.
(a) Option 1: 80,000 square feet/dwelling unit.
(b) Option 2: 60,000 square feet/dwelling unit.
(c) Option 3: 217,800 square feet/dwelling unit (five acres).
D. Lot requirements.
(1) On tracts of less than six acres existing on the effective date of this
chapter, single-family detached dwellings are permitted on
conventional sixty-thousand-square-foot lots with no required
§ 245-5.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-5.3
227:654
greenway land. The following dimensional requirements shall apply
to these conventional lots and to Option 3, Estate Lots:
(a) Minimum street frontage: 125 feet.
(b) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Front yard: 50 feet.
[2] Side yard: 30 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 30 feet.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage: 30% of the lot area.
(2) Lot size. To maximize flexibility in design, no minimum lot sizes
shall be required in the development area for Option 1 and Option
2, with the exception that, for lots using on-lot wastewater disposal
systems, the minimum lot size shall be the size required by the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer. The septic field may be
located on the conservation area if it is held as common open space
in the development.
(3) Minimum setbacks.
(a) Minimum front yard setbacks shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
[1] Greenway area: 50 feet.
[2] Development area: 25 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard setbacks shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
[1] Greenway area: 30 feet.
[2] Development area: Distance between residential buildings
on adjacent lots shall be not less than 10 feet; however, no
residential lot shall have a minimum side setback less than
five feet. A nonresidential building shall be no closer than
20 feet to an adjacent building, with no nonresidential lot
having a side setback less than 10 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setbacks shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
[1] Greenway area: 30 feet.
[2] Development area: 15 feet.
(4) Lot coverage.
(a) Option 1 development areas: not more than 30% for
impervious coverage for residential uses; not more than 30%
§ 245-5.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-5.3
227:655
building coverage and 50% impervious coverage for
nonresidential buildings.
(b) Option 2 development areas: not more than 35% for
impervious coverage for residential uses; not more than 35%
building coverage and 55% impervious coverage for
nonresidential buildings.
(c) Conservation area: not more than 10% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings and impervious surface.
(5) Buffers. Buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements contained in § 245-16.5, General buffer regulations.
All grazing and pasture area shall be fenced to prevent livestock
from roaming.
(6) Building height limit. The maximum height of buildings hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
(a) One- or two-family dwelling: 35 feet.
(b) Church or similar place of worship: 45 feet for the principal
building.
(c) Nonresidential: 35 feet.
(d) Other structures shall comply with provisions of § 245-16.6 of
this chapter.
E. Building height limitations. No principal building or structure shall
exceed 35 feet in height; however, this height may be exceeded in
accordance with § 245-16.6, Height adjustments, of this chapter.
Accessory building or structure heights shall be in accordance with
§ 245-16.2 herein.
F. Development in the R-1 District shall meet the general regulations and
design standards for conservation subdivisions in accordance with
§ 245-11.8 herein.
G. Greenway area standards.
(1) Greenway lands shall be laid out where possible to form an
interconnected network of open space. The required greenway land
consists of all constrained land.
(2) Options 1 and 2 greenway land shall generally remain undivided
and may be owned and maintained by a homeowners' association,
land trust, another conservation organization recognized by the
municipality, or by a private individual (typically as part of the
original farmhouse). However, in no case shall less than 30% of the
land comprising the "adjusted tract area" be available for the
common use and passive enjoyment of the subdivision residents.
These ownership options may be combined so that different parts
§ 245-5.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-5.3
227:656
§ 245-5.4. Medium-Density Residential (R-2) District.
of the greenway land may be owned by different entities in
accordance with Article XI, § 245-11.10.
(3) In Option 3 subdivisions, the required greenway may lie within the
lots or undivided open space.
(4) In accordance with the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance178 and/or the Comprehensive Recreation
and Open Space Plan, a portion of the total acreage in any of the
options may be subject to the Township's public land dedication
requirement (typically to provide potential connections with the
Township long-range trail network).
(5) Buffers for adjacent public parkland. Where the proposed
development adjoins public parkland, a natural greenway buffer at
least 150 feet deep shall be provided within the development along
its common boundary with the parkland, within which no new
structures shall be constructed, nor shall any clearing of trees or
understory growth be permitted (except as may be necessary for
street, trail construction, or woodland management). Where this
buffer is unwooded, the Board may require vegetative screening to
be planted or that it be managed to encourage natural forest
succession through "no-mow" policies and the periodic removal of
invasive alien plant and tree species.
(6) No portion of any building lot may be used for meeting the
minimum required greenway land. However, active agricultural
land with farm buildings, excluding areas used for residences, may
be used to meet the minimum required greenway land.
(7) Greenway easements. Designated greenway areas shall be
permanently protected through a conservation easement in
accordance with § 245-11.9 herein.
(8) Ownership and maintenance of greenway areas and common
facilities. The ownership and maintenance of designated greenway
areas and common facilities shall be in accordance with
§ 245-11.10 herein.
A. Permitted uses. See Table V-1 for a complete list of allowed uses within
the R-2 District.
B. Dimensional requirements. The following table (Table V-2) shall apply to
all areas designed R-2 District on the Zoning Map. The table shows the
minimum lot size, setbacks, and street frontage requirements per
dwelling unit or nonresidential uses. Requirements represent
minimums unless otherwise noted.
178. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-5.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-5.4
227:657
Table V-2
Medium-Density Residential (R-2) District
Public Water and
Public Sewer
Public Sewer/
No Public
Water
No Public Water
or Public Sewer
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard Minimum Minimum Minimum
Use
# Use Minimum Feet
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
Lot
Size
(acres)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
Residential Uses
1 Conversion
apartments
See § 245-14.20
2 Conservation
subdivision1
See Article XI
3 Continuing
care
retirement
community
See § 245-14.18
4 Long-termcare
nursing
center and
personal
care centers
See § 245-14.36
5 Singlefamily,
attached
(townhouse,
max 8 du
per
building)
25 10
(exterior
side)
15 2,000 20
interior
units;
35
exterior
units
Not permitted Not permitted
6 Singlefamily,
detached
25 10 15 10,000 75 20,000 75 1 100
7 Singlefamily,
semidetached
(duplex, 2
du)
25 10 15 20,000 75 20,000 75 1 100
§ 245-5.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-5.4
227:658
Table V-2
Medium-Density Residential (R-2) District
Public Water and
Public Sewer
Public Sewer/
No Public
Water
No Public Water
or Public Sewer
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard Minimum Minimum Minimum
Use
# Use Minimum Feet
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
Lot
Size
(acres)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
8 Student
housing (in
a permitted
residential
unit)
25 10 15 10,000 75 20,000 75 1 100
9 Two-family
detached
(two
dwelling
units)
25 10 15 5,000
per
dwelling
35 10,0002 35 1 100
Nonresidential Uses
10 Adaptive
reuse of
federally or
locally
designated
historic
building
25 10 35 10,000 75 20,000 75 1 100
11 Bed-andbreakfast
home or inn
25 10 35 1 acre 100 1 acre 100 1 100
12 Group daycare
center
25 10 15 1 acre 75 1 acre 75 1 100
13 Group
homes and
family care
facilities
25 10 15 10,000 75 20,000 75 1 100
14 House of
worship
50 50 50 2 acres 100 2 acres 100 2 100
15 Library 25 25 25 2 acres 100 2 acres 100 2 100
§ 245-5.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-5.4
227:659
Table V-2
Medium-Density Residential (R-2) District
Public Water and
Public Sewer
Public Sewer/
No Public
Water
No Public Water
or Public Sewer
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard Minimum Minimum Minimum
Use
# Use Minimum Feet
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
Lot
Size
(acres)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
16 Municipal
uses and
buildings
See § 245-14.51
17 Public parks
and
recreation
areas
25 25 25 1 acre 100 1 acre 100 1 100
18 Public uses
and
buildings
See § 245-14.51
19 School,
public or
nonpublic
50 50 50 2 acres 100 2 acres 100 2 100
NOTES:
1 Tracts of land or parcels containing areas designated for greenway and trail links as
shown on the Greenway/Trail Map for Upper Allen Township in the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan Recreation and Open Space Plan, as amended, shall be developed
as a conservation subdivision in accordance with Article XI, Conservation Design Overlay
District, herein. Conservation subdivisions are permitted by right in other locations within
the R-2 District, but are not required.
2 Assumes one on-site water system shall be provided to serve both units, provided ownership
and maintenance agreements shall be a part of all sales agreements for the units, including
future sales of the units.
C. Lot coverage requirements. Not more than 30% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings, and no more than 45% shall be occupied by
impervious surface.
D. Building height limitations. No principal building or structure shall
exceed 35 feet in height; however, this height may be exceeded in
accordance with § 245-16.6, Height adjustments, of this chapter.
Accessory building or structure heights shall be in accordance with
§ 245-16.2 herein.
§ 245-5.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-5.5
227:660
§ 245-5.5. High-Density Residential (R-3) District.
A. Permitted uses. See Table V-1 for a complete list of allowed uses within
the R-3 District.
B. Dimensional requirements. The following table (Table V-3) shall apply to
all areas designed R-3 District on the Zoning Map. The table shows the
minimum lot size, setbacks, and street frontage requirements per
dwelling unit or nonresidential uses. Requirements represent
minimums unless otherwise noted. All R-3 Districts shall be in the
service area of public water and public sewer.
Table V-3
High-Density Residential (R-3) District
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard Minimum
Use
# Use
Minimum
Feet
Lot Size
(per
unit)
(square
feet)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
Residential Uses
1 Conversion
apartments
20 15 15 10,000 75
2 Continuing
care
retirement
community
See § 245-14.18
3 Long-termcare
nursing
center and
personal care
centers
See § 245-14.36
4 Mobile/
manufactured
home park
In accordance with § 245-14.40 of this chapter and
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter 220)
5 Multifamily
dwelling
50 50 50 1 acre
per
development
area and
2,000
square
feet per
unit
100
§ 245-5.5 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-5.5
227:661
Table V-3
High-Density Residential (R-3) District
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard Minimum
Use
# Use
Minimum
Feet
Lot Size
(per
unit)
(square
feet)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
6 Single-family,
attached
(townhouse,
max 8 du per
building)
20 15
exterior
sides
15 2,000 20 interior
units; 35
exterior
units
7 Single-family,
detached
20 15 15 8,000 60
8 Single-family,
semi-detached
(duplex, 2 du)
20 15
exterior
sides
15 4,000 30
9 Student
housing (in a
permitted
residential
unit)
Shall be allowed in a permitted residential unit in
accordance with § 245-14.65
10 Two-family
detached
20 15 15 4,000 60
Nonresidential Uses
11 Adaptive
reuse of
federally or
locally
designated
historic
building
20 15 15 10,000 75
12 Group daycare
homes
and older
adult living
centers
20 15 35 1 acre 100
13 Group homes
and family
care facilities
20 15 15 10,000 75
§ 245-5.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-5.5
227:662
Table V-3
High-Density Residential (R-3) District
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard Minimum
Use
# Use
Minimum
Feet
Lot Size
(per
unit)
(square
feet)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
14 Group
quarters
25 15 15 10,000 75
15 Hospitals 50 50 50 5 acres 200
16 House of
worship
50 50 50 2 acres 100
17 Library 50 50 50 2 acres 100
18 Municipal
uses and
buildings
See § 245-14.51
19 Public parks
and
recreation
areas
25 25 25 1 acre 100
20 Public utility
buildings and
structures
75 75 75 See
§ 245-14.52
Accessory Uses
21 Accessory
buildings,
structures and
uses,
including
timber
harvesting
See § 245-16.2 and § 245-16.3
22 Day care,
accessory
Setback per primary use - house
of worship, etc., as defined
under accessory day care
See house of
worship, etc. and
§ 245-14.51
23 Professional
and other
home
occupations,
no-impact
To be part of the primary use. See § 245-14.49
§ 245-5.5 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-5.5
227:663
§ 245-5.6. Sign requirements.
Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Article XVIII, Signs, of this
chapter.
§ 245-5.7. Off-street parking requirements.
Off-street parking and access requirements shall be provided in accordance
with Article XVII, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter.
§ 245-5.8. Agricultural nuisance disclaimer.
Lands within the Residential Districts are located within an area where
land is used for commercial agricultural production. Owners, residents and
other users of this property may be subjected to inconvenience, discomfort
and the possibility of injury to property and health arising from normal and
accepted agricultural practices and operations, including, but not limited
to, noise, odors, dust, the operation of machinery of any kind, including
aircraft, the storage and disposal of manure, the application of fertilizers
and soil amendments. Owners, occupants and users of this property should
be prepared to accept such inconveniences, discomfort and possibility of
injury from normal agricultural operations and are hereby put on official
notice that Section 4 of the Pennsylvania Act 133 of 1982, as amended,
otherwise known as the "Right to Farm Law,"179 may bar them from
obtaining legal judgment against such normal agricultural operations used
in a prudent manner.
C. Lot coverage requirements. Not more than 35% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings, and no more than 55% shall be occupied by
impervious surface.
D. Building height limitations. No principal building or structure shall
exceed 35 feet in height; however, this height may be exceeded in
accordance with § 245-16.6, Height adjustments, of this chapter.
Accessory building or structure heights shall be in accordance with
§ 245-16.2 herein.
E. Buffer and screening requirements. Buffer and screen planting areas
and buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
contained in § 245-16.5, General buffer regulations, herein.
179. Editor's Note: See 3 Pa. Stat. §§ 951-957.
§ 245-5.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-5.8
227:664
ARTICLE VI
Commercial, Mixed-Use and Institutional Districts
§ 245-6.1. Area of application.
The following regulations shall apply to the areas designated as
Neighborhood Commercial (C-1), Highway Commercial (C-2), Village (VIL),
Professional Office (PO), and Institutional (INS) Districts on the Zoning
Map.
§ 245-6.2. Permitted uses.
The following table (Table VI-1) lists all permitted, special exception, and
conditional uses in the Neighborhood Commercial (C-1), Highway
Commercial (C-2), Village (VIL), Professional Office (PO), and Institutional
(INS) Districts. Permitted, special exception, and conditional uses shall
meet the requirements of Article XIV, § 245-14.1, and specific regulations
for each use.
Table VI-1
Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts
Use Regulation
Use
#
Use C-1 C-2 VIL PO INS Specific
Criteria
Residential Uses
1 Continuing care
retirement
community
N N N N P § 245-14.18
2 Group homes and
family care
facilities
N N P N P § 245-14.26
3 Group quarters N N N N P § 245-14.27
4 Long-term-care
nursing center and
personal care
centers
N N N N P § 245-14.36
5 Multifamily P N P P N § 245-14.43
6 Single-family,
attached
(townhouse, max 8
du per building)
N N P N P § 245-14.61
7 Single-family,
detached
P N P N P
8 Single-family,
semidetached
(duplex, 2 du)
N N P N P
§ 245-6.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-6.2
227:665
Table VI-1
Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts
Use Regulation
Use
#
Use C-1 C-2 VIL PO INS Specific
Criteria
9 Student housing (in
a permitted
residential unit)
N N P N P § 245-14.65
10 Two-family
detached
N N P N N
Nonresidential Uses
11 Adaptive reuse of
federally or locally
designated historic
building
P P P N N § 245-14.6
12 Adult regulated
facility
N N N N N § 245-14.7
13 Animal hospital SE N N P N § 245-14.11
14 Bed-and-breakfast
home
N P SE N SE § 245-14.12
15 Bed-and-breakfast
inn
N P N N N § 245-14.12
16 Business and office
equipment sales
and service
N P N P N
17 Business services P P P P N
18 Colleges,
universities,
including
dormitories
N N N N P
19 Commercial
recreational or
entertainment
facility
N P N N N
20 Convenience store
(with gas
dispensing)
N P N P N § 245-14.19
21 Convenience store
(without gas
dispensing)
SE P N P N § 245-14.19
22 Cultural facilities P P P P P § 245-14.51
§ 245-6.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-6.2
227:666
Table VI-1
Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts
Use Regulation
Use
#
Use C-1 C-2 VIL PO INS Specific
Criteria
23 Emergency medical
treatment facility
P P N P SE § 245-14.22
24 Farmers market P P N N N § 245-14.23
25 Gasoline service
station
N P N N N § 245-14.19
26 Group day-care
homes and older
adult living centers
N P SE P P § 245-14.25
27 Heliports and
helistops
N N N C N § 245-14.10
28 Hospitals N C N P C § 245-14.30
29 House of worship P P P N P § 245-14.51
30 Kennel N P N N N § 245-14.11
31 Landscaping and
garden service,
nonretail
P P N N N § 245-14.35
32 Landscaping and
garden service,
retail
P P N N N § 245-14.35
33 Laundry and drycleaning
establishment
N N N P N § 245-14.37
34 Library P P P P P § 245-14.51
§ 245-6.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-6.2
227:667
Table VI-1
Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts
Use Regulation
Use
#
Use C-1 C-2 VIL PO INS Specific
Criteria
35 Manufacturing,
limited to
processing and
packaging of eatery
products; drug and
pharmaceutical
preparation;
perfumes and
cosmetics;
electrical lighting
and wiring;
electronic
components;
optical instruments,
lenses; dental and
medical
instruments;
household
instruments; sports
equipment;
apparel; footwear;
luggage; leather
and other finished
products made
from fabrics,
rubber, leather and
similar materials;
and printing,
graphic
reproduction and
allied services,
including
manufacturing of
manifold business
forms, greeting
cards, bookbinding,
typesetting and
photoengraving and
similar uses;
provided that no
adverse external
effects or emission
such as dust, glare,
N N N P N
§ 245-6.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-6.2
227:668
Table VI-1
Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts
Use Regulation
Use
#
Use C-1 C-2 VIL PO INS Specific
Criteria
vibration, electrical
or radio
disturbance, fumes,
vapor or gases go
beyond the
property lines
creating such
potential nuisances
36 Medical labs and
clinics
C P N P SE § 245-14.30
37 Microbrewery P P N P N
38 Microdistillery P P N P N
39 Mixed uses P P P P P § 245-14.39
40 Mortuary or
undertaking
establishment
N P N N N § 245-14.41
41 Motel/hotel N P N P N § 245-14.42
42 Municipal uses and
buildings
P P P P P § 245-14.51
43 Nightclubs N C N N N § 245-14.45
44 Nursery,
horticulture
N P N N N
45 Office buildings and
office center
N P N P N
46 Parking lot N P N N N
47 Personal services P P P N N
48 Professional offices P P P P N
49 Public parks and
recreation areas
P P P P P
50 Public utility
buildings and
structures
N P N P N § 245-14.52
51 Retail businesses P P P P N
52 Resort N P N N N § 245-14.54
53 Restaurant P P N P N
54 School, commercial N P SE N N § 245-14.57
§ 245-6.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-6.2
227:669
Table VI-1
Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts
Use Regulation
Use
#
Use C-1 C-2 VIL PO INS Specific
Criteria
55 School, public or
nonpublic
SE P SE P P § 245-14.50
56 Shopping center,
mall or plaza and
large commercial
establishments
N P N P N § 245-14.59
57 Storage, mini
facility
C P N N N § 245-14.38
58 Studio, dancing or
music
P P P SE P
59 Taverns N P N N N § 245-14.66
60 Vehicle body shop
and repair garage
N P N N N § 245-14.68
61 Vehicle, mobile/
manufactured home
or trailer sales lot
N P N N N § 245-14.69
62 Vehicle washes N P N N N § 245-14.70
63 Warehousing and
storage, not greater
than 25,000 square
feet of gross floor
area
N SE N P N § 245-14.71
64 Wireless
communications
facilities
N C N N N § 245-14.16
Accessory Uses
65 Accessory
buildings,
structures and
uses, including
timber harvesting
P P P P P § 245-16.2
and
§ 245-16.3
66 Apartments,
accessory
SE N N N SE § 245-14.3
67 Boardinghouse N N N N P § 245-14.13
68 Day care, accessory SE P SE P P § 245-14.4
69 Drive-in facilities
for permitted uses
C P N P N § 245-14.21
§ 245-6.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-6.2
227:670
Table VI-1
Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts
Use Regulation
Use
#
Use C-1 C-2 VIL PO INS Specific
Criteria
70 Family day-care
home
P N P N P
71 Honeybee apiaries P N P N P § 245-14.29
72 Keeping of chickens
or poultry
P N P N P § 245-14.33
73 Professional and
other home
occupations, other
than no-impact
home-based
businesses
P P P P P § 245-14.49
74 Professional and
other home
occupations, impact
P P P N SE § 245-14.48
75 Solar energy
systems
P P P P P § 245-14.62
76 Special occasion
home
N P SE N N § 245-14.64
§ 245-6.3. Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) District.
A. Permitted uses. See Table VI-1 for a complete list of allowed uses within
the C-1 Dstrict.
B. Use limitation. Without intending to reduce the total lot coverage or
building area as otherwise permitted in this article, the square footage
of a single structure may not exceed 15,000 square feet in gross floor
area, with the exception of libraries, public parks and recreation areas,
houses of worship and municipal buildings, which may exceed 15,000
square feet in gross floor area.
C. Lot area requirements. The minimum lot area shall be determined
based on the size of the building(s); the accommodation of an approved
on-lot water and sewer system, if needed; compliance with the yard and
applicable parking requirements of the chapter; and the stormwater
management requirements of the Upper Allen Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.180
D. Minimum setback requirements. The following minimum setback
standards are required for all uses within the C-1 District:
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-6.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-6.3
227:671
§ 245-6.4. Highway Commercial (C-2) District.
(1) Front yard: 30 feet.
(2) Side yard: 15 feet each side; however, when a written agreement is
provided by adjoining property owners, no side yard shall be
required where two or more commercial properties abut side by
side. In the case of a series of abutting structures paralleling a
public right-of-way, an open, unobstructed passage for vehicles and
pedestrians of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided every 400
feet. In addition, staggered setbacks or change in the roofline or
facades of contiguous buildings shall be required so that no more
than two contiguous buildings have the same setback, roofline and
facade. Changes in building setback shall involve a minimum of
four feet.
(3) Rear yard: 15 feet.
E. Street frontage requirements. The minimum street frontage standard
required for all uses within the C-1 District is 75 feet.
F. Lot coverage requirements. Not more than 50% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings, and no more than 70% shall be occupied by
impervious surface. The remaining 30% shall be in landscaping/
vegetative coverage.
G. Building height limitation. No principal building or structure shall
exceed 35 feet in height; however, this height may be exceeded in
accordance with § 245-16.6, Height adjustments, of this chapter.
Accessory building or structure heights shall be in accordance with
§ 245-16.2 herein.
H. Tracts of land five acres or larger in size existing on the effective date of
this subsection. The subdivision or land development of tracts that are
five acres or larger in size shall be limited to the following: [Added
10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 788]
(1) A mix of single-family residential and nonresidential uses, as
permitted in this district, if subdivided or developed under a
preliminary or final subdivision or land development plan. The total
number of single-family residential lots or units shall not exceed
50% of the total number of lots or uses on the tract;
(2) Multifamily uses, as permitted in § 245-14.43 of this chapter;
(3) A single nonresidential use; or
(4) A mix of nonresidential uses on one or more lots, as permitted in
this district.
A. Permitted uses. See Table VI-1 for a complete list of allowed uses within
the C-2 District.
§ 245-6.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-6.4
227:672
§ 245-6.5. Village (VIL) District.
B. Lot area requirements. The minimum lot area shall be determined
based on the size of the building(s); compliance with the yard and
applicable parking requirements of the chapter; and the stormwater
management requirements of the Upper Allen Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.181
C. Minimum setback requirements. The following minimum setback
standards are required for all uses within the C-2 District:
(1) Front yard: 30 feet.
(2) Side yard: 15 feet each side; however, when a written agreement is
provided by adjoining property owners, no side yard shall be
required where two or more commercial properties abut side by
side. In the case of a series of abutting structures paralleling a
public right-of-way, an open, unobstructed passage for vehicles and
pedestrians of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided at grade
levels of not more than 400 feet. In addition, staggered setbacks or
change in the roofline or facades of contiguous buildings shall be
required so that no more than two contiguous buildings have the
same setback, roofline and facade. Changes in building setback
shall involve a minimum of four feet.
(3) Rear yard: 15 feet.
D. Street frontage requirements. The minimum street frontage standard
required for all uses within the C-2 District is 150 feet.
E. Lot coverage requirements. Not more than 50% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings, and no more than 70% shall be occupied by
impervious surface. The remaining 30% shall be in landscaping/
vegetative coverage.
F. Building height limitations. No principal building or structure shall
exceed 35 feet in height; however, this height may be exceeded in
accordance with § 245-16.6, Height adjustments, of this chapter.
Accessory building or structure heights shall be in accordance with
§ 245-16.2 herein.
A. Permitted uses. See Table VI-1 for a complete list of allowed uses within
the VIL district.
B. Dimensional requirements. The following table (Table VI-2) shall apply
to all areas designed Village District on the Zoning Map. The table
shows the minimum lot size, setbacks, and street frontage
requirements per dwelling unit or nonresidential uses. Requirements
represent minimums unless otherwise noted.
181. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-6.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-6.5
227:673
Table VI-2
Village District (VIL)
Lot Size Per Dwelling
Units or Use, Unless
Otherwise Indicated
(square feet)
Street Frontage Per
Dwelling Units or Use,
Unless Otherwise
Indicated
(square feet)
Use
# Use Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum
Residential Uses
1 Conversion
apartments
6,000 12,000 40 80
2 Group homes
and family
care facilities
6,000 30,000 40 120
3 Multifamily
dwelling
12,000 per
building
40,000 per
building
80 per
building
160 per
building
4 Single-family,
attached
2,000 3,500 20 35
5 Single-family,
detached
6,000 12,000 40 80
6 Single-family,
semidetached
(duplex, 2 du)
2,500 6,000 25 40
7 Student
housing
Shall be allowed in a permitted residential unit in
accordance with § 245-14.65
8 Two-family
detached
6,000 per
building
12,000 per
building
40 per
building
80 per
building
Nonresidential Uses
9 Adaptive reuse
of federally or
locally
designated
historic
building
6,000 18,000 40 120
10 Bed-andbreakfast
home or inn
6,000 40,000 40 160
11 Business
services
6,000 18,000 40 120
§ 245-6.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-6.5
227:674
Table VI-2
Village District (VIL)
Lot Size Per Dwelling
Units or Use, Unless
Otherwise Indicated
(square feet)
Street Frontage Per
Dwelling Units or Use,
Unless Otherwise
Indicated
(square feet)
Use
# Use Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum
12 Cultural
facilities
12,000 30,000 80 160
13 Group daycare
home or
older adult
daily living
center
6,000 18,000 40 120
14 House of
worship
12,000 40,000 80 160
15 Library 12,000 30,000 80 160
16 Mixed uses 6,000 18,000 40 120
17 Municipal uses
and buildings
12,000 30,000 80 160
18 Personal
services
6,000 18,000 40 120
19 Professional
offices
6,000 18,000 40 120
20 Public parks
and recreation
areas
12,000 30,000 80 160
21 Retail
businesses
6,000 12,000 40 80
22 School, public
or nonpublic
12,000 30,000 80 160
23 Studio,
dancing or
music
6,000 18,000 40 120
Accessory Uses
§ 245-6.5 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-6.5
227:675
Table VI-2
Village District (VIL)
Lot Size Per Dwelling
Units or Use, Unless
Otherwise Indicated
(square feet)
Street Frontage Per
Dwelling Units or Use,
Unless Otherwise
Indicated
(square feet)
Use
# Use Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum
24 Accessory
buildings,
structures and
uses, including
timber
harvesting
See §§ 245-16.2 and 245-16.3
25 Day-care,
accessory
See § 245-14.4
26 Professional
and other
home
occupations,
no-impact
See § 245-14.49
27 Professional
and other
home
occupations
See § 245-14.48
28 Special
occasion home
12,000 30,000 80 160
C. Setback requirements are established to retain the existing character
of the village.
(1) Front yard setbacks. The front yard setback shall be dependent on
the characteristics of existing development contiguous to the
parcel. All principal buildings, whether residential or
nonresidential, shall front on a street, unless the only access to the
lot is by an alleyway, in accordance with the following standards.
(a) Infill lots (lots within developed blocks or street frontages).
The required setback shall be the average of the setback of the
existing principal buildings on either side of the lot. If the lot is
the last lot in the district or at the end of the block or row of
buildings, the front setback shall be within plus or minus five
feet of the adjacent existing principal building setback on the
developed side of the lot, unless the lot is situated on a corner,
in which case the building shall be set back a distance that
§ 245-6.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-6.5
227:676
§ 245-6.6. Professional Office (PO) District.
shall provide a clear site triangle at the intersection in
accordance with § 245-16.9 of this chapter and the Upper Allen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.182
(b) Undeveloped blocks or areas. If the block or street frontage
has no existing principal structures from which to determine
the setback requirement, the following setbacks shall apply.
For lots fronting on streets with sidewalks, the lots shall have a
maximum front yard setback of five feet from the inner edge of
the sidewalk easement. For lots fronting on streets without
sidewalks, the lots shall have a minimum front yard setback of
five feet from the ultimate street right-of-way and a maximum
front yard setback of 10 feet from the ultimate street right-ofway;
however, in the case of lots situated on a corner, buildings
shall be set back a distance that shall provide a clear site
triangle at the intersection in accordance with the Upper Allen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(c) A lot fronting on an alleyway shall have a minimum front yard
setback of 15 feet from the property line.
(2) Side yard setback shall be a minimum of five feet for residential lots
and 10 feet for nonresidential lots; however, all buildings with the
principal use being nonresidential shall be set back 20 feet from
any other buildings, whether on the same or adjoining lot.
(3) Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
(4) Setbacks for accessory structures on an alleyway: The minimum
setback requirement shall be five feet.
D. Lot coverage requirements. Not more than 40% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings, and no more than 60% shall be occupied by
impervious surface.
E. Building height limitations. No principal building or structure shall
exceed 35 feet in height; however, this height may be exceeded in
accordance with § 245-16.6, Height adjustments, of this chapter.
Accessory building or structure heights shall be in accordance with
§ 245-16.2 herein.
F. Buffer and screening requirements. Buffer and screen planting areas
and buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
contained in § 245-16.5, General buffer regulations, herein.
A. Permitted uses. See Table VI-1 for a complete list of allowed uses within
the PO District.
182. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-6.5 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-6.6
227:677
§ 245-6.7. Institutional (INS) District.
B. Lot area requirements. The minimum lot area shall be determined
based on the size of the building(s); compliance with the yard and
applicable parking requirements of the chapter; and the stormwater
management requirements of the Upper Allen Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.183
C. Minimum setback requirements. The following minimum setback
standards are required for all uses within the PO District:
(1) Front yard: 30 feet.
(2) Side yard: 25 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet.
D. Street frontage requirements. The minimum street frontage standard
required for all uses within the PO District is 150 feet.
E. Lot coverage requirements. Not more than 30% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings, and no more than 60% shall be occupied by
impervious surface. The remaining 40% shall be in landscaping/
vegetative coverage.
F. Building height limitations. No principal building or structure shall
exceed 35 feet in height; however, this height may be exceeded in
accordance with § 245-16.6, Height adjustments, of this chapter.
Accessory building or structure heights shall be in accordance with
§ 245-16.2 herein.
G. Use limitation. Without intending to reduce the total lot coverage or
building areas as otherwise permitted in this article, the square footage
of a retail business may not exceed 15,000 square feet in gross floor
area. The total square footage of retail business in any building that is
part of a shopping center, mall, or plaza may not exceed 15,000 square
feet in gross floor area.
A. Permitted uses. See Table VI-1 for a complete list of allowed uses within
the INS District.
B. Lot area requirements.
(1) The minimum lot area for nonresidential uses and group quarters,
such as dormitories, shall be determined based on the size of the
building(s), compliance with the yard and applicable parking
requirements of this chapter, and the stormwater management
requirements of the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.184
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
184. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-6.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-6.7
227:678
(2) The minimum lot area for residential units shall be in accordance
with the following standards.
(a) Single-family attached dwelling (townhouse; maximum of eight
dwelling units per building): 2,000 square feet.
(b) Single-family detached dwelling, including group homes and
day-care center: 10,000 square feet.
(c) Single-family semidetached dwelling (duplex; two dwelling
units): 5,000 square feet.
C. Minimum setback requirements.
(1) The following minimum setbacks for nonresidential uses and group
quarters, such as dormitories, shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 50 feet each.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(2) The minimum setbacks for residential uses shall be in accordance
with the following standards:
(a) Front yard: 25 feet.
(b) Side yard for all residential uses, with the exception that side
yards are only required for the exterior side in single-family
detached and attached dwellings: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 15 feet.
D. Street frontage requirements.
(1) The minimum street frontage for nonresidential uses and group
quarters, such as dormitories, shall be 100 feet.
(2) The minimum street frontage for residential units shall be in
accordance with the following standards.
(a) Single-family attached dwelling: 20 feet, interior units; 35 feet,
exterior units.
(b) Single-family detached dwelling, including group homes and
day-care center: 75 feet.
(c) Single-family semidetached dwelling (duplex; two dwelling
units): 35 feet.
E. Lot coverage requirements. Not more than 50% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings, and no more than 70% shall be occupied by
§ 245-6.7 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-6.7
227:679
§ 245-6.8. Buffer, screening and landscaping requirements.
impervious surface. The remaining 30% shall be in landscaping/
vegetative coverage.
F. Building height limitations. No principal building or structure shall
exceed 35 feet in height; however, this height may be exceeded in
accordance with § 245-16.6, Height adjustments, of this chapter.
Accessory building or structure heights shall be in accordance with
§ 245-16.2 herein.
A. Where buffer yards and screen planting areas are required in this
chapter, they shall be provided in place of yard setbacks prescribed in
the applicable zoning districts and in accordance with the requirements
contained in § 245-16.5, General buffer regulations, herein, and the
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance's
screening and landscaping regulations.
B. A landscaping plan for the entire tract shall be required. A landscape
architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
retained to complete such a plan to ensure the proper species, use,
arrangement of plant materials and installation by the developer. All
areas of the development not covered by impervious surfaces shall be
landscaped and maintained with suitable ground cover and plants.
(1) The plan shall indicate the extent in which existing vegetation will
be preserved for landscaping purposes.
(2) Where deemed necessary by the Board of Commissioners, earthen
berms shall be incorporated into the landscaping plan along public
street frontage and along property lines abutting existing dwellings
in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.185
(3) Landscaped areas shall be continually maintained by the
landowner. Care, grooming, and replacement of plants shall be
included as part of the required maintenance. Failure to adequately
maintain landscaped areas shall be subject to a citation issued by
the Township.
(4) In addition to landscape elements, the plan shall include the layout
of walkways, lighting, and recreation areas throughout the
development for the safety and security of the patrons. The layout
and design of pedestrian-level streetlighting shall be provided
throughout the development and parking areas.
(5) Parking areas shall be adequately landscaped in order to provide
shade, to screen vehicles from public streets, and to reduce glare
and noise within the development itself and shall be designed in
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-6.7 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-6.8
227:680
§ 245-6.9. Sign requirements.
Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Article XVIII, Signs, of this
chapter.
§ 245-6.10. Off-street parking requirements.
Off-street parking and access requirements shall be provided in accordance
with Article XVII, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter.
accordance with § 245-17.5 and the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.186
186. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-6.8 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-6.10
227:681

ARTICLE VII
Industrial District (IND)
§ 245-7.1. Area of application.
The following regulations shall apply to all areas designated as IND District
on the Zoning Map.
§ 245-7.2. Permitted uses.
The following table (Table VII-1) lists all permitted, special exception, and
conditional uses in the Industrial (IND) District. Permitted, special
exception, and conditional uses shall meet the requirements of Article XIV,
§ 245-14.1, and specific regulations for each use.
Table VII-1
Industrial District (IND)
Use
# Use Use Regulation Specific Criteria
Use Nonresidential Uses
1 Academic clinical research
centers
P
2 Adult regulated facilities C § 245-14.7
3 Airports, heliports and
helistops
C § 245-14.10
4 Contractors' offices, shops
and yards
P
5 Convenience stores (with or
without gas dispensing)
P § 245-14.19
6 Junkyards SE § 245-14.31
7 Manufacturing (not limited) P
8 Medical marijuana transport
vehicle office
P
9 Mills P
10 Mixed uses P § 245-14.39
11 Municipal uses and buildings P § 245-14.51
12 Natural production uses SE § 245-14.44
13 Office buildings and office
centers
P
14 Power-generating facilities C § 245-14.46
15 Professional offices P
16 Public utility buildings and
structures
P § 245-14.52
§ 245-7.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-7.2
227:683
Table VII-1
Industrial District (IND)
Use
# Use Use Regulation Specific Criteria
17 Racetracks C § 245-14.53
18 Retail businesses P
19 Restaurants P
20 Semitrailer parking lots P § 245-14.58
21 Solid waste processing and/
or disposal facilities
C § 245-14.63
22 Storage, mini facilities P § 245-14.38
23 Transportation terminals P § 245-14.67
24 Trucking terminals P § 245-14.67
25 Vehicle body shop and repair
garages
P § 245-14.68
26 Vehicle, mobile/
manufactured home or
trailer sales lots
P § 245-14.69
27 Vehicle washes P § 245-14.70
28 Wholesaling, storage and
warehousing
P § 245-14.71
29 Wireless communications
facilities
C § 245-14.16
Accessory Uses
30 Accessory buildings, and
structures
P § 245-16.2 and
§ 245-16.3
31 Day-care, accessory P § 245-14.4
32 Drive-in facilities for
permitted uses
P § 245-14.21
33 Solar energy systems P § 245-14.62
§ 245-7.3. Lot requirements.
A. Lot area requirements. The minimum lot area shall be determined
based on the size of the building(s); compliance with the yard and
applicable parking requirements of the chapter; and the stormwater
management requirements of the Upper Allen Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.187
B. Minimum setback requirements. The following minimum setback
standards are required for all uses within the IND District:
187. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-7.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-7.3
227:684
§ 245-7.4. Building height limitations.
No principal building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height; however,
this height may be exceeded in accordance with § 245-16.6, Height
adjustments, of this chapter. Accessory building or structure heights shall
be in accordance with § 245-16.2 herein.
§ 245-7.5. Buffer and screening requirements.
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Side yard: 25 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet.
C. Street frontage requirements. The minimum street frontage standard
required for all uses within the IND District is 150 feet.
D. Lot coverage requirements. Not more than 50% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings, and no more than 70% shall be occupied by
impervious surface. The remaining 30% shall be in landscaping/
vegetative coverage.
A. Where buffer yards and screen planting areas are required in this
chapter, they shall be provided in place of yard setbacks prescribed in
the applicable zoning districts and in accordance with the requirements
contained in § 245-16.5, General buffer regulations, herein, and the
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance's
screening and landscaping regulations.
B. A landscaping plan for the entire tract shall be required. A landscape
architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
retained to complete such a plan to ensure the proper species, use,
arrangement of plant materials and installation by the developer. All
areas of the development not covered by impervious surfaces shall be
landscaped and maintained with suitable ground cover and plants.
(1) The plan shall indicate the extent in which existing vegetation will
be preserved for landscaping purposes.
(2) Where deemed necessary by the Board of Commissioners, earthen
berms shall be incorporated into the landscaping plan along public
street frontage and along property lines abutting existing
dwellings, in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.188
(3) Landscaped areas shall be continually maintained by the
landowner. Care, grooming, and replacement of plants shall be
included as part of the required maintenance. Failure to adequately
188. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-7.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-7.5
227:685
§ 245-7.6. Sign requirements.
Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Article XVIII, Signs, of this
chapter.
§ 245-7.7. Off-street parking requirements.
Off-street parking and access requirements shall be provided in accordance
with Article XVII, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter.
maintain landscaped areas shall be subject to a citation issued by
the Township.
(4) In addition to landscape elements, the plan shall include the layout
of walkways, lighting, and recreation areas throughout the
development for the safety and security of the patrons. The layout
and design of pedestrian-level streetlighting shall be provided
throughout the development and parking areas.
(5) Parking areas shall be adequately landscaped in order to provide
shade, to screen vehicles from public streets, and to reduce glare
and noise within the development itself and shall be designed in
accordance with § 245-17.5.
§ 245-7.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-7.7
227:686
ARTICLE VIII
Planned Residential Development (PRD) Overlay District
§ 245-8.1. Purpose.
The purposes of the Planned Residential Development District, otherwise
known as PRD District, are to:
§ 245-8.2. Application requirements for Planned Residential
Development Overlay District.
No application for a planned residential development shall be considered
or approved by the Board of Commissioners unless the following initial
requirements are met.
A. Encourage that the provisions of this chapter which are concerned with
the uniform treatment of dwelling type, bulk, density, and open space
within each zoning district shall not be applied to the improvement of
land or other than lot-by-lot development in a manner which would
distort the objectives of this chapter.
B. Encourage innovations in residential development and renewal so that
the growing demand for housing may be met by greater variety in type,
design and layout of dwelling, and by the conservation and more
efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings.
C. Provide greater opportunities for better housing and recreation for all
who are or will be residents of the PRD District and/or the Township.
D. Encourage a more efficient use of land and public services, and reflect
changes in the technology of land development so that the economies so
secured may inure to the benefit of those who need homes.
E. To encourage more flexible land development which will respect and
conserve natural resources such as streams, lakes, floodplains,
groundwater, wooded areas, steep sloped areas, and areas of natural
beauty or importance to the natural ecosystem.
F. In aid of these purposes, provide a procedure which can relate the type,
design, and layout of residential development to the particular site and
the particular demand for housing existing at the time of development
in a manner consistent with the preservation of the property values
within existing residential areas and ensure that the increased
flexibility of the regulations over land development established hereby
is carried out pursuant to sound, expeditious and fair administrative
standards and provisions.
G. Reduce the excessive sprawl of development and the segregation of
land uses that cause unnecessary traffic congestion.
H. Promote the creation of places which are oriented to the pedestrian,
thereby promoting citizen security and social interaction.
§ 245-8.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-8.2
227:687
§ 245-8.3. General regulations; procedures.
A. The planned residential development shall consist of at least 100
contiguous acres, all of which are absolutely controlled by the
applicant, and if the number of proposed dwelling units exceeds 500, it
shall abut and have direct access onto an arterial street to be within
1,000 feet of an access to a freeway or an interstate highway.
B. The planned residential development shall be permitted to locate only
in the R-2, Medium-Density Residential District.
C. The planned residential development shall be served by those public
water supply and public sewage disposal systems serving Upper Allen
Township. The applicant shall provide proof to the Board of
Commissioners that capacity for both utilities is available for the
planned residential development.
D. The planned residential development shall be generally consistent with
the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan or any specific plan.
A. The Board of Commissioners shall hear and decide requests for a
planned residential development in accordance with the provisions of
this section and the procedures and regulations of this chapter.
B. All provisions of the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance189 shall apply to any planned residential
development involving subdivision and land development, with the
exception of the following:
(1) Application procedures;
(2) Review and approval process.
C. Application procedure, general. An application for development of a
planned residential development is governed by and follows the
procedures of Article VII of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (MPC).190 The applicant shall file all applications with the
Township by the first business day of the month in which the plan will
be considered by the Township Planning Commission.
D. Preapplication conference (optional).
(1) Purpose. Before submission of an application for tentative approval
(MPC § 10707), the applicant is strongly encouraged to have a
meeting with the Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission,
the Planner, Zoning Officer, Township Engineer, the Building Codes
Enforcement Officer, and such other personnel as may be
necessary to determine the feasibility, suitability and timing of the
application. The intent of this step is for the applicant to obtain
189. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
190. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10701-10713.
§ 245-8.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-8.3
227:688
information and guidance from the Township personnel before
entering into any commitments or incurring substantial expenses
with regard to the site and the PRD site plan preparation.
(2) Scheduling. The request for a preapplication conference with the
Planning Commission, accepted by the Township at least 14 days
prior to the date of the regularly scheduled Planning Commission
meeting.
(3) Relationship to formal review process. The submission of a
preapplication conference submission shall not be deemed the
beginning of the time period for review as prescribed by law. The
preapplication conferences are intended to be advisory only and
shall not bind the Township to approve any application for
development.
E. Application for tentative approval. The application for tentative
approval must be executed by or on behalf of the applicant and filed
with the Township. An initial filing fee in an amount established by the
Township shall be paid upon filing of the application to be applied
against such expenses, and additional deposits shall be made from time
to time as requested by the Township to be applied against expenses of
processing the application, not to exceed the actual expenses incurred
by the Township.
(1) Application content. An application for tentative approval of a
planned residential development shall include the following:
(a) Seven copies: application form, provided by the Township and
completed by the applicant.
(b) Application fee for tentative approval of a planned residential
development.
(c) Seventeen copies: maps and information as required by the
preliminary plan requirement of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,191 which shall show compliance with
Subsection 4 of § 10707 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. The applicant shall also provide information to
determine the location and size of the common areas and
common open space and the form of the organization proposed
to own and maintain the common areas for any planned
residential development.
(d) Seventeen copies of an environmental impact assessment
documenting compliance with Subsections 4 and 5 of § 10707
of the MPC. Such assessment shall indicate reasons why the
planned residential development is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and is in the interest of the Township.
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-8.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-8.3
227:689
(e) Seventeen copies of a community impact analysis.
[1] An analysis of the potential effects and impacts of the
planned residential development upon the following
community facilities will be required:
[a] Transportation system;
[b] Water supply;
[c] Sewage disposal;
[d] Public utilities, such as electricity, gas, telephone,
cable television;
[e] Solid waste disposal;
[f] Emergency services (i.e., police, fire, EMS);
[g] School facilities and school district budget;
[h] Recreation; and
[i] Township revenue and expenses.
F. Planning Commission review and comment. At the first regular
scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission after the submission of
the application, the Planning Commission shall perform the following:
(1) Hold an open meeting where the populace shall be heard on the
application for tentative approval.
(2) Make a written recommendation to the Board of Commissioners on
any application for tentative approval of a planned residential
development. In said recommendation, the Planning Commission
shall set forth, with particularity, the explicit reasons for its
recommendation that the proposal be either approved or denied.
G. Cumberland County Planning Commission review and comment. At
least 30 days before the public hearing, the Township shall submit the
application for tentative approval of a planned residential development
to the Cumberland County Planning Commission for review and
comment as required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
H. Public hearing. The Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing
on the application for tentative approval of a planned residential
development in accordance with § 10708 of the MPC. The
Commissioners shall cause notice of the public hearing to be given as
follows:
(1) By giving public notice in accordance with § 10908 of the MPC.
(2) By posting one notice in the vicinity of each front lot line of the site
for which the planned residential development is proposed in a
§ 245-8.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-8.3
227:690
place conspicuously visible from the street. In addition, notices
shall be posted at the Municipal Building. All posting shall be done
at least seven days prior to the public hearing.
I. The Board of Commissioners shall consider whether proposed
modifications in any of the requirements of this section for the R-2
Zoning District, except the provisions of this section, contained in an
application for tentative approval of a planned residential development
will make for a more efficient, attractive and harmonious planned
development. If such modifications, in the judgment of the Board of
Commissioners, constitute a more beneficial use of the site than
provided for under the requirements of the R-2 Zoning District, the
Board of Commissioners, in its sole discretion, may grant the
modifications.
(1) Authorized uses shall be limited to those specified in § 245-8.4.A.
(2) No modifications shall be given for density in the R-2 Zoning
District. Densities shall not exceed the density established in
§ 245-8.4.C(1), Maximum dwelling units per site.
(3) All common open space shall be reserved as permanent open
space.
(4) Provisions for all planned residential developments shall be in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
planned residential developments.
(5) No modification shall be granted for any construction,
development, use or activity within any floodway area as identified
in Article X of this chapter that would cause any increase in the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(6) Under no circumstances shall a modification be granted to the
prohibitions of uses or activities in floodplain areas as set forth in
Article X of this chapter.
(7) Whenever a modification is granted to construct a structure below
the one-hundred-year flood elevation, the Township shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the modification will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such modification increases the risk to life and property.
J. Findings. The Board of Commissioners shall make findings in
accordance with § 10709 of the MPC.
K. Official written communication. The official written communication of
findings shall be certified by the Township Secretary of the Board of
Commissioners, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the applicant.
§ 245-8.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-8.3
227:691
L. Status of plan after tentative approval. The status of a plan after
tentative approval shall be in accordance with § 10710 of the MPC.
M. Final approval.
(1) Submission of application. The application for final approval of a
planned residential development shall be submitted within six
months after tentative approval, unless the Board of
Commissioners grants an extension upon written request of the
applicant to a date not to exceed 18 months from the date of
tentative approval. Phased planned residential developments,
however, shall have applications for final approval made pursuant
to the phase schedule set forth in the official written
communication of the findings of the Board of Commissioners with
respect to tentative approval.
(2) Application content. An application for final approval of a planned
residential development shall include the following:
(a) Seventeen copies: application form, provided by the Township
and completed by the applicant.
(b) Application fee and review fees for final approval of a planned
residential development.
(c) Seventeen copies: maps and information as required by the
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(d) Seventeen copies: final drawings, including floor plans and
elevations (but not including working drawings for buildings),
for all structures and buildings, other than single-family
detached dwelling, prepared by a professional engineer,
including all proposed signs, all exterior illumination and all
outside storage areas.
(e) The final plat for the planned residential development shall
contain those items approved in the application for tentative
approval and the items for final plat approval in the Upper
Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.192
(f) Seventeen copies: a development schedule showing:
[1] The order of construction of the proposed sections
delineated in the final development plan.
[2] The proposed dates for the beginning of construction on
said sections.
192. Editor's Note: See Chapter 220.
§ 245-8.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-8.3
227:692
[3] The proposed dates for the completion of construction on
said sections.
[4] The proposed schedule for the construction and
improvement of the common areas.
(g) Two copies: deed restriction proposals to preserve the
character of the common areas.
[1] If the applicant elects the association or nonprofit
corporation method of administering common areas, the
proposed bylaws of the association or the certificate of
incorporation and the incorporated bylaws of the nonprofit
corporation.
[2] If the developer elects the condominium method of
ownership of common areas, the proposed declaration of
condominium bylaws and related documents.
(h) Instruments dedicating all public and private rights-of-way,
easements and other public lots shown on the final
development plan from all persons having any interest in said
lots; two copies if separate from the final plat.
(i) Improvement security. The developer shall guarantee the
installation of the private and public improvements as specified
in the final development plan by providing an improvements'
security in the amount of 110% of the estimated cost of
construction of the private and public improvements as
determined in accordance with § 10509 of the MPC.
(j) Two copies. A title insurance policy or an attorney's certificate
of title showing the status of the title to the site encompassed
by the final development plan and all liens, encumbrances and
defects, if any, in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
(k) Two copies. Tax receipts, paid receipts from the taxing bodies
indicating taxes have been paid in full up to and including the
current period.
(l) Two copies: evidence that a commitment from a responsible
financial institution or entity has been issued to the developer
for construction financing.
(3) Plans shall be submitted to the Township by the first business day
of the month in which the plan will be considered by the Township
Planning Commission.
N. Planning Commission review and recommendation. The Planning
Commission shall, at its next regularly scheduled meeting after the
filing of the application for final approval, examine the application and
determine if the application meets the criteria and includes the items
required by § 245-8.3.M(2) and if the application for final approval
§ 245-8.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-8.3
227:693
complies with the conditions of tentative approval, if any. The Planning
Commission shall forward its written report to the Board of
Commissioners, setting forth its findings and recommendations.
O. Action on application for final approval. Action on the application for
final approval shall be in accordance with § 10711 of the MPC.
P. Recording of final development plan. Recording of the final
development plan shall be in accordance with § 10711(d) of the MPC.
The time for recording of a final development plan granted final
approval by the Board of Commissioners shall be governed by the
provisions of the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.193
Q. Zoning permit. No zoning permit for structural alteration and erection
of structures or for occupancy and use shall be issued until the final
development plan has been approved and recorded. Upon proof of
recording and certification of final approval by the Board of
Commissioners, a zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer.
R. Procedure for approval of amendments to planned residential
developments after final approval and/or recording. Any amendment to
a planned residential development submitted after final approval for
recording which does not violate any of the conditions or requirements
of the tentative approval or of the zoning district classification may be
approved at an open meeting of the Board of Commissioners after
recommendation by the Planning Commission. Amendments involving
substantive changes or modifications to conditions shall require a
public hearing in the same manner as for an application for tentative
approval of a planned residential development. Upon approval of the
amendment, the recorded final development plan shall be amended and
rerecorded to conform to the amendment.
S. Completion and acceptance of public improvements. Upon completion
of the public improvements in a final development plan, the provisions
of the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall apply and govern the filing of as-built plans and the
completion and acceptance of public improvements.
T. Release of improvement security. The release of the improvement
security required under § 245-8.3.M(2)(i) shall be governed by the
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
and the acceptance of public improvements and the required
maintenance security shall be in accordance with the Upper Allen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
U. Remedies to effect completion. The remedies available to the Township
to effect completion of public improvements shall be governed by the
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
193. Editor's Note: See Chapter 220.
§ 245-8.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-8.3
227:694
§ 245-8.4. Standards and conditions.
V. Uniformity with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.194
The provisions of the preceding sections are intended to make uniform
the requirements of this article and the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. Whenever the above cited provisions of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance are amended, those
amendments shall be incorporated into this article as of the effective
date of the amendment.
A. Uses permitted. Uses permitted in planned residential developments
shall be limited to:
(1) Residential uses:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(c) Two-family detached dwellings.
(d) Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses).
(e) Multiple-family dwellings.
(2) Neighborhood commercial uses. Neighborhood commercial uses
may be permitted in a planned residential development only to the
extent that they are designed and intended primarily to serve
residents of the planned residential development and are
compatible and harmoniously incorporated into the unitary design
of the planned residential development. Such uses may include
commercial uses of the local convenience retail and service type,
located to serve primarily the residents of the planned residential
development. Uses may include personal services, day care, public
and nonpublic schools, florist, library, public utility buildings and
laundry and dry-cleaning (personal) establishments.
B. Applicability of other provisions. Unless otherwise specifically stated or
specifically modified by the Board of Commissioners, all provisions of
this chapter shall apply to all planned residential developments, and all
planned residential development uses must comply with provisions of
all other applicable ordinances, including the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. The provisions of this section apply to all
planned residential developments unless otherwise stated.
C. Residential use standards and conditions. This section specifies the
regulations for residential uses in planned residential developments.
(1) Maximum dwelling units per site. The maximum number of
dwelling units permitted in a planned residential development shall
be calculated as follows:
194. Editor's Note: See Chapter 220.
§ 245-8.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-8.4
227:695
Line
Number Formula Results
1 Gross tract area (acres) Acres
2 Area in existing streets and rightsof-
way (50% of area within overhead
or underground utility easements or
rights-of-way)
Acres
3 Site area (subtract Line 2 from Line
1)
Acres
4 Required open space (30% of gross
tract area)
Acres
5 Environmentally sensitive areas not
required in open space
Acres
6 Future infrastructure (15%) Acres
7 Net site area (subtract Lines 4, 5,
and 6 from Line 3)
Acres
8 Maximum net site density [per
§ 245-8.4.C(2)]
Dwelling units
9 Maximum dwelling units based on
net site density (multiply Line 7 by
Line 8)
Dwelling units
(2) Net site density modifications. Net site density permitted by the
Board of Commissioners may be varied upon consideration of the
following factors:
(a) The amount, location and proposed use of common open space,
including, but not limited to, the amount of land devoted to
active recreation facilities and the quality of the recreation
facilities or fees contributed to the Township in lieu of
dedication by agreement with the developer;
(b) The location and physical characteristics of the site of the
planned residential development; factors such as the amount
of land limited by environmentally sensitive areas shall be
considered;
(c) The density modification from that allowed in the R-2 District
shall be granted at the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners based on the above factors determined after a
public hearing where the applicant shall have the burden to
show that the modifications requested would be in the public
interest and benefit the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Upper Allen Township.
(d) Notwithstanding the above, the net site density in the R-2
District shall not exceed five dwelling units per acre, and no
§ 245-8.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-8.4
227:696
modifications shall be granted to increase the net site density
in the R-2 District.
(e) Variations in density may be granted for different phases of a
planned residential development; and
(f) Density increases will be roughly proportional to the factors
listed above in this section and, in addition, to the overall
design quality of the planned residential development, the
quality and amount of open space or fees paid by agreement of
the developer in lieu thereof, the size of individual lots and the
facts considered by the MPC, this chapter, and the
Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Mix of housing types. A planned residential development shall have
a mix of dwelling units, consisting of the following types, within the
following proportions:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings: a minimum of 40% and
maximum of 75% of all proposed dwelling units.
(b) Single-family semidetached dwellings: a maximum of 35% of
all proposed dwelling units.
(c) Two-family detached dwellings: a maximum of 35% of all
proposed dwelling units.
(d) Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses): a maximum of
35% of all proposed dwelling units.
(e) Multiple-family dwellings: a maximum of 10% of all proposed
dwelling units.
(f) The remainder of the housing stock shall be left to the
discretion of the applicant. The requirements of this section
may be waived by the Board of Commissioners upon the
applicant successfully demonstrating that the required
housing type(s) are not then presently marketable. Upon
granting a waiver, the required percentage of the remaining
housing types shall be increased proportionately.
(4) All dwelling units shall be designed with regard to topography,
elevation, and other natural features of the tract. The effects of
prevailing winds, seasonal temperatures, and hours of sunlight on
the physical layout and form of the proposed building shall be taken
into account.
(5) Housing and other facilities near the periphery of the planned
residential development shall be designed so as to be harmonious
with neighboring areas. Special care shall be given to protect
adjacent land which is located in the R-1 District, VIL District, and
A District.
§ 245-8.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-8.4
227:697
(6) No structures or building shall be within 20 feet of the right-of-way
of access roads or parking areas.
(7) No structures or building shall be less than 50 feet from the
property lines of the development, and a planting strip of at least
20 feet shall be provided along all property lines at the periphery of
the development.
(8) Yard setbacks for the uses specified in § 245-8.4.A shall be
consistent with the requirements established for those uses in this
Zoning Ordinance.
(9) Off-street parking.
(a) Parking space, off-street, shall meet regulations as set forth in
Article XVII herein.
(b) Excepting single-family, semidetached, single-family attached,
and two-family detached dwellings, all parking areas shall be
located at least 25 feet from the buildings to allow access for
emergency vehicles.
(c) The required parking spaces shall be situated on the same lot
within 200 feet of the dwelling units to be serviced.
(10) Streets and access drives. Plans for streets, drives, service access,
parking and walks, and all such facilities shall be reviewed and
approved, and all such facilities shall be designed and installed in
the manner prescribed by the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance regulations for dedication and amendments thereto,
regardless of whether they are to be presented to the Township for
dedication or not.
(11) Phased development.
(a) Preliminary plan approval to include all phases. Where an
applicant proposes phased development of a project over time,
the applicant shall comply with all requirements for a
preliminary plan approval as required under the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance for all phases, except where
application content requirements have been waived.
(b) Minimum phase size. Each section of development, except for
the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total
number of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan,
unless a lesser percentage is approved by the governing body
in its discretion.
(c) Independence of phases. Each phase of a development shall
include the required improvements necessary to serve that
phase of development as if it were the final phase of the
development, independent of any proposed future phase of
development.
§ 245-8.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-8.4
227:698
D. Neighborhood commercial use regulations.
(1) Location. Neighborhood commercial uses shall be grouped
together adjacent to an arterial or collector street located within
the planned residential development and be provided with shared
off-street parking, signage and landscaping in accordance with
provisions provided herein.
(2) Maximum percent of site area. The maximum portion of the
planned residential development for neighborhood commercial
uses shall not exceed 5% of the net site area.
(3) Maximum gross floor area. The maximum gross floor area of
planned residential development for neighborhood commercial
uses shall be as follows:
(a) For a single neighborhood commercial use: 4,000 square feet
of gross floor area; and
(b) For a single building: 16,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(4) Maximum impervious surface. On any portion of the planned
residential development dedicated to neighborhood commercial
uses, no combination of structures and impervious surfaces,
including asphalt or concrete paved areas for parking, access,
driveways, pedestrian access walkways and rock-lined stormwater
detention facilities, shall exceed 50% of the site area dedicated to
neighborhood commercial uses.
E. Minimum site perimeter yard: 50 feet.
F. Building heights shall be in accordance with the regulations specified in
the underlying zoning district.
G. Buffers and screening shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements contained in § 245-16.5 and the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
H. Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting shall meet the requirements
contained in § 245-16.10.G.
I. Standards for location and management of open space.
(1) The open space shall be located so as to be consistent with the
objectives and purposes of a planned residential development and
shall adhere to the following requirements:
(a) A minimum of 30% of the gross tract area of the planned
residential development shall be devoted to common open
space. The total amount of common open space shall not be
less than what is required in § 220-28.D(3) and (2) shall not
count towards the dedication of land to the Township, as
§ 245-8.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-8.4
227:699
required in § 220-28.D(4) of the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(b) At least 2/3 of the required open space shall be designed as
one, contiguous primary park. The remaining open space shall
be bulk areas of not less than four acres each, providing a
sense of spaciousness.
(c) Land included with the fifty-foot buffer strip required in
§ 245-8.4.C(7) may be counted as part of the required open
space after the requirements in Subsection I(1)(a) and (b) are
fully satisfied, but such land shall in no event be counted to and
extend greater than 1/3 of the required open space.
(d) Land which is subject to utility or drainage easements or other
restrictions which inhibit the full use of the land shall not be
counted as part of the required open space.
(2) There shall be provisions which ensure that the open space land
shall continue as such and be properly maintained. The developer
shall either:
(a) Dedicate such land to public use if the Township or another
public agency has indicated it will accept such dedication;
(b) Retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such
open space land; or
(c) Provide for and establish one or more organizations for the
ownership and maintenance of all common open space. In the
case of this subsection, each organization shall be a nonprofit
homeowners' corporation, unless the developer demonstrates
that a community open space trust is a more appropriate form
of organization.
(3) If a homeowners' association or open space trust is formed, it shall
be governed according to the following regulations:
(a) The organization shall be organized by the developer and shall
be operated with financial subsidization by the developer, if
necessary, before the sale of any lots within the development.
(b) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all
purchasers of home therein and their successors.
(c) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of
insurance and taxes on common open space.
(d) The members of the organization shall share equitably the
costs of maintaining and developing common open space in
accordance with procedures established by them.
§ 245-8.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-8.4
227:700
(e) The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to
administer common facilities and to maintain the common
open space.
(4) Maintenance of common open space:
(a) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain a common open space or any successor organization
shall, at any time after establishment of the planned residential
development, fail to maintain the common open space in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
development plan, the Township may serve written notice on
such organization or on the residents and owners of the
planned residential development, setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to maintain the common open
space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a
demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within
30 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a hearing
thereon which shall be held within 14 days of the notice. At
such hearing, the Township may modify the terms of the
original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension
of time within which they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set
forth in the original notice or the modifications thereof shall
not be cured within said 30 days or any extension thereof, the
Township, in order to preserve the taxable values of the
properties within the planned residential development and to
prevent the common open space from becoming a public
nuisance, may enter upon said common open space and
maintain the same for a period of one year. Said entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
common open space except when the same is voluntarily
dedicated to the public by the residents and owners. Before the
expiration of said year, the Township shall, upon its initiative or
upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible
for the maintenance of the common open space, call a public
hearing upon notice to such organization or to the residents
and owners of the planned residential development to be held
by the Township, at which hearing such organization or the
residents and owners of the planned residential development
shall show cause why such maintenance by the Township shall
not, at the election of the Township, continue for the next
succeeding year. If the Township shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain said common open
space in reasonable condition, the Township shall cease to
maintain said common open space at the end of said year. If the
Township shall determine such organization is not ready and
able to maintain said common open space in a reasonable
condition, the Township may, at its discretion, continue to
maintain said common open space during the next succeeding
year and, subject to a similar hearing and determination, in
§ 245-8.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-8.4
227:701
each year thereafter. The decision of the Township in any such
case shall constitute a final administrative decision subject to
judicial review.
(b) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the planned
residential development that have a right of enjoyment of the
common open space and shall become a tax lien on said
properties. Said assessments or charges shall be subordinate
in lien to the lien of any mortgage or mortgages on the
property which is subject to such assessments or charges,
regardless of when said mortgage or mortgages were created
or when such assessments or charges accrued, provided that
such subordination shall apply only to assessments or charges
that have become payable prior to the passing of title under
foreclosure of such mortgage or mortgages, and the transferee
shall not be liable for payment of any assessments or charges
occurring prior to said foreclosure, but nothing herein shall be
held to affect the rights herein given to enforce the collection
of such assessments or charges accruing after sale under
foreclosure of such mortgage or mortgages, and provided
further, that such charges accruing after sale shall also be
subordinate in lien to the lien of any further mortgage or
mortgages which are placed on property subject to such
assessments or charges, with the intent that no such charges
shall be at any time prior in lien of any mortgage or mortgages
whatsoever on such property. The Township, at the time of
entering on said common open space for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the
prothonotary of the county on the properties affected by such
lien within the planned residential development.
(5) Development plan.
(a) In accordance with § 10706 of the Municipalities Planning
Code, the provisions of the development plan relating to the
use, bulk and location of buildings and structures; the quantity
and location of common open space; and the intensity of use or
the density of residential units shall run in favor of the
municipality and shall be enforceable in law or in equity by the
municipality, without limitation on any powers of regulation
otherwise granted the municipality by law.
(b) The development plan shall specify those of its provisions
which shall run in favor of and be enforceable by residents of
the planned residential development and, in addition, the
manner in which such residents may modify or release such
rights.
§ 245-8.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-8.4
227:702
(6) The location and management of open space shall be consistent
with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Planned Community
Act.195
195. Editor's Note: See the Uniform Planned Community Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 5101 through
5114.
§ 245-8.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-8.4
227:703

ARTICLE IX
Steep Slope Protection (SSP) Overlay District
§ 245-9.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Steep Slope Protection (SSP) Overlay District is to
conserve and protect those areas having slopes as defined herein from
inappropriate development as well as to permit and encourage the use of
said areas for open space purposes in order to constitute a harmonious
aspect of the continuing physical development of the Township. In
implementing these principles and the general purposes of this chapter
and the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, the following specific
objectives are intended to be accomplished by this article:
A. To combine with other zoning requirements, as an overlay zoning
district, certain restrictions for steep slope areas to promote the
general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township.
B. To prevent inappropriate development of steep slope areas in order to
avoid potential dangers for human usage caused by erosion, stream
siltation, and soil failure leading to structural collapse or damage and/
or unsanitary conditions and associated hazards.
C. To minimize danger to public health and safety by promoting safe and
sanitary drainage.
D. To relate the intensity of development to the steepness of terrain in
order to minimize grading, removal of vegetation, runoff and erosion,
and to help ensure the utilization of land in accordance with its natural
capabilities to support development.
E. To promote only those uses in steep slope areas that are compatible
with the preservation of existing natural features, including vegetative
cover, by restricting the grading of steep slope areas.
F. To promote the ecological balance among those natural systems
elements (such as wildlife, vegetation, and aquatic life) that could be
grossly affected by inappropriate development of steep slope areas.
G. To prevent the development that would cause excessive erosion and a
resultant reduction in the water-carrying capacity of the watercourses
which flow through or around the Township with the consequences of
increased flood crests and flood hazards within the Township and to
both upstream and downstream municipalities.
H. To minimize the potential harmful effects to individuals and adjacent
landowners in the Township and/or other municipalities caused by
inappropriate grading and development on steep slopes.
I. To advise those individuals who choose, despite the dangers, to develop
or occupy land with steep slopes; to protect residents from property
§ 245-9.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-9.1
227:705
§ 245-9.2. Boundary definition of district.
§ 245-9.3. Steep Slope Protection Overlay District concept.
The Steep Slope Protection Overlay District shall be deemed to be an
overlay zoning district on any zoning district now or hereafter enacted to
regulate the use of land in Upper Allen Township.
damage and personal injury due to runoff, erosion, or landslides
attributable to a nearby development on steeply sloped land.
J. To protect the entire Township from inappropriate development of
steep slope areas which could have an effect upon subsequent
expenditures for public works and disaster relief and, thus, adversely
affect the economic well-being of the Township.
K. To promote the provisions of safe and reliable access ways, parking
areas, and utility systems serving development on or around steep slope
areas, where more sensitive grading and floodplain is essential.
A. The Steep Slope Protection (SSP) Overlay District shall be defined and
established as those areas of the Township having slopes of 15% or
greater as determined from topographic studies or evaluation. The
slope shall be determined prior to excavation, grading, or other
movement of soil or rock. Any lot which contains land which lies within
the SSP District (i.e., with slopes of 15% or greater) shall be subject to
the regulations of the Steep Slope Protection Overlay District.
B. All lots within the SSP District with average slopes, as defined herein, of
less than 15% would not be subject to the provision of this article,
unless the requested use, including yard requirements, would be on any
portion of the lot exceeding a slope of 15% or the requested use is for
parking areas in the excess of a slope of 6%.
A. The SSP District shall have no effect on the permitted uses or
regulations in the underlying zoning district, except where the
development intended is to be located within the boundaries of the SSP
District, as defined herein, is in conflict with the permitted uses or
regulations set forth in this section.
B. In those areas of Upper Allen Township where the SSP District applies,
the requirements of the SSP District shall supersede any less stringent
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
C. Should the zoning classification of any parcel or any part thereof on
which the SSP District is an overlay be changed, such change in the
classification shall have no effect on the boundaries of the SSP District,
unless an amendment to said boundaries was included as part of the
proceedings from which the change originated.
§ 245-9.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-9.4
227:706
§ 245-9.4. Boundary interpretation and appeals procedures.
An initial determination as to whether the SSP District regulations apply
to a given parcel shall be made by the Zoning Officer. Any party aggrieved
by the decision of the Zoning Officer, either because of an interpretation
of the location of the SSP District boundary or because the criteria used
in delineating the boundary, as set forth in § 245-9.6 herein, are incorrect
because of changes due to natural or other causes, may appeal such
decision to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in Article XIX of this
chapter.
§ 245-9.5. Land use and development regulations in Steep Slope
Protection Overlay District.
For any lot created after the effective date of this chapter, which contains
land included in the Steep Slope Protection District, the following land use
and development regulations shall apply.
A. The average slope of the entire lot shall be determined according to the
formula:
S = (0.0023/A) x I x L
Where:
S = Average slope in percent
0.0023 = A factor for the conversion of square feet into
acres
I = Contour interval (in feet) of a topographic map of
the parcel
L = Combined length (in feet) of or along all contour
lines measured
A = Acreage of the subject parcel's buildable area
B. In all areas of the Township where the slope is 15% or greater, such as
to be considered a "steep slope," as defined in Article II, the minimum
lot size for a parcel of land having such steep slope shall be:
(1) Three acres when the percent slope of the site is 15% or more.
(2) Five acres when the slope of the site is 18% or more.
(3) Ten acres when the slope of the site is 20% or more.
(4) Exception: The lot sizes set forth in Subsection B(1) through (3)
above will not apply in those circumstances where the lot owner or
any developer can provide a contiguous area of the lot which does
not have any of the steep slope averages set forth above and is at
least the size of the minimum lot sizes for the zoning district in
which the lot is located. When this exception is selected by the lot
owner or developer, the area of the lot which is steep area (i.e., that
§ 245-9.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-9.5
227:707
§ 245-9.6. Uses permitted within the Steep Slope Protection Overlay
District.
portion not included in the area selected by the lot owner/
developer for meeting the zoning district minimum lot size) shall
not be used for any land development except for a driveway
easement access or public utility access to the said lot and is
intended to remain in a natural state or condition so far as is
possible.
C. Any lot which shall have an average slope of at least 15% but not more
than 18% shall have a maximum impervious surface area of 20% of the
lot area, of which no more than 1/2, or 10% of the lot area, shall consist
of buildings.
D. Any lot which shall have an average slope of at least 18% but not more
than 25% shall have a maximum impervious surface area of 10% of the
lot area of which no more than 1/2, or 5% of the lot area, shall consist of
buildings.
E. All freestanding structures, buildings and substantial improvements
(with the exception of utilities where no other location is feasible) are
prohibited on slopes of 25% or greater. Never shall more than 5% of the
area be regraded or vegetation cover disturbed by the exceptions, if
they are granted.
F. All swimming pools, junkyards, sanitary landfills, and outdoor storage
of vehicles or materials are prohibited on slopes of 15% or greater.
G. Driveways and roadways shall not exceed a slope of 10% within 25 feet
of the street right-of-way lines. Parking areas shall not be in excess of
6%. Access drives shall not be in excess of 4% within 75 feet of the
intersecting street center line.
H. Applicants for permits required by this chapter shall present evidence
of approval of any required erosion and sedimentation plan or any
required stormwater management plan prior to the issuance of any
permit.
A. All uses permitted within the underlying zoning district, except those
specifically prohibited in § 245-9.5 above, shall be permitted by special
exception in the Steep Slope Protection District, if the use would be on
any portion of the lot exceeding a slope of 15% or the requested use is
for parking areas in excess of a slope of 6%.
B. Any application requesting a special exception for a use permitted
herein shall be accompanied by a plan certified by a registered
professional engineer, a registered surveyor, or a registered landscape
architect. In addition to any information required for an application for
a special exception set forth in § 245-19.13, such plan shall show:
§ 245-9.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-9.6
227:708
(1) The location of the proposed use with respect to the areas of the lot
determined to have slopes in excess of 15%.
(2) The location of the proposed use with respect to existing
development within the property.
(3) Nature of the proposed use.
(4) Topographical surveys showing the contours of the property in twofoot
intervals. The plans shall also include a reference benchmark
used.
(5) Typical tract cross sections at a scale of not more than one inch
equals 100 feet and typical tract cross sections at a vertical and
horizontal scale. There shall be a minimum of one cross section for
the first five acres or less of lot or tract area and one cross section
for each five acres or portion thereof thereafter.
(6) Calculations to determine the average slope of the lot in
accordance with this article.
(7) Surface view of construction, grading or fill elevations.
(8) Size, location and arrangement of all proposed and existing
structures on the site, as well as specifications for building
construction and materials and storage of materials.
(9) Location, elevation, and specifications for water supply, sanitary
facilities and streets, including entrance drive.
(10) A soils engineering report regarding site characteristics of the
subject property, to include the nature, types, distribution, and
suitability of subsurface soils for load bearing, stability, and
compaction; extent, description, and location of exposed rock;
erodibility of surface soil; engineering and conservation techniques
to be used to prevent erosion and alleviate environmental problems
created by the proposed development activities; permeability and
available water infiltration capacity; depth to bedrock and seasonal
high-water table; the means of accommodating stormwater runoff;
proposed modifications to the existing topography and vegetative
cover; and the location, type and intensity of vegetative cover on
the subject property.
(11) A geophysical-hydrologic report investigating conditions of the
subject property's underlying geologic formation and the
hydrological characteristics of the proposed development. Such
report shall demonstrate that any adverse impacts of the proposed
development can be addressed in such a manner as to prevent the
hazards to life and property and to maintain amenable site features
for stormwater management, soil erosion and sedimentation
control, vegetative cover and exposed rock stability.
§ 245-9.6 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-9.6
227:709
C. The applicant for any special exception shall request the review and
recommendations of the Cumberland County Conservation District at
least 45 days prior to the hearing by the Zoning Hearing Board and
shall present evidence that such review has been requested.
D. The applicant shall request, at least 45 days prior to the hearing before
the Zoning Hearing Board, the review and recommendations of the
Township and shall present evidence that such review has been
requested.
E. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with any applicable
stormwater management ordinance regulations196 pertaining to the
proposed development, including, but not limited to, stormwater
management regulations contained in any applicable subdivision and
land development ordinance.
196. Editor's Note: See Ch. 214.
§ 245-9.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-9.6
227:710
ARTICLE X
Floodplain Regulations
§ 245-10.1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Upper Allen Township
Floodplain Management Regulations."
§ 245-10.2. Intent.
The intent of this article is to:
§ 245-10.3. Applicability.
§ 245-10.4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this article, the more restrictive shall apply.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting the water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with Section 60.3(d) of the National Flood Insurance Program
and the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act (32 P.S. § 679.101 et
seq.).
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business, or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction
or development in any designated flood area(s) within the Township
unless the appropriate development permit(s) have been obtained from
the Zoning Officer and/or the Building Code Official or from any other
authorized Township official.
B. A development permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures, provided that no structural changes or
modifications are involved.
§ 245-10.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.5
227:711
§ 245-10.5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the article, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this article are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 245-10.6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 245-10.7. Building permits required.
Building and or zoning permits shall be required before any construction or
development is undertaken within any area of the Township.
§ 245-10.8. Administration; issuance of building permit.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain area or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This article shall not create liability on the part of the Township or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
A. The Zoning Officer, the Building Code Official or other duly authorized
Township official(s) shall issue a building permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this article and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Township Engineer,
Zoning Officer or other duly authorized Township official(s) shall review
the application for a permit to determine if all other necessary
governmental permits or approvals required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, permits such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966, No. 537, as amended);197 the Dam
Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978, No. 325, as amended);198 the
United States Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1334; and the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937, No. 394, as amended).199 No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
197. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
198. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
199. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 245-10.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.8
227:712
§ 245-10.9. Application procedures and requirements.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Building Code Official shall review the history
of repairs to the subject building so that any repetitive loss issues can
be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be
affected by such action have been notified by the Township and until all
required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR) and/or the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the Bureau of Dams
and Waterway Management.
E. In addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the
DCNR, the DEP, and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development (DCED), Bureau of Community Planning, shall
be notified by the Township prior to any alteration or relocation of any
watercourse.
A. Application for such a building permit shall be made, in writing, on
forms supplied by the Township. Such application shall contain the
following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the land on which the
proposed construction is to occur.
(3) The name and address of the contractor.
(4) The site location, including address.
(5) A listing of other permits required.
(6) A brief description of the proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of the flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before the flood damage occurred.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for building
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the reviewing Township official(s) to determine
that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform to the requirements of this article and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
§ 245-10.8 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.9
227:713
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information, plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Township to make the
above determination:
(1) A completed and signed building permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines;
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site, expressed in acres or square feet;
(d) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and land development;
(e) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways
and parking areas, with information concerning widths,
pavement types and construction, and elevations;
(f) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural
and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed
activity or development; identified floodplain areas, and, if
available, information pertaining to the floodway; and the flow
of water, including direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at a suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building,
based upon the North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood as designated in
the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared for the Township by
FEMA;
(c) Information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a
one-hundred-year flood;
§ 245-10.9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.9
227:714
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures; and
(e) Supplemental Information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, Chapters 401-405, as amended, and Section 1612.5.1,
Sections 104.7 and 109.3 of the 2003 IBC, and Sections
R106.1.3 and R104.7 of the 2003 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
one-hundred-year flood elevations, pressures, velocities, and
impact and uplift forces associated with the one-hundred-year
flood. Such statement shall include a description of the type
and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(b) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 245-10.25.F, Storage, and § 245-10.27, Development which
may endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 245-25.F and 245-10.27 which
are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site or within structures.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 245-10.27 during a one-hundred-year flood.
(c) The appropriate component of the DCNR and/or DEP's
Planning Module for Land Development.
(d) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the DCNR and/or DEP to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
D. Applicants for special permits (see § 245-10.29 of this article) shall
provide nine copies of the following items:
(1) A written request, including a completed development permit
application form.
(2) A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
(3) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch equals 100 feet or less, showing the following:
§ 245-10.9 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.9
227:715
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topography based upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of
two feet;
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site, expressed in acres or square feet;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways
and parking areas, with information concerning widths,
pavement types and construction, and elevations;
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural
and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed
activity or development;
(f) The location of the floodplain boundary line; information and
spot elevations concerning the one-hundred-year flood
elevations; and information concerning the flow of water,
including direction and velocities;
(g) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and
any other improvements; and
(h) Any other information which the municipality considers
necessary for adequate review of the application.
(4) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at a suitable scale,
showing the following:
(a) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building
elevations, as appropriate;
(b) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any
other floor;
(c) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors
associated with the one-hundred-year flood;
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(e) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
§ 245-10.9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.9
227:716
(f) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(g) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
(5) The following data and documentation:
(a) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is owned by the applicant
or the client he represents ["owned by" shall mean the holder
of the legal or beneficial title, the holder of an option or
contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is
subject to any condition), a lessee (if the lessee is authorized
under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner), or any
other person having a proprietary interest in the land];
(b) Certification from a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect that the proposed
construction has been adequately designed to protect against
damage from the one-hundred-year flood;
(c) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the
development during the course of a one-hundred-year flood,
including a statement concerning the effects such pollution
may have on human life;
(d) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on one-hundred-year flood elevations
and flows;
(e) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be
located on the site below the one-hundred-year flood elevation
and the effects such materials and debris may have on onehundred-
year flood elevations and flows;
(f) The appropriate component of the DCNR and/or DEP's
Planning Module for Land Development;
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the DCNR and/or DEP to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
§ 245-10.9 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.9
227:717
§ 245-10.10. Review by County Planning Commission and County
Conservation District.
All permit applications proposing the commencement of an activity or the
construction or expansion of any structure in any identified floodplain area,
such activity or structure having been identified by the Act as an obstruction
or special hazard, shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by
registered or certified mail for its review and comment within three working
days following receipt of the complete application package. Applications
shall also be forwarded to the County Conservation District for review
of land uses which may be within the watershed and activities that may
require review for erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 245-10.11. Review of application by others.
The reviewing Township official(s) may refer a copy of all plans and
applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to special consultants and other appropriate agencies and/
or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Fire Department, County
Conservation District, etc.) for their review and comment.
§ 245-10.12. Changes.
After the issuance of a building permit, no changes of any kind shall be
made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other
documents submitted with the application without the written consent or
approval of the permit-issuing Township official(s). Requests for any such
change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant to
the Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer or to other permit-reviewing
official for consideration.
§ 245-10.13. Placards.
In addition to the building permit, the Building Code Official shall issue
a placard, which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
building permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the Building
Code Official.
(h) Any other applicable permits, such as but not limited to a
permit for any activity regulated by the DCNR and/or DEP
under Section 302 of Act 1978, No. 166; and
(i) If applicable, an evacuation plan acceptable to the Upper Allen
Township Emergency Management Director which fully
explains the manner in which the site and buildings thereon
will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a onehundred-
year flood.
§ 245-10.9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.14
227:718
§ 245-10.14. Start of construction.
Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin within
six months and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of
issuance of the building permit, or else the permit shall expire, unless a time
extension request is granted, in writing, by the Zoning Officer or Building
Code Official. Construction and/or development shall be considered to have
started with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling, and
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, the erection
of temporary forms, the installation of pilings under proposed subsurface
footings, or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes or electrical or
other service lines from the street. Time extensions shall be granted only
if the applicant submits a written request which sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Zoning Officer or Building Code Official to approve
such a request.
§ 245-10.15. Inspection and revocation.
A. During the construction period, the Zoning Officer and/or Building
Code Official, Township Engineer or other authorized Township
official(s) shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is
progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable state, federal and Township laws and
ordinances. Such inspections, as deemed necessary by the authorized
official(s), will be made during and upon completion of the work.
B. In the discharge of their duties, the officials named in Subsection A of
this section shall have the authority to enter any building, structure,
premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce
the provisions of this article. Whenever any authorized agent or official
of the Township has been refused access to a property for the purpose
of conducting a survey or inspection, or reasonably requires access to
such property without prior notice to the owner, such agent or
Township official may apply for an inspection warrant to any
commonwealth official authorized by law to issue a search or inspection
warrant.
C. In the event the authorized Township official(s) discovers that the work
for which the permit was issued does not comply with the permit
application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has
been a false statement or misrepresentation by the applicant, the
Zoning Officer and/or the Building Code Official shall issue a stop-work
order and order corrective action to be taken by the applicant or permit
holder before the cited work will be permitted to resume or shall revoke
the building permit and report such fact to the Board of Commissioners
for whatever action it considers necessary.
D. A record of all such inspections and violations of this article shall be
maintained.
§ 245-10.14 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.15
227:719
§ 245-10.16. Fees.
A fee amount based upon the estimated cost of proposed construction shall
be paid for applications or requests for development permits. Such fee
amount or schedule shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 245-10.17. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
E. The requirements of the 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405, and the IBC
(Sections 109.3.3, 1612.5.1, 104.7 and 103.8) and the 2003 IRC
(R106.1.3, 109.1.3 and R104.7), or latest revisions thereof, pertaining
to elevation certificates and record retention shall be considered.
A. Notices. Whenever the Building Permit Officer or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
article, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Building
Permit Officer shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this article.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Building Permit Officer
or any other authorized employee of the municipality shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to the Township of not
less than $25 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution. In default
of such payment, such person shall be imprisoned in the county prison
for a period not to exceed 10 days. Each day during which any violation
of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition
to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including
an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this article. The
imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of or noncompliance
with this article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or
permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations and noncompliances within a reasonable
§ 245-10.15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.17
227:720
§ 245-10.18. Appeals.
§ 245-10.19. Identification of floodplain areas; designation.
time. Any development initiated or any structure or building
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in
noncompliance with this article may be declared by the Board to be a
public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Building Permit
Officer concerning the administration of the provisions of this article
may appeal to the Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within
30 days after the decision, determination or action of the Building
Permit Officer.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Board shall set a time and place,
within not less than 10 nor more than 30 days, for the purpose of
considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the
appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board may seek relief
therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
commonwealth, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act.200
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Upper Allen
Township subject to the one-hundred-year flood, which is identified as
Zone A (area of special flood hazard) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
dated March 16, 2009, and the accompanying maps, or the most recent
revision thereof, as issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
B. A map showing all areas considered to be subject to the one-hundredyear
flood is available for inspection at the Township offices. For the
purposes of this article, the following nomenclature is used in referring
to the various kinds of floodplain areas:
(1) FW (floodway area): the areas identified as "floodway" in the FIS
prepared by FEMA.
(2) FF (flood-fringe area): the areas identified as "floodway fringe" in
the FIS prepared by FEMA.
(3) FA (general floodplain area): the areas identified as "approximate
one-hundred-year floodplain" in the FIS prepared by FEMA.
C. The FW (identified as floodway area) in the AE Zone in the Flood
Insurance Study prepared by FEMA is delineated for purposes of this
article using the criteria that a certain area within the floodplain must
200. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 245-10.17 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.19
227:721
be capable of carrying the water of the one-hundred-year flood without
increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot
at any point. The areas included in this area are specifically defined
in the Floodway Data Table contained in the above-referenced FIS and
shown on the accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Map. Also
included shall be floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those floodplain areas
where no floodway has been delineated in the FIS.
D. The FF (flood fringe area) shall be that area of the one-hundred-year
floodplain not included in the floodway identified in the AE Zone. The
basis for the outermost boundary of this district shall be the onehundred-
year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the
above-referenced FIS and as shown on the accompanying Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map.
E. The FA (general floodplain area) identified as Zone A in the FIS shall be
that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations
have been provided. The area is shown on the maps accompanying the
FIS prepared by FEMA. Where the specific one-hundred-year flood
elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of
data, such as the United States Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain
Information Reports, United States Geological Survey Floodprone
Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use,
development or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance
with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. When no other
information is available, the one-hundred-year elevation shall be
determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site in question.
F. Where a floodway area cannot be determined for this area using
available information from federal, state or other acceptable sources,
the applicant shall delineate a floodway area and provide sufficient
documentation to demonstrate that his proposed activity, together with
all other existing and anticipated development, uses and activities, will
not increase the water surface elevation of the one-hundred-year flood
more than one foot at any point.
G. Only professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications
who certify that the technical methods used accurately reflect currently
accepted concepts and practices shall undertake hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by
the Township.
H. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
§ 245-10.19 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.19
227:722
§ 245-10.20. Changes in floodplain area delineations.
§ 245-10.21. Disputes.
Should a dispute arise concerning the identification of any floodplain area,
an initial determination shall be made by the Township Planning
Commission; and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination
may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, with the approval of FEMA. The
burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 245-10.22. Technical provisions.
§ 245-10.23. Special floodway and stream setback requirements.
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Township.
A. The areas designated as floodplain areas may be revised or modified by
the Board of Commissioners where studies or information provided by a
qualified agency or person document the need and/or feasibility for
such revisions.
B. No modification or revision of any floodplain area identified in the FIS
prepared by FEMA shall be made without prior approval from FEMA.
A. No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be
affected by such action have been notified by the municipality and until
all required permits or approvals are first obtained from the DCNR and/
or DEP, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management. In addition, FEMA
and the DCED, Bureau of Community Planning, shall be notified prior to
any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this article and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Within any FW (floodway area), the following provisions apply:
(1) Any new construction, development, use, activity or encroachment
that would cause any increase in flood heights during the base
flood discharge shall be prohibited.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed unless a
permit is obtained from the DCNR and DEP, Bureau of Dams and
Waterway Management.
B. Within any FA (general floodplain area), the following provisions apply:
(1) No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
§ 245-10.19 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.23
227:723
§ 245-10.24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
watercourse unless a permit or other written permission is
obtained from the DCNR and/or DEP, Bureau of Dams and
Waterway Management.
(2) Any new construction, development, use, activity or encroachment
which would cause any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited
within a floodway area.
A. Residential structures. Within any identified floodplain area, any new
construction or substantial improvement of a residential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to 18 inches
above the regulatory flood elevation. The design and construction
standards and specifications contained in the 2003 IBC (Sections
1612.4, 1603.1.6 and 3403.1) and in the 2003 IRC (Sections R323.1.4,
R323.2.1, and R323.2.2) and ASCE 24 (Sections 2.4 and 2.5, and
Chapter 5) and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) shall be
utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) Within any FW, FF, or FA, the lowest floor (including basement) of
any new or substantially improved nonresidential structure shall be
at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood elevation or be
designed and constructed so that the space enclosed by such
structure shall remain either completely or essentially dry during
any flood up to that height.
(2) Any structure or part thereof which will not be completely or
adequately elevated shall be designed and constructed to be
completely or essentially dry in accordance with the W1 or W2
space classification standards contained in the publication entitled
"Flood Proofing Regulations" (United States Army Corps of
Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992) or some other
equivalent standard for that type of construction. A statement,
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which
states that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above-referenced standards shall accompany
all plans and specifications for such floodproofing work.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the IBC (Sections 1603.1.2, 1603.1.6, 1605.2.2,
1606.5, 1612.5.1 and 3403.1) and ASCE 24 (Section 2.4 and
Chapter 7) and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) shall
be utilized.
C. Enclosed space below the lowest floor. Enclosed space below the lowest
floor (including the basement) is prohibited.
§ 245-10.23 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.25
227:724
§ 245-10.25. Design and construction standards.
The following standards shall apply for all construction and development
proposed within any identified floodplain area:
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes is submitted to and
approved by the Building Code Official and/or Township Engineer.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties. The provisions contained in the 2003 IBC (Sections
1801.1 and 1803.4) shall be utilized.
B. Drainage. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow
of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall
ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive drainage
away from buildings where drainage is the method of conveyance
utilized. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of
excess runoff onto adjacent properties. The provisions contained in the
2003 IBC (Appendix G401.5) shall be utilized.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401-405, as amended) and contained in the 2003 IBC
(Appendix G, Sections 401.3 and 401.4), the 2003 IRC (Section
323.1.6), the ASCE 24-98 (Section 8.3), FEMA No. 348, Protecting
Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the International
Private Sewage Disposal Code (Chapter 3) shall be utilized.
§ 245-10.25 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.25
227:725
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines and electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood,
according to the requirements, regulations or other procedures
established by the DCNR and/or DEP.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
which are not listed in § 245-10.27, Development which may endanger
human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation
and/or be floodproofed to the maximum extent possible to preclude
their causing damage to life and property.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. The following shall not be placed or caused to be placed in identified
flood-prone areas: fences, except two-wire fences, other structures or
other matter which may impede, retard or change the direction of the
flow of water, or that will catch or collect debris carried by such water,
or that are placed where the natural flow of the stream or floodwaters
would carry the same downstream to the damage or detriment of either
public or private property adjacent to the flood-prone areas.
I. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
(3) The design and construction requirements of the UCC pertaining to
this subsection as referred to in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as
amended) and contained in the 2003 IBC (Sections 1605.2.2,
1605.3.1.2, 1612.4 and Appendix G501.3), the IRC (Sections
R301.1 and R323.1.1) and ASCE 24-98 (Section 5.6) shall be
utilized.
J. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
§ 245-10.25 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.25
227:726
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or treated or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
(5) The provisions of the UCC pertaining to this subsection and
referenced in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) and
contained in the 2003 IBC (Sections 801.1.3, 1403.2, 1403.4,
1403.6 and 1404.2), the 2003 IRC (Sections R323.1.7 and R501.3)
and ASCE 24-98 (Chapter 6) shall be utilized.
K. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints or other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
(4) The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401-405, as amended), the 2003 IBC (Sections 801.1.3,
1403.7 and Appendix G) and the 2003 IRC (Section R323.1.7) shall
be utilized.
L. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(3) The provisions pertaining to the above provisions and referenced in
the UCC and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) and
contained in the 2003 IBC (Section 1612.4), the IRC (Section
R323.1.5), the 2000 IFGC (Sections R301.5 and R1601.3.8) and
ASCE 24 (Chapter 8) shall be utilized.
M. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation. The
provisions pertaining to this provision and referenced in the UCC and
34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) and contained in the 2003
§ 245-10.25 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.25
227:727
§ 245-10.26. Uniform Construction Code coordination.
The standards and specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to
the above and other sections and subsections of this article to the extent
that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this
article:
§ 245-10.27. Development which may endanger human life.
IBC (Section 1612.4), the 2003 IRC (Section R323.1.5) the 2000 IFGC
(Sections R301.5 and R1601.3.8) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8) shall be
utilized.
N. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
A. International Building Code (IBC) 2003, or the latest edition thereof:
Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
B. International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2003, or the latest edition
thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix
E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act201
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development (DCED) as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which will be used for the production
or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances or
which will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a
supply (more than 550 gallons or other comparable volume or any
amount of radioactive substances) of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises shall be subject to the
provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions.
The following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
201. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 245-10.25 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.27
227:728
§ 245-10.28. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any FW (floodway area), any structure of the kind described in
§ 245-10.27.A of this article shall be prohibited.
C. Within any FA (general floodplain area), any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in § 245-10.27.A above shall
be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in § 245-10.27.A above shall
be:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a one-hundred-year flood.
E. Any such structure or part thereof that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood Proofing Regulations" (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992)
or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any FW (floodway area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
§ 245-10.27 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.28
227:729
§ 245-10.29. Activities requiring special permits.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
DCED to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act (Act 166
of 1978),202 and the mandate of the Board of Commissioners of Upper Allen
Township, the following obstructions and activities are prohibited if located
entirely or partially within an identified floodplain area, unless a special
permit is issued:
B. Within any FA (general floodplain area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes
and any additions thereto shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is 1 1/2
feet or more above the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(4) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2003
International Residential Building Code or the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 edition, draft or
latest revision thereto, shall apply and 34 Pa. Code Chapters
401-405.
(5) Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2003 IBC (Appendix G, Section 501.1-3) and the 2003 IRC (Sections
R323.2, R323.3, R102.7.1, and Appendix AE101, 604 and 605), or
the most recent revisions thereto, and 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be
provided or were not established for the unit's(s') proposed
installation.
D. An evacuation plan acceptable to the Upper Allen Township Emergency
Management Director, Fire Marshal and Fire Department, indicating
alternative vehicular access and escape routes, shall be filed with the
Township Building Code Official for mobile home parks.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used or
intended to be used for any of the following activities:
202. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 245-10.28 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.29
227:730
§ 245-10.30. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
(1) Hospitals (public or private).
(2) Nursing homes (public or private).
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of or any construction of new manufactured home
parks and manufactured home subdivisions and substantial
improvements to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions.
A. A written request, including a completed building permit application
form.
B. A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum of
1929, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of two
feet;
(3) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the
site, expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the one-hundred-year flood elevation, and
information concerning the flow of water, including direction and
velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
§ 245-10.29 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.30
227:731
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the one-hundred-year flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client the applicant
represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the onehundred-
year flood;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a one-hundred-year flood, including a
statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on
human life;
(4) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on one-hundred-year flood elevations and flows;
§ 245-10.30 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.30
227:732
§ 245-10.31. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Township, the
following procedures shall apply in addition to those in § 245-10.9:
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the one-hundred-year flood elevation and the effects such
materials and debris may have on one-hundred-year flood
elevations and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's Planning Module for Land Development;
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan, meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection, to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits, such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166; and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a onehundred-
year flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the Cumberland County Planning Commission by
registered or certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies
of the application shall also be forwarded to the Township Planning
Commission and Township Engineer for review and comment.
B. If an incomplete application is received, the Township shall notify the
applicant, in writing, stating in what respects the application is
deficient.
C. If the Township decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Township approves an application, it shall file written notification,
together with the application and all pertinent information, with the
DCED, by registered or certified mail, within five working days after the
date of approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Township shall allow the DCED
30 days after receipt of the notification by the Department to review the
application and the decision made by the Township.
§ 245-10.30 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.31
227:733
§ 245-10.32. Special technical requirements.
§ 245-10.33. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
F. If the Township does not receive any communication from the DCED
during the thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the
applicant.
G. If the DCED should decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify
the Township and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Township shall not issue the special permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of § 245-10.9 of this article, the
following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between
any of the following requirements and those in § 245-10.9 of this article
or in any other code, ordinance or regulation, the more-restrictive
provision shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants. At a minimum, all new structures shall be designed,
located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the onehundred-
year flood without any lateral movement or damage to
either the structure itself or to any of its equipment or contents
below the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(b) The lowest floor elevation will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the one-hundred-year flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. Only professional engineers, or others of demonstrated qualifications,
shall undertake all hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, who shall certify
that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses and computations shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by
the Township and the DCED.
A. The provisions of this article do not require any changes or
improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However,
§ 245-10.31 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.33
227:734
when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions
of this section shall apply.
B. Structures existing in any identified floodplain area prior to the
enactment of this article may continue, subject to the following
provisions:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any identified floodway that would cause any
increase in the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure either before the
improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred, shall
constitute a "substantial improvement," as defined herein, and
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of
this article.
(3) The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code, Chapters 401-405, as amended, and the 2003 IBC (Sections
3402.1 and 1612.4) and the 2003 IRC (Section 323.1.4).
(4) The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include
either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living
conditions.
(b) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(c) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of less
than 50% of its market value. (Such improvements shall,
however, be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.)
(5) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
(6) The requirements of 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405, as amended,
and the 2003 IRC (Sections R102.7.1, R105.3.1 and Appendixes E
and J), or the latest revision thereof, and the 2003 IBC (Sections
101.3, 3403.1 and Appendix G), or the latest revision thereof, shall
also be utilized in conjunction with the provisions of this section.
§ 245-10.33 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.34
227:735
§ 245-10.34. Variances.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this article would result in an
exceptional hardship for a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirements.
§ 245-10.35. Variance procedures and requirements.
A. A written application for variance from the terms of this article shall be
filed with the Zoning Officer or other authorized Township official, and
it shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location of the site and the nature of the improvement or
activity for which the proposed variance or relief is sought.
(3) A statement of the provision of this article from which variance is
being sought.
(4) The nature of the change to be made under the variance.
(5) The reasons why such variance should be granted, including a
statement of alternative safeguards to preserve the intent of this
article.
(6) Such other information or materials pertinent to the issue of a
variance which the applicant believes the Board would wish to
consider in relation to the request for variance.
B. Upon receipt of the application for a variance, the Board shall initially
determine if the information contained in the application is sufficient
for the consideration of the variance and, if so, shall either grant or
deny the variance. In the event that the Board determines that the
information contained in the application is insufficient for the Board to
make a proper determination, or in the event that the Board wishes
additional information, it should either:
(1) Request that the applicant provide such additional materials in
writing; or
(2) Schedule a hearing, at which time the applicant shall be entitled to
present such additional information, including direct testimony,
which is pertinent and germane to the issue of the variance.
C. The Board shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the determination
which it has made in regard to the request for a variance, whether the
variance has been granted or denied.
D. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or
activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
§ 245-10.34 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.35
227:736
§ 245-10.36. General definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give this article its most reasonable application.
E. Except for possible modification of the one-and-one-half-foot freeboard
requirements involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
special permit or to development which may endanger human life (see
§ 245-10.27).
F. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
G. In granting any variance, the Township shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve the
objectives of this article.
H. Whenever a variance is granted, the Township shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
I. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township shall consider,
but not be limited to, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Not result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense.
(b) Not create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public or
conflict with any other applicable state statute or regulation or
local ordinance or regulation.
J. The Township shall maintain a complete record of all variance requests
and related actions. In addition, a report of all variances granted during
the year shall be included in the annual report to FEMA and the DCED.
K. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-hundred-year flood.
§ 245-10.35 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.37
227:737
§ 245-10.37. Specific definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same lot
with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
use or structure.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry during
flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage
of water and water vapor.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the
structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and
discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this article,
the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the one-hundredyear
magnitude.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
§ 245-10.37 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.37
227:738
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in this article as being inundated by the one-hundred-year flood.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including the basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, and recreational and other
similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive
days.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 245-10.37 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.37
227:739
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership,
which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
manufactured homes for nontransient use.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after February 15, 1980, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 245-10.37 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-10.37
227:740
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, sheds, manufactured
homes, and other similar items. This term includes any man-made object
having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether
or not affixed to land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL ADDITIONS TO MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS — Any
repair, reconstruction, or improvement of an existing manufactured home
park or manufactured home subdivision where such repair, reconstruction,
or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads will equal or exceed
50% of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair,
reconstruction, or improvement is started.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage (or repetitive loss, when a repetitive loss
provision is used), regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC) by
reference as the construction standards applicable to commonwealth
floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above
are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 245-10.37 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-10.37
227:741

ARTICLE XI
Conservation Design Overlay District (CSO)
§ 245-11.1. Purpose.
The Conservation Design Overlay District is intended to provide greater
design flexibility, efficiency and options for conserving open land and areas
containing unique and sensitive natural features and reducing the
infrastructure needs of development. The district regulations implement
adopted objectives in the Upper Allen Comprehensive Plan, as amended,
and the Upper Allen Comprehensive Recreation and Open Space Plan, as
amended, including:
§ 245-11.2. Area of application.
A. To create new residential development and neighborhoods that are
harmonious with the landscape and preserve tree cover and other
important natural amenities found within the Township.
B. To preserve natural amenities, such as streams, floodplains, wetlands
and wooded areas, and incorporate these features into development
plans to serve as open space and greenways and to provide a link to
other similar areas.
C. To work with landowners and developers to explore alternatives to
conventional residential subdivisions.
D. To preserve and enhance scenic qualities along and from major
roadways.
E. To encourage the design of new development to complement the
Township's scenic and historic character.
F. To establish low- and moderate-growth land uses with cluster
development to preserve open space, promote sustainable agriculture,
and protect natural resources.
G. To promote a greenway system along stream corridors, to enhance
flood control and water quality that would interconnect with a county
greenway system, if developed, and adjoining municipality parks, to the
extent possible.
A. The Conservation Design Overlay District applies to the R-1 and R-2
District tracts of land or parcels containing areas designated for
greenway and trail links and corridors as shown on the Greenway/Trail
Map for Upper Allen Township in the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Recreation and Open Space Plan.
B. Conservation subdivisions are allowed by right in the any R-1 or R-2
District of the Township and in accordance with the regulations of this
article.
§ 245-11.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-11.3
227:743
§ 245-11.3. Development options; use and lot requirements.
A. The following two options shall be permitted by right in the R-1 and R-2
Districts.
(1) Option 1, Neutral Density and Basic Conservation, provides singlefamily
detached residential uses at the density permitted by the
underlying district. The required lot sizes in the underlying district
are reduced to accommodate the minimum open space required for
the conservation subdivision.
(2) Option 2, Enhanced Density with Greater Conservation, provides
for a larger percentage of the tract to remain in open space, in
exchange for higher densities of residential uses than Option 1.
B. Determination of the minimum greenway area and the maximum
development area, including the maximum permitted residential
density, shall be by the adjusted tract method or the yield method in
accordance with § 245-11.7 herein. The greenway requirement shall be
the minimum open space requirement (percentage of the adjusted tract
area) plus all of the constrained land. The minimum open space
requirements by underlying zoning district shall be as follows:
(1) Low-Density Residential District (R-1) shall comply with the
regulations of § 245-5.3 herein.
(2) Medium-Density Residential District (R-2):
(a) Option 1: 30%.
(b) Option 2: 40%.
C. The density factor to be applied for the calculation of the maximum
residential density in the development area shall be in accordance with
the following standards. To provide space for parking, stormwater
management and buffering, each acre of nonresidential use shall be
equal to four residential development rights in Option 1 and five
residential development rights in Option 2 and shall be subtracted from
the maximum residential density.
(1) Low-Density Residential District (R-1) shall comply with the
regulations of § 245-5.3 herein.
(2) Medium-Density Residential District (R-2):
(a) Option 1: 11,500 square feet/dwelling unit.
(b) Option 2: 8,000 square feet/dwelling unit.
D. The permitted, special exception and conditional uses for the
development area shall be in accordance with the underlying district.
(1) In addition, the following permitted and special exception uses
shall be allowed in the greenway areas.
§ 245-11.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-11.3
227:744
(a) Permitted uses:
[1] Conservation of open land in its natural state (for example,
woodland, fallow field or managed meadow).
[2] Agricultural and horticultural uses, including raising
crops, wholesale nurseries, associated buildings.
Specifically excluded are commercial livestock operations
involving swine, poultry, mink and other animals likely to
produce highly offensive odors.
[3] Forestry and timber harvesting in accordance with
§ 245-16.3.
[4] Low-impact passive recreational uses, specifically
excluding motorized off-road vehicles, rifle ranges, and
other uses similar in character and potential impact. If a
property contains a segment of greenway or trail shown on
the Greenway/Trail Map for Upper Allen Township in the
Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Recreation and
Open Space Plan, the segment shall be part of the
greenway area.
[5] Active noncommercial recreation areas, such as playing
fields, playgrounds, courts and bikeways, provided such
areas do not consume more than half of the minimum
required greenway land or five acres, whichever is less.
Playing fields, playgrounds and courts shall not be located
within 100 feet of abutting properties. Parking facilities for
the same shall also be permitted, and they shall generally
be gravel-surfaced, unlighted, properly drained and
provide safe ingress and egress.
[6] Water supply and sewage disposal systems and
stormwater detention areas designed, landscaped and
available for use as an integral part of the greenway.
(b) Special exception uses: golf courses, including their parking
areas and associated structures, but shall not include driving
ranges or miniature golf and shall be in accordance with
§ 245-14.24.
(2) No more than one principal use shall occupy a lot in the
development area. The following standards shall apply to
developments where both residential and nonresidential lots are
occupying the development area.
(a) No more than 20% of the development area on the tract shall
be devoted to lots with nonresidential uses.
(b) The nonresidential development shall meet all buffering
requirements in § 245-16.5.
§ 245-11.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-11.3
227:745
(c) More than one principal use shall be allowed in the greenway
area.
E. Developments in the CSO District shall meet the general regulations
and design standards for conservation subdivisions in accordance with
§ 245-11.8 herein and the following dimensional requirements.
(1) Minimum requirements for single-family detached dwelling units.
(a) Lot area. To maximize flexibility in design, no minimum lot
sizes shall be required; with the exception that for lots using
on-lot wastewater disposal systems, the minimum lot size shall
be the size required by the Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer. The septic field may be located on the conservation
area if it is held as common open space in the development.
(b) Setback requirements. Single-family detached residential units
shall meet the setback requirements in § 245-5.4.B.
(c) Lot coverage. Not more than 50% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings, and no more than 60% shall be occupied
by impervious surface.
(2) All nonresidential uses and residential dwelling unit types other
than single-family detached units shall meet the minimum lot and
dimensional requirements of the underlying district.
(3) No more than 4% of the greenway area shall be occupied by
buildings and impervious surface.
(4) Buffers and screening. Buffer yards shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements contained in § 245-16.5, General buffer
regulations, in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.203
(5) Building height limits. The building height limit for uses shall be in
accordance with the limits of the underlying district.
F. Water and wastewater system. Lot size plus soil conditions shall be the
determining factor for the need for public water, public sewer, an
approved community water and/or wastewater treatment system, or onlot
systems. The final approval of the community system or on-lot
systems shall be by the Board of Commissioners, based on review by the
Township Engineer and/or Sewage Enforcement Officer and
concurrence from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. Minimum lots sizes shall be adjusted, based on the
approved systems.
203. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-11.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-11.4
227:746
§ 245-11.4. Sign requirements.
Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Article XVIII, Signs, of this
chapter.
§ 245-11.5. Off-street parking requirements.
Off-street parking and access requirements shall be provided in accordance
with Article XVII, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter.
§ 245-11.6. Greenway area standards.
A. Greenway lands shall be laid out where possible to form an
interconnected network of open space. The required greenway land
consists of all constrained land.
B. Options 1 and 2 greenway land shall generally remain undivided and
may be owned and maintained by a homeowners' association, land
trust, another conservation organization recognized by the
municipality, or by a private individual (typically as part of the original
farmhouse). However, in no case shall less than 30% of the land
comprising the adjusted tract area be available for the common use and
passive enjoyment of the subdivision residents. These ownership
options may be combined so that different parts of the greenway land
may be owned by different entities in accordance with § 245-11.10
herein.
C. Up to 5% of the total tract acreage in any of the options may be subject
to the Township's public land dedication requirement (typically to
provide potential connections with the Township's long-range trail and
greenway network).
D. Buffers for adjacent public parkland. Where the proposed development
adjoins public parkland, a natural greenway buffer at least 150 feet
deep shall be provided within the development along its common
boundary with the parkland, within which no new structures shall be
constructed, nor shall any clearing of trees or understory growth be
permitted (except as may be necessary for street or trail construction).
Where this buffer is unwooded, the Board may require vegetative
screening to be planted or that it be managed to encourage natural
forest succession through "no-mow" policies and the periodic removal
of invasive alien plant and tree species.
E. No portion of any building lot may be used for meeting the minimum
required greenway land. However, active agricultural land with farm
buildings, excluding areas used for residences, may be used to meet the
minimum required greenway land.
F. Conservation area easements. Designated conservation areas shall be
permanently protected through a conservation easement in accordance
with § 245-11.9 herein.
§ 245-11.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-11.6
227:747
§ 245-11.7. Conservation/greenway area, development area, and
density determinations for Options 1 and 2 conservation
subdivisions.
Applicants shall use one of two methods to determine the minimum
conservation area in the case of the A District or a greenway area for other
districts; the maximum development area and the permitted residential
building density for conservation subdivisions: the adjusted tract area
approach or the yield plan approach.
G. Ownership and maintenance of conservation areas and common
facilities. The ownership and maintenance of designated conservation
areas and common facilities shall be in accordance with § 245-11.10
herein.
A. Adjusted tract area approach. The adjusted tract area equals the gross
tract area minus the constrained land (described below).
(1) Constrained land equals the sum of the following:
(a) All land within the rights-of-way of existing public streets or
highways.
(b) All land under existing private streets.
(c) Wetlands: Multiply the acreage of designated wetlands by 0.80.
(d) Floodway: Multiply the acreage within the floodway by 1.00.
(e) Floodplains: Multiply the nonwetland portion of the onehundred-
year floodplain by 0.50.
(f) Steep slopes from 15% to 25%: Multiply the acreage of land
with natural ground slopes of 15% to 25% by 0.25.
(g) Steep slopes greater than 25%: Multiply the acreage of land
with natural ground slopes exceeding 25% by 0.80.
(h) Extensive rock outcroppings: Multiply the total area of rock
outcrops and boulder-fields more than 1,000 square feet by
0.90.
(i) Scenic River Corridor: Multiply the acreage of land within the
corridor by 1.00.
(2) If a portion of the tract is underlain by more than one natural
feature subject to a density factor, that acreage shall be subject to
the most restrictive density factor.
(3) Since acreage that is contained within the public or private rightsof-
way, access easements or access strips is excluded from
developable lot area, any portion of these items that also contains a
natural feature subject to a deduction from the total tract acreage
should not be included when calculating the adjusted tract area.
§ 245-11.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-11.7
227:748
(4) Minimum required conservation area or greenway area. The
minimum required conservation area or greenway area equals the
adjusted tract area times the open space percentage for selected
option in the underlying district plus all constrained land.
(5) Maximum development area. The maximum development area is
the total tract area minus the conservation or greenway area.
(6) Permitted dwelling units. The maximum number of permitted
dwelling units equals the adjusted tract area divided by the density
factor for the selected option in the underlying district. See Table
XI-1 to calculate maximum number of permitted dwellings.)
Table XI-1
Adjusted Tract Area Calculation Worksheet
A B C D
Description of
Constraint
Area of Site
Constraint
(acres)
Multiplier
(resource
protection
factor)
Constrained
Lands
(acres)
Rights-of-way of
existing public
streets
1.00
Overhead utility
rights-of-way,
existing or
proposed
1.00
Land under
existing private
streets
1.00
Wetlands 0.80
Floodways 1.00
One-hundred-year
floodplain
(excluding
floodways or
wetlands within
floodplains)
0.50
Steep slopes from
15% to 25%
0.25
Steep slopes
greater than 25%
0.80
Rock outcrops and
boulder fields
0.90
§ 245-11.7 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-11.7
227:749
Table XI-1
Adjusted Tract Area Calculation Worksheet
A B C D
Description of
Constraint
Area of Site
Constraint
(acres)
Multiplier
(resource
protection
factor)
Constrained
Lands
(acres)
Scenic river
overlay
1.00
Totals
NOTES:
1. Delineate and calculate the site area of the described constraint (see
Existing Resource and Site Analysis Plan in the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Conservation
Subdivision Plat Procedures).
2. Calculate total constrained land:204
• Insert site acreage for each factor in Column B (area of site
constraint).
• Take factor acreage in Column B x Column C (resource protection
factor) to find Column D (constrained land).
• Add all constrained lands in Column D to find total constrained
land.
3. To calculate the Adjusted Tract Area (ATA):
ATA = Gross Tract Area - Total Constrained Land
4. Calculate permitted density:
Permitted density = ATA/density factor
5. Calculate the minimum conservation/greenway area:
Required Conservation/Greenway Area = Total Constrained Land +
(ATA x Open Space Percentage)
6. Calculate the maximum development area:
Maximum Development Area = Gross Tract Area - Minimum Required
Greenway Area
B. Yield plan approach. Determination of density or maximum number of
permitted dwelling units shall be based upon the density factor of the
chosen option applied to the gross tract acreage, as demonstrated by an
actual yield plan. Yield plans shall meet the following requirements:
204. If a portion of the tract is underlain by more than one site constraint, that acreage shall
be subject to the most restrictive multiplier.
§ 245-11.7 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-11.7
227:750
(1) Yield plans must be prepared as conceptual layout plans in
accordance with the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance,205
containing proposed lots, streets, rights-of-way and other pertinent
features. Although it must be drawn to scale, it need not be based
on a field survey. However, it must be a realistic layout reflecting a
development pattern that could reasonably be expected to be
implemented, taking into account the presence of wetlands,
floodplains, steep slopes, existing easements or encumbrances and,
if unsewered, the suitability of soils for subsurface sewage
disposal.
(2) The yield plan must identify and demonstrate that wetlands,
floodplains, steep slopes and rock outcrops could be successfully
absorbed in the development process without disturbance by
allocating this area to proposed single-family dwelling lots.
(a) On sites not served by central sewage disposal, density shall be
further determined by evaluating the number of homes that
could be supported by individual septic systems on
conventional lots. The applicant shall be required to provide
evidence that 10% of lots at various locations distributed
throughout the tract meet the standards for an individual
septic system in order to be granted the full density
determined by the yield plan. Should any of the lots in a sample
fail to meet the standard for individual septic system, those lots
shall be deducted from the yield plan.
(b) Yield plan dimensional standards. The following dimensional
standards shall be used in the development of yield plans for
Option 1 and 2 subdivisions in the A District. The yield plan
shall use the density factor of Options 1 and 2 in the R-1 and
R-2 Districts as minimum lot area plus the standards of the
underlying districts for other dimensional requirements. These
minimum dimensions are exclusive of all wetlands, slopes
greater than 25%, and land under high-tension electrical
transmission lines (69kV or greater). No more than 25% of the
minimum required lot area may consist of land within the onehundred-
year floodplain, and only then if it is free of wetlands.
District/Option
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Street
Frontage
(minimum)
(feet)
Lot Depth
(feet)
Agriculture
District
Option 1 80,000 150 300
Option 2 60,000 125 250
205. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-11.7 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-11.8
227:751
§ 245-11.8. General regulations and design standards for
conservation subdivisions.
A. Conservation subdivisions shall be governed by the following minimum
general regulations:
(1) Ownership. The tract of land may be held in single and separate
ownership or in multiple ownership. However, when a tract is held
in multiple ownership, it shall be planned as a single entity with
common authority and common responsibility.
(2) Existing resources and site analysis plan. An existing resources and
site analysis plan shall be required in accordance with the Upper
Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.206
(3) Intersections and access. New intersections with existing public
roads shall be minimized. Although two accessways into and out of
subdivisions containing more than 15 dwellings are generally
required for safety, proposals for more than two entrances onto
public roads shall be discouraged if they would unnecessarily
disrupt traffic flow.
(4) Sensitive area disturbance. The proposed design shall strictly
minimize disturbance of environmentally sensitive areas, as shown
on the existing resources and site analysis plan as required by the
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.207 Lands within the floodway, one-hundred-year
floodplain, wetlands, slopes in excess of 15% and rock
outcroppings constitute such environmentally sensitive areas
where disturbance shall be strictly minimized. Demonstration by
the applicant that these features will be protected by the proposed
application shall be prerequisite to approval of both the
preliminary plan and final plan.
(5) Community wastewater systems. In developments that are
proposed to be served by community wastewater disposal systems,
the selection of wastewater treatment technique shall be based
upon a thorough review and comment by the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer and Township Engineer and acceptance by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Board of Commissioners.
B. Conservation subdivisions shall be governed by the following design
standards.
(1) All new dwellings shall meet the following setback requirements:
(a) From all external road ultimate right-of-way: 100 feet.
206. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
207. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-11.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-11.8
227:752
§ 245-11.9. Conservation/greenway area easements.
Options 1, 2, and 3 conservation subdivisions. The required conservation
area or greenway land shall be subject to permanent conservation
easements prohibiting future development other than permitted or
conditional uses.
(b) From all other tract boundaries: 50 feet.
(c) From cropland or pasture land: 100 feet.
(d) From buildings or barnyards housing livestock: 300 feet.
(e) From active recreation areas such as courts or playing fields
(not including tot lots): 150 feet.
(f) Minimum setbacks: Distance between residential buildings on
adjacent lots, unless otherwise indicated in the zoning district,
shall be not less than 10 feet; however, no residential lot shall
have a minimum side setback less than five feet. A
nonresidential building shall be no closer than 20 feet to an
adjacent building, with no nonresidential lot having a side
setback less than 10 feet.
(2) Views of house lots from exterior roads and abutting properties
shall be minimized by the use of changes in topography, existing
vegetation, or additional landscaping.
(3) House lots shall be accessed from interior streets, rather than from
roads bordering the tract.
(4) At least three-quarters of the lots shall directly abut or face
greenway land across a street.
C. Conservation subdivisions and greenways shall be governed by the
following design guidelines.
(1) Pedestrian and maintenance access, excluding those lands used for
agricultural purposes, shall be provided to greenway land in
accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Each neighborhood shall provide one centrally located access
point per 15 lots, a minimum of 35 feet in width.
(b) Access to greenway land used for agriculture may be
appropriately restricted for public safety and to prevent
interference with agricultural operations.
(2) All greenway land areas that are not wooded or farmed shall be
landscaped in accordance with the landscaping requirements of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.208
208. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-11.8 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-11.10
227:753
§ 245-11.10. Ownership and maintenance of conservation and
greenway areas and common facilities.
A. Ownership options. The following methods may be used, either
individually or in combination, to own common facilities (conservation
areas and greenway areas). Common facilities shall not be transferred
to another entity except for transfer to another method of ownership
permitted under this section, and then only when there is no change in
the common facilities or in the open space ratio of the overall
development. Ownership methods shall conform to the following:
(1) Fee simple dedication to Upper Allen Township. The Township may,
but shall not be required to, accept any portion of the common
facilities, provided that there is no cost of acquisition to the
Township and the Township agrees to and has access to maintain
such facilities. Furthermore, the Board may require adherence to
conditions or standards set forth by the Township prior to
acceptance of dedication.
(2) Condominium association. Common facilities may be controlled
through the use of condominium agreements. Such agreements
shall be in accordance with relevant commonwealth law. All open
land and common facilities shall be held as "common element."
(3) Homeowners' association. Common facilities may be held in
common ownership by a homeowners' association, subject to all of
the provisions for homeowners' associations set forth in
commonwealth regulations and statutes and the Upper Allen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. In
addition, the following regulations shall be met:
(a) The applicant shall provide the Township a description of the
organization of the proposed association, including its bylaws
and all documents governing ownership, maintenance and use
restrictions for common facilities.
(b) The proposed association shall be established by the owner or
applicant and shall be operating (with financial subsidization
by the owner or applicant, if necessary) before the sale of any
dwelling units in the development.
(c) Membership in the association shall be automatic (mandatory)
for all purchasers of dwelling units therein and their
successors in title.
(d) The association shall be responsible for maintenance and
insurance of common facilities.
(e) The bylaws shall confer legal authority on the association to
place a lien on the real property of any member who falls
delinquent in his dues. Such dues shall be paid, with the
accrued interest, before the lien may be lifted.
§ 245-11.10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-11.10
227:754
(f) Written notice of any proposed transfer of common facilities by
the association or the assumption of maintenance for common
facilities must be given to all members of the association and to
the municipality no less than 30 days prior to such event.
(g) The association shall have adequate staff to administer,
maintain and operate such common facilities.
(h) Evidence shall be produced as required by the Board to
demonstrate the financial viability of the homeowners'
association.
(4) Private conservation organization or the county. With permission of
the Township, an owner may transfer either fee simple title of the
open space or easements on the open space to a private nonprofit
conservation organization or to the county, given the following
conditions:
(a) The conservation organization is acceptable to the Township
and is a bona fide conservation organization intended to exist
indefinitely.
(b) The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper
reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization or
Cumberland County becomes unwilling or unable to continue
carrying out its functions.
(c) The greenway land is permanently restricted from future
development through a conservation easement and the
Township is given the ability to enforce these restrictions.
(d) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is
established between the owner and the organization or
Cumberland County.
(e) Evidence shall be provided as required by the Board of
Commissioners to demonstrate the financial viability and
liability of the private conservation organization.
(5) Dedication of easements to the Township. The Township may, but
shall not be required to, accept easements for public use of any
portion of the common land or facilities. In such cases, the facility
remains in the ownership of the condominium association,
homeowners' association or private conservation organization,
while the easements are held by the municipality. In addition, the
following regulations shall apply:
(a) There shall be no cost of acquisition to the Township.
(b) Any such easements for public use shall be accessible to the
residents of the Township.
§ 245-11.10 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-11.10
227:755
(c) A satisfactory maintenance agreement shall be reached
between the owner and the Township.
(6) Non-common private ownership. The land may be owned privately,
provided the conservation area or greenway is permanently
restricted from future development through a conservation
easement and that the Township is given the ability to enforce
these restrictions.
B. Maintenance.
(1) Unless otherwise agreed to by the Board of Commissioners, the
cost and responsibility of maintaining common facilities and
conservation or greenway land shall be borne by the property
owner, condominium association, homeowners' association, or
conservation organization.
(2) The applicant shall, at the time of preliminary plan submission,
provide a plan for maintenance of conservation or greenway lands
and operation of common facilities, in accordance with the
following requirements:
(a) The plan shall define ownership.
(b) The plan shall establish necessary regular and periodic
operation and maintenance responsibilities for the various
kinds of open space (i.e., lawns, playing fields, meadow,
pasture, cropland, woodlands, etc.).
(c) The plan shall estimate staffing needs, insurance
requirements, and associated costs, and define the means for
funding the maintenance of the greenway land and operation
of any common facilities on an ongoing basis. Such funding
plan shall include the means for funding long-term capital
improvements as well as regular yearly operating and
maintenance costs.
(3) In the event that the organization established to maintain the
conservation or greenway lands and the common facilities, or any
successor organization thereto, fails to maintain all or any portion
thereof in reasonable order and condition, the Township may
assume responsibility for maintenance, in which case any escrow
funds may be forfeited and any permits may be revoked or
suspended.
(4) The Township may enter the premises and take corrective action,
including extended maintenance. The costs of such corrective
action may be charged to the property owner, condominium
association, homeowners' association, conservation organization,
or individual property owners who make up a condominium or
homeowners' association and may include administrative costs and
penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on said properties. Notice
§ 245-11.10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-11.10
227:756
of such lien shall be filed by the Township in the office of the
prothonotary of Cumberland County.
§ 245-11.10 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-11.10
227:757

ARTICLE XII
Airport Overlay District (AO)
§ 245-12.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Airport Overlay District is to consider safety issues
around the airport, regulate and restrict the height of constructed
structures and objects of natural growth, create appropriate zones,
establish the boundaries thereof and provide for changes in the restrictions
and boundaries of such zones, create the permitting process for use within
said zones and provide for enforcement, assessment of violation penalties,
an appeals process, and judicial review.
§ 245-12.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings and shall
supersede definitions as contained in Article II, Land Use Definitions, of this
chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance, except an unpowered hang glider or
parachute, used for manned ascent into or flight through the air.
AIRPORT — Harrisburg International and Capital City Airports, and any
area of land or water which is used or intended to be used for the landing
and takeoff of aircrafts, and any appurtenant areas which are used or
intended to be used for airport buildings or air navigation facilities or
rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities thereon. As
used herein, the term "airport" includes public airports but excludes private
airports and heliports. Public and private airports are defined separately in
this section.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area measures in feet above sea level. The airport elevation of the
Harrisburg International Airport is 310 feet; Capital City Airport is 347 feet.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use
of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight or aircraft in landing
or taking off of an aircraft.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this chapter
and the Airport Zoning Act, 74 Pa. C.S.A. § 5911 et seq.
APPROACH SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and
upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is
applied to each end of the runway based on the planned approach. The
inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface
and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach. The approach
surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived from the approach surface.
CONICAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface extending outward
and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet
§ 245-12.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-12.2
227:759
horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The
conical surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is based on the conical surface.
DEPARTMENT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of
Transportation.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation that is constructed by swinging arcs of various
radii from the center of the end of the primary surface and then connecting
the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based on the
planned approach. The horizontal surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is
derived from the horizontal surface.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved
or planned.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter or an amendment thereto.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth, or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in this article.
OTHER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which
a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of paved
runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation of any point
on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on
the runway center line. The primary surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is
derived from the primary surface.
PRIVATE AIRPORT — An airport which is privately owned and which is not
open or intended to be open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
PUBLIC AIRPORT — An airport which is either publicly or privately owned
and which is open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
§ 245-12.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-12.2
227:760
RUNWAY — A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface that extends
outward and upward from the edge of the primary and approach surfaces
to the horizontal surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot
vertically. The transitional surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived
from the transitional surface.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight
or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
§ 245-12.3. Establishment of airport zones.
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all lands lying beneath the
approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical
surfaces as they apply to the Harrisburg International and Capital City
Airports. Such zones are shown on the Harrisburg International and Capital
City Airport Height Limitation and Zoning District Maps, prepared by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, which, by
reference, is made a part of this article. An area located in more than one
of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitation. The various zones hereby include:
§ 245-12.4. Permit applications.
A. Approach Surface Zone.
B. Conical Surface Zone.
C. Horizontal Surface Zone.
D. Primary Surface Zone.
E. Transitional Surface Zone.
A. As regulated by Act 164 and defined by 14 Code of Federal Regulations
Part 77.13(a) (as amended or replaced), any person who plans to erect a
new structure, to add to an existing structure, or to erect and maintain
any object (natural or man-made), in the vicinity of the airport, shall
first notify the Department's Bureau of Aviation (BOA) by submitting
PENNDOT Form AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review of the proposal
at least 30 days prior to commencement thereof. The Department's BOA
§ 245-12.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-12.4
227:761
§ 245-12.5. Variance.
§ 245-12.6. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use shall be made
of land or water within the Airport Overlay District in such a manner
response must be included with this permit application for it to be
considered complete. If the Department's BOA returns a determination
of no penetration of airspace, the permit request should be considered
in compliance with the intent of this Overlay Ordinance. If the
Department's BOA returns a determination of a penetration of airspace,
the permit shall be denied, and the project sponsor may seek a variance
from such regulations as outlined in Section 6.
B. No permit is required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace
parts of existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height
of an existing structure.
A. Any request for a variance shall include documentation in compliance
with 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 77 Subpart B (FAA Form
7460-1 as amended or replaced). Determinations of whether to grant a
variance will depend on the determinations made by the FAA and the
Department's BOA as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of
air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable air space.
In particular, the request for a variance shall consider which of the
following categories the FAA has placed the proposed construction in:
(1) No objection. The subject construction is determined not to exceed
obstruction standards, and marking/lighting is not required to
mitigate potential hazard. Under this determination, a variance
shall be granted.
(2) Conditional determination. The proposed construction/alteration is
determined to create some level of encroachment into an airport
hazard area which can be effectively mitigated. Under this
determination, a variance shall be granted contingent upon
implementation of mitigating measures as described in Section 9,
Obstruction Marking and Lighting.
(3) Objectionable. The proposed construction/alteration is determined
to be a hazard and is thus objectionable. A variance shall be denied
and the reasons for this determination shall be outlined to the
applicant.
B. Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly found that
a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be contrary to the
public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the intent of this
chapter.
§ 245-12.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-12.6
227:762
as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots
to distinguish between airport lights and others, impair visibility in the
vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or otherwise endanger or
interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the
airport.
§ 245-12.7. Preexisting nonconforming uses.
The regulations prescribed in this chapter shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or
tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this
chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming
use. No nonconforming use shall be structurally altered or permitted to
grow higher, so as to increase the nonconformity, and a nonconforming use,
once substantially abated may only be reestablished consistent with the
provisions herein.
§ 245-12.8. Obstruction marking and lighting.
Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
may be conditioned according to the process described in § 245-12.5.
(Variance) to require the owner of the structure or object of natural growth
in question to permit the municipality, at the owner's expense, or require
the person requesting the permit or variance to install, operate, and
maintain such marking or lighting as deemed necessary to ensure both
ground and air safety.
§ 245-12.9. Enforcement; notice.
A. Local enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to
administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications
for permits and variance shall be made to the Zoning Officer upon a
form published for that purpose. Applications required by this article to
be submitted to the Zoning Office shall be promptly considered and
granted or denied. Application for action by the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be forthwith transmitted by the Zoning Officer.
B. Notice to Department of Transportation. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, a municipality or board which decides to grant a
permit or variance under this article shall notify the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, of its decision. This
notice shall be in writing and shall be sent so as to reach the
Department at least one day before the date upon which the decision is
to be issued.
§ 245-12.6 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-12.9
227:763
Figure 1: Part 77 Surface Areas
§ 245-12.9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-12.9
227:764
ARTICLE XIII
Scenic River Corridor Overlay District
§ 245-13.1. Purpose.
§ 245-13.2. Area of application.
A. The Scenic River Corridor Overlay District is intended to protect,
enhance, and promote the Yellow Breeches Creek. The Yellow Breeches
Creek is designated as a Scenic River and identified as High-Quality
Cold Water Fishes (HQ-CWF) protected watercourse by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Yellow Breeches Creek is an
important environmental, social, economic, historic, scenic, and
recreational asset and resource of local and statewide importance.
A. Establishment Scenic River Corridor Overlay District boundaries. The
Scenic River Corridor Overlay Zoning District shall consist of all water
and adjacent land areas within 100 feet of the top of the established
stream banks along the Yellow Breeches Creek.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Scenic
River Corridor Overlay District, provided that they are in compliance
with the provisions of the underlying zoning district, are not prohibited
by another Township ordinance or regulation, and do not require
building(s), fill, or storage of materials and equipment.
(1) Common open space, nature preserves and wildlife sanctuaries,
forest preserves, passive recreational and park areas, trails,
greenways, and similar uses.
(2) Fishing, swimming, boating, etc.
(3) Boat-launching facilities, provided that parking areas and other
uses with the boat launch are placed outside of the Scenic River
Corridor Overlay District.
(4) River-oriented uses.
(5) Municipal-owned uses.
(6) Educational and scientific uses.
(7) Essential services.
(8) Stream bank and watershed improvements approved by the
Cumberland County Conservation District, and/or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(9) Crossings by recreational trails, roads, railroads, sewer and water
lines, and public utility transmission lines provided that all
necessary permits and approvals from federal, state, and local
agencies are received and that required plantings are of native
species and maintained.
§ 245-13.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-13.2
227:765
C. Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited from the Scenic
River Corridor Overlay District.
(1) Grading, filling, or earthmoving which alters or changes the natural
ridgelines and/or stream banks.
(2) Storage and/or disposal of any toxic, hazardous, or noxious
substances.
(3) Storing of junk (residential and nonresidential).
(4) Unenclosed storage.
(5) Any use which violates Article X, Floodplain Regulations, in this
chapter.
D. Required vegetation. Within the Scenic River Corridor Overlay District,
vegetative plantings including trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be
provided and shall be maintained for stream bank stabilization, soil
stability, and habitat for native animal species.
(1) Existing vegetative plantings shall not be removed within the
Scenic River Corridor Overlay District, except:
(a) When associated with the development of an access point for a
trail or other similar corridor, the width of such access point
shall not exceed 12 feet in width.
(b) The removal of dead, diseased or damaged vegetation.
(c) The removal of invasive species and replacement with native
species.
(2) Any new vegetative plantings and/or replacement of existing
vegetative plantings shall be of native plant materials to stabilize
any disturbed landscapes, improve the function of the floodplain,
screen and buffer adjacent land uses and improve the aesthetic
condition of the corridor whenever possible.
(3) Regular maintenance/pruning of landscaping, including the
removal of dead and/or diseased vegetation, shall be permitted.
§ 245-13.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-13.2
227:766
ARTICLE XIV
Specific Standards for Designated Uses
§ 245-14.1. Specific standards.
§ 245-14.2. Accessory agriculture uses, including the farmhouse,
barns, outbuildings and structures.
§ 245-14.3. Accessory apartments.
A. In addition to the general criteria for uses within a particular district
and supplemental regulations established in Article XVI, this article
sets forth standards that shall be applied to each individual use
identified herein. The standards of this article must be satisfied before
approval of any application for a special exception, conditional use or
zoning permit, as applicable. The criteria for special exceptions and
conditional uses in this article shall be in addition to the general criteria
for special exceptions and conditional uses set forth in Article XIX, as
applicable. The applicant shall be responsible for providing evidence
and demonstrating compliance with all applicable standards.
B. All uses identified in this article must comply with the general
regulations for the district in which the use is to be located, unless
different or inconsistent standards are established by this article, in
which case the standards in this article shall take precedence.
C. The decision-making body may request a traffic study in accordance
with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance209 for any use as deemed necessary.
A. The accessory agriculture uses shall not comprise more than 10% of the
farm parcel.
B. The accessory uses shall meet other requirements for specific uses
found in Articles XVI and XIV of this chapter.
C. Minimum setback of buildings on the farm parcel shall be, unless
otherwise stipulated herein for specific buildings, structures or uses:
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Side yard: 30 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet.
A. The apartment will be a complete and separate housekeeping unit that
can be isolated from the original unit with its own exterior entryway.
The exterior entryway shall not be part of the front facade of the
primary residence.
209. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.3
227:767
§ 245-14.4. Accessory day care.
B. Only one accessory apartment shall be permitted per single-family
residential lot. The apartment may be detached or attached to the
primary residence.
C. Detached and attached apartments must conform to the general
architectural style of the primary residence.
D. The apartment shall meet all building setback and coverage
requirements of the underlying zoning district. When detached from the
primary residence, the apartment shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from the primary residence.
E. The owner(s) of the residence in which the accessory unit is created
shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the premises, except
for bona fide temporary absences.
F. The design and size of the apartment conforms to all applicable state
and Township standards/codes.
G. A minimum of 300 square feet of floor area shall be required. The
accessory apartment shall be no more than 45% of the primary
structure's total floor area.
H. At least a total of three off-street parking spaces are available for use by
the owner-occupant and tenant.
I. The accessory apartment shall be located on the same lot as the
primary residence and cannot be subdivided or sold separately from the
primary residence.
A. The accessory day-care center shall meet all state and federal licensing
and registration requirements and shall provide proof of compliance
with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Code, Title 55, Chapter 3270,
Child Day Care Centers, or Title 6, Chapter 11, Older Adult Daily Living
Centers.
B. The accessory day-care center is located at and is accessory to a legally
established house of worship, a public or nonpublic school, or a place of
employment. Such buildings shall obtain a Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry occupancy permit.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XVII,
§ 245-17.2.
D. The accessory day-care center provides safe off-street pickup and
dropoff points in order to minimize traffic congestion. Vehicles shall
enter and exit from the pickup and dropoff points at least 60 feet from
any intersection. The passenger pickup and dropoff points shall be
arranged so that the passengers do not have to cross traffic.
§ 245-14.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.4
227:768
§ 245-14.5. Active and low-impact noncommercial recreation areas
in conservation and greenway areas in conservation subdivisions.
§ 245-14.6. Adaptive reuse of federally or locally designated historic
buildings.
E. An outdoor play area shall be provided in accordance with state
regulations. Adult passive recreation areas may be provided for older
adult daily living centers. Off-street parking compounds shall not be
used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located
within the front yard and must be set back 25 feet from all property
lines. Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a four-foothigh
fence that shall screen the area from adjoining residentially zoned
or use properties. All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade
such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s).
A. Active recreation uses, such as playing fields, playgrounds, courts and
bikeways, shall not consume more than half of the minimum required
conservation or greenway land or five acres, whichever is less.
B. Low-impact passive recreation uses shall include uses such as village
greens, commons, picnic areas, community gardens and trails, but shall
exclude motorized off-road vehicles, rifle ranges, and other uses similar
in character.
C. Playing fields, playgrounds and courts shall not be located within 100
feet of abutting properties.
D. Parking facilities shall be permitted for the above uses provided that
parking facilities can only be used in designated greenway areas as an
accessory use as permitted on adjacent development area lots. Design
features shall include semipermeable surfaces, unlighted, properly
drained, safe ingress and egress.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the adaptive reuse is to ensure the continued
use and condition of the historic resource.
B. The conversion of buildings within a locally designated historic district,
in accordance with Chapter 155 of the Codified Ordinances of Upper
Allen Township, and listed historic sites or structures, in accordance
with § 155-12 therein, to a cultural facility, as defined herein, or another
nonresidential use permitted in the district in which the historic
building is located shall be permitted in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) The applicant shall submit a plot plan, building plans and
specifications to the Upper Allen Township Historical Architectural
Review Board for its review in accordance with Chapter 155,
Historic Districts.
(2) The applicant shall receive a certificate of appropriateness from
the Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 245-14.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.6
227:769
§ 245-14.7. Adult regulated facility.
(3) All off-street parking and/or loading areas shall be screened from
adjoining residences, residential districts, and roads in accordance
with buffer yard type 1 as set forth in the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.210
(4) Signs shall be in accordance with Chapter 155, § 155-13, and with
Article XVIII of this chapter, whichever is stricter.
(5) Joint parking or off-site parking shall be permitted in accordance
with Article XVII herein.
C. In addition to the uses permitted in Subsection B above, the historic
building may revert to its original, historic use, provided it meets the
conditions in Subsection B above and is deemed compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood through the special exception review
process.
A. Permits required. No person shall operate an adult entertainment
establishment without first obtaining a use and occupancy or zoning
permit as provided in this chapter and all other applicable permits
required by law. The permit will be reviewed annually for compliance.
The Health Officer and/or Zoning Officer will also perform regular
inspections.
B. Minimum spacing and proximity requirements.
(1) No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 600
feet of any other adult entertainment establishment.
(2) No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within
specified distances of certain land uses as set forth below:
(a) No such establishment shall be located within 600 feet of the
property line of a residential dwelling.
(b) No such establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any
parcel of land which contains any one or more of the following
specified land uses:
[1] Amusement park;
[2] Camp (for minors' activity);
[3] Child-care facility;
[4] Church or other similar religious facility;
[5] Community center;
[6] Museum;
210. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.7
227:770
§ 245-14.8. Agriculture operation.
[7] Park;
[8] Playground;
[9] School;
[10] Other lands where minors congregate.
(3) The distance between any two adult entertainment establishments
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest point on the exterior parcel line of each
establishment. The distance between any adult entertainment
establishment and any land use specified in Subsection B(2) above
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest point on the exterior parcel line of the
adult entertainment establishment to the closest point on the
property line of said land use.
C. Visibility from the street. No person operating an adult entertainment
establishment shall permit, or cause to be permitted, any stock-in-trade
which depicts, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities and/or
specified anatomical areas, as defined in Article II, Land Use
Definitions, to be viewed from the street, sidewalk, or highway.
D. Signs. No person shall place or cause to be placed or maintained in
such a location as can be viewed by persons on any public street any
sign or signs, photographic, pictorial or other graphic representation
that depict in whole or in part the following:
(1) Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act, which are
prohibited by law.
(2) Scenes where a person displays the vulva or the anus or other
genitals.
(3) Scenes where artificial devices are employed to depict, or drawings
are employed to portray, any of the prohibited signs, photographs
or graphic representations described above.
(4) Any other graphic illustration pertaining to specified sexual
activities and/or specified anatomical areas.
E. Any use or activity prohibited by Section 5903 of the Pennsylvania
Crimes Codes,211 as amended, and further defining the offense of
obscenity, redefining obscene, and further providing for injunctions,
shall be prohibited.
A. Minimum lot size of five acres.
211. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903.
§ 245-14.7 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.8
227:771
§ 245-14.9. Agritourism enterprise.
B. Minimum street frontage of 300 feet.
C. No structure for the housing of poultry, livestock or feedlot shall be
located:
(1) Within 300 feet of any residential structure, other than a structure
in which the applicant resides, located on the same lot.
(2) Within 125 feet of any right-of-way line.
(3) Within 300 feet from adjoining property line in other than
Agricultural District.
D. Manure storage facilities are subject to the requirement of § 245-16.3.
E. Building height. The building height restrictions shall be subject to
provisions of § 245-16.6.
F. Intensive agricultural uses shall be subject to § 245-14.17 herein.
A. An agritourism enterprise must comply with the minimum lot size and
width in the district in which it is located.
B. Activities or structures included in the agritourism enterprise must
comply with the setbacks for accessory structures in which it is located
unless utilizing an existing structure.
C. An agritourism enterprise must comply with the building and/or
impervious coverage requirements for the lot in the district in which it
is located unless utilizing an existing structure. The use of existing
structures is encouraged.
D. Outdoor storage areas, and off-street parking and/or unloading areas
shall be screened from adjoining residential districts with a buffer yard
type 1 in the applicable setback area and in accordance with buffering
and screening requirements of § 245-16.5.
E. An Agritourism Enterprise must comply with the access and driveway
provisions in Article XVII Off-Street Parking and Loading in this chapter.
A shared use driveway with an existing driveway is encouraged.
F. The applicant must demonstrate sufficient off-street parking and
loading spaces are provided for the uses proposed in accordance with
Article XVII Off-Street Parking and Loading in this chapter.
G. Signage shall comply with Article XVIII, Signs, in this chapter.
H. Agritourism enterprises shall be owned or operated by the landowner,
landowner's immediate family member, operator of the farm, or persons
in residence of the farm.
§ 245-14.8 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.9
227:772
§ 245-14.10. Airports, heliports and helistops.
I. Zoning permit and/or building permit required. In addition to
completing a zoning permit and/or a building permit application,
applicants proposing an agritourism enterprise must submit
information identifying the following:
(1) Location map.
(2) Description of the existing agricultural operation, proposed
activities, and how the proposed use is accessory in nature.
(3) All existing and proposed farm structures and dwellings.
(4) Driveways, access drives, parking areas, vehicle turnaround areas,
loading areas, and proposed vehicle circulation patterns.
(5) Location and adequacy of sewage facilities (if required).
(6) Stormwater management plan (if required).
(7) Proposed operating dates/times.
(8) Estimated number of attendees.
(9) Landscaping/buffering plan.
(10) Certify compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal
regulations and permits.
(11) When there is a change in the use of the farm with an agritourism
enterprise, or when there is a change in the management of the
enterprise, the continuation of the enterprise or business shall be
subject to review and re-approval in accordance with current
regulations in place at that time.
A. Minimum lot area shall be 30 acres for airports and three acres for
heliports and helistops.
B. The applicant shall submit evidence confirming that the facility will be
constructed, operated, and maintained in accordance with applicable
rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, related
to the use of airports, heliports, or helistops.
C. No part of the takeoff/landing strip and/or pad shall be located within
300 feet from any property line.
D. The applicant shall provide the delineation of the airport or heliport
hazard zone to the Township and all adjoining municipalities with land
located within the hazard zone.
E. All facilities shall not be detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of
the Township residents and their property.
§ 245-14.9 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.10
227:773
F. Heliports and helistops shall meet the following additional
requirements:
(1) The landing pad shall be at least 80 feet square or a circle with an
eighty-foot diameter. This pad shall be paved, level, and maintained
dirt free. Rooftop pads shall be free of all loose stone and
aggregate.
(2) At least two approach lanes to each landing pad shall be provided
and maintained free of obstructions and shall be located not less
than 90° apart. Each approach lane shall be located within 45° left
or right of the prevailing winds and shall fan out at an angle of 10°
from the width of the landing pad to a width of 1,000 feet, and shall
have a glide angle slope of 8° to one, measured from the outer edge
of the pad.
(3) An application for a helistop or heliport on a roof or similar
aboveground structure shall be accompanied by a certification by a
registered engineer that the loads imposed by a helicopter will be
supported by the structure.
(4) The helistop and heliports shall be used only for personal or
executive use by a firm or individual.
(5) No helicopter over 6,000 pounds gross weight shall use any
helistop.
(6) The application shall include at a minimum the following:
(a) A copy of the Federal Aviation Administration Form 7480-1,
Notice of Land Area Proposal.
(b) A copy of the letter of "no objections" from the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(c) A copy of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Application for
Approval of a Land Site, AV-4, and necessary supplemental
information or equivalent, and the letter of site approval from
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of
Aviation.
(d) An aerial photograph or drawing, either of which shall be at a
scale no less than one inch equals 200 feet, indicating the
approach and departure routes, the location of all residences,
schools, churches, hospitals, and areas used for the open
assembly of people, as well as other noise-sensitive areas
within the radius of 1/2 mile of the proposed helistop or
heliport sites.
G. Heliports shall meet the following additional requirements:
(1) Heliports shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any
dwelling unit.
§ 245-14.10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.10
227:774
§ 245-14.11. Animal hospitals; kennels.
(2) The applicant shall submit a land development plan for review and
approval by the Township.
(3) Heliports shall meet all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for
the district of its proposed location.
(4) The proposed site shall be fenced with a minimum height of four
feet with at least two openings, except those located on the
rooftops. The fence shall be located so as not to obstruct the glide
angle of the helicopter using the heliport.
(5) The proposed heliport shall not adversely affect the health and
safety of the citizens both in and surrounding Upper Allen
Township.
(6) The applicant shall also make full compliance with those guidelines
and regulations for helistops and heliports or similar facilities as
outlined in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, Title 67, Regulations Relating
to Pennsylvania Aviation, as amended.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person to land, discharge, load or take
off in a helicopter any place within the Township of Upper Allen
Township other than at an approved helistop or heliport, except:
(a) In conjunction with a special event such as an athletic contest,
a holiday celebration, parade or similar activity, after seven
days' advanced notice has been given to the Zoning Officer
and/or Township Engineer, and a special permit has been
issued by the Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer or his/
her designee.
(b) When necessary for law enforcement purposes and for
emergencies.
(c) For the purpose of delivery or transfer of patients to/from any
hospital and/or its emergency trauma centers.
A. Kennels and/or animal hospitals shall have a minimum lot size in
accordance with the requirements of the zoning district.
B. All areas used for exercise shall be securely fenced.
C. All animal boarding buildings that are not wholly enclosed and any
outdoor animal pens, stalls or runways shall be a minimum of 100 feet
from all property lines and a minimum of 200 feet from any adjacent
residence whose owner is other than the animal building owner.
D. Animals shall be permitted to exercise daily between the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. All outdoor exercise areas shall be 200 feet from any
property line.
§ 245-14.10 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.11
227:775
§ 245-14.12. Bed-and-breakfast homes and inns.
E. Satisfactory evidence must be presented to indicate that adequate
storage and disposal of animal waste will be provided in a manner that
will not create a public health hazard or nuisance.
F. Evidence of adequate water supply and wastewater disposal must be
provided by the applicant.
G. All kennel areas not enclosed by a building shall be enclosed by a fence
not less than six feet in height.
H. All animal boarding buildings that are not wholly enclosed and any
outdoor animal pens, stalls, or runways shall be located within the rear
yard.
I. All kennels shall be licensed by the commonwealth and shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with the Pennsylvania Code,
Title 7, Chapter 21, General Provisions; Kennels; Licensure; Dog-
Caused Damages, as amended.
A. A bed-and-breakfast home shall be allowed only in an owner-occupied,
single-family, detached residential dwelling or buildings accessory
thereto. No modification to the external appearances of the building
(except fire and safety requirements) which would alter its residential
character shall be permitted.
B. The owners of a bed-and-breakfast home or bed-and-breakfast inn must
be in the residence when guests are present.
C. Accommodations for overnight lodging at a bed-and-breakfast home
shall be limited to no more than five guest rooms and to no more than
10 guests at a given time. Accommodations for overnight lodging in a
bed-and-breakfast inn shall be limited to no more than 10 guest rooms
and to no more than 20 guests at a given time. The guest rooms for both
bed-and-breakfast homes and inns shall be rented to overnight guests
on a daily basis for periods not exceeding one week.
D. Accommodations at bed-and-breakfast homes and inns may include
breakfast prepared on the premises for guests and included in the
charge for the room. No meal other than breakfast may be prepared on
the premises for the registered guests. Catered food service from a
licensed facility is permitted without additional licensing requirements.
E. No cooking facilities shall be provided or permitted in individual guests
rooms.
F. A bed-and-breakfast home or inn shall be required to obtain a state
highway occupancy permit or Township driveway permit, as
appropriate.
G. A bed-and-breakfast home or inn must conform to all zoning regulations
with regard to parking, access, signs, area, setbacks, etc., as are
§ 245-14.11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.12
227:776
§ 245-14.13. Boardinghouses.
applicable under this chapter or as attached by the Zoning Hearing
Board or Board of Commissioners.
H. A bed-and-breakfast home or inn must provide for buffer yards when
determined necessary by the Zoning Hearing Board or Board of
Commissioners in conformance generally with the buffer program as
set forth under § 245-16.5 of this chapter and screening in accordance
with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.212
I. The facility shall adhere to lighting requirements in § 245-16.10.
J. The use of a residential dwelling for a bed-and-breakfast home or inn
must be approved by the Township's Sewage Enforcement Officer and
system upgraded, if necessary.
K. Not more than one person for the housekeeping functions of the use,
other than the occupants of the bed-and-breakfast home or inn, shall be
employed by the home or inn.
L. No goods may be publicly displayed for sale on the premises.
M. The source of water to be used by the bed-and-breakfast home or inn
shall be a potable water source as certified by a test laboratory and a
certified provider.
N. All bed-and-breakfast homes and bed-and-breakfast inns shall comply
with the Federal Life Safety Code, the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, and all other
applicable building, safety, and fire codes of the federal, state, or local
government.
O. Section 245-14.64 conditions, herein, shall be met if the bed-andbreakfast
home or inn will be used for special occasions as defined
under "special occasion home" in Article II, Land Use Definitions, of this
chapter.
A. Minimum lot area. As required by the zoning district in which the
property is located.
B. The Boardinghouse shall provide accommodations for no more than five
persons.
C. The applicant shall furnish evidence that approved systems for sewage
disposal and water supply shall be used and all other federal and state
license requirements have been met.
D. No modifications to the external appearance of the building (except fire
escapes) which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
212. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.12 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.13
227:777
§ 245-14.14. Camps and campgrounds.
E. All floors above grade shall have direct means of escape to ground level.
F. All parking areas shall be screened from adjoining residences,
residential districts and roads in accordance with buffer yard type 1, as
set forth in the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, and shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet
from all property lines.
G. Meals shall be offered only to registered tenants.
H. No signs shall be permitted.
A. Camps shall meet all requirements set forth in Title 28 of the
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 19, Organized Camps and Campgrounds,
and other rules and regulations of the commonwealth.
B. There shall be a minimum lot area of 15 acres.
C. All campsites shall be located at least 50 feet from any side or rear
property line and at least 100 feet from any public street right-of-way
line.
D. Each campsite shall be at least 1,000 square feet in size and shall either
provide parking space for one automobile which will not interfere with
the convenient and safe movement of traffic, or equivalent parking shall
be provided in a common parking area.
E. An internal road system shall be provided.
F. All outdoor play areas shall be set back 100 feet from any property line
and screened from adjoining residentially zoned properties in
accordance with buffer yard type 1, as set forth in the Upper Allen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.213 Such
outdoor play areas shall be used exclusively by registered guests and
their visitors.
G. All centralized sanitary and garbage collection facilities shall be set
back a minimum of 100 feet from any property line. Such facilities shall
be screened from any adjoining residential property in accordance with
§ 245-16.8 herein.
H. Any accessory retail or service commercial uses shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from any property line. Such accessory
commercial uses shall be solely designed and constructed to serve the
campground's registered guests and their visitors. Any parking spaces
provided for these commercial uses shall only have vehicular access
from the campground's internal road rather than the public street. All
accessory commercial uses and related parking shall be screened from
adjoining parcels used for residential purposes in accordance with
213. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.13 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.14
227:778
§ 245-14.15. Cemeteries.
§ 245-14.16. Communications facilities, wireless.
buffer yard type 1, as set forth in the Upper Allen Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
I. All campgrounds containing more than 100 campsites shall have
vehicular access to a minor arterial or collector roadway, as identified in
the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
J. A minimum of 20% of the gross area of the campground shall be
devoted to active and passive recreational facilities. Responsibility for
maintenance of the recreation area shall be with the landowner.
K. During operation, every campground shall have an office in which shall
be located the person responsible for the operation of the campground.
L. All lighting shall be arranged and shielded so that no glare or direct
illumination shall be cast upon adjacent properties or public street.
A. Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
B. All burial plots or facilities shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from
any property line.
C. No burial plots or facilities are permitted in floodplain or flood fringe
areas.
A. General and specific requirements for non-tower wireless
communications facilities.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs:
(a) Permitted in all zones subject to regulations. Non-tower WCFs
are permitted in all zones subject to the restrictions and
conditions prescribed below and subject to applicable
permitting by the Township.
(b) Nonconforming wireless support structures. Non-tower WCFs
shall be permitted to co-locate upon nonconforming towerbased
WCFs and other nonconforming structures. Co-location
of WCFs upon existing tower-based WCFs is encouraged even
if the tower-based WCF is nonconforming as to use within a
zoning district.
(c) Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including, but not
limited to, the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, and National Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times
§ 245-14.14 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.16
227:779
be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by
qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the
same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property
in the Township.
(d) Wind and ice. All non-tower WCF structures shall be designed
to withstand the effects of wind gusts and ice to the standard
designed by the American National Standards Institute as
prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics
Industry Association, and Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as amended).
(e) Aviation safety. Non-tower WCFs shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(f) Public safety communications. Non-tower WCFs shall not
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(g) Radio frequency emissions. A non-tower WCFs shall not, by
itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations
of the FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(h) Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the
use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs, or
portions of WCFs, shall be removed as follows:
[1] All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities
shall be removed within 60 days of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved
by the Township.
[2] If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within 60
days of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and/or
associated facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the
owner of the WCF.
(i) Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA.
Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a
non-tower WCF is filed with the Township, the Township shall
notify the WCF applicant, in writing, of any information that
may be required to complete such application. Within 60
calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the
§ 245-14.16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.16
227:780
Township shall make its final decision on whether to approve
the application and shall advise the WCF applicant, in writing,
of such decision. If additional information was requested by
the Township to complete an application, the time required
by the WCF applicant to provide the information shall not
be counted toward the Township's sixty-day review period.
The timing requirements in this section shall only apply to
proposed facilities that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act.214
(j) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower
WCF shall provide the Township with a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage
in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering
the non-tower WCF.
(k) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a nontower
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the non-tower WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a non-tower WCF shall defend any actions or
proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a non-tower WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(l) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
[1] The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety and
security of the Township's residents.
214. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 245-14.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.16
227:781
[3] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than
the best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(m) Reservation of rights. To the extent permitted by applicable
law, and in accordance with applicable law and as set forth in
more detail in subsequent design and development standards
below, the Township reserves the right to deny an application
for the construction or placement of any non-tower WCF for
numerous factors, which include, but are not limited to, visual
impact, design, and safety standards.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to all co-located non-tower
WCFs that do not substantially change the physical dimensions of
the wireless support structure to which they are attached, and/or
fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
(a) Building permit required. WCF applicants proposing the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF shall obtain a
building permit from the Township. In order to be considered
for such permit, the WCF applicant must submit a permit
application to the Township in accordance with applicable
permit policies and procedures.
(b) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a non-tower WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
(3) The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs that do
not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act
or the mandatory applicable provisions of the FCC's 2014 Report
and Order:
(a) Prohibited on certain structures. No non-tower WCF shall be
located on single-family detached residences, single-family
attached residences, or any residential accessory structure.
(b) Building and zoning permits required. Any WCF applicant
proposing the construction of a new non-tower WCF, or the
modification of an existing non-tower WCF, shall first obtain a
building permit and zoning permit from the Township. The
zoning permit application shall demonstrate that the proposed
facility complies with all applicable provisions in the Upper
Allen Township Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Historic buildings. No non-tower WCF may be located upon
any property, or on a building or structure that is listed on
either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic
Places, or is listed on the official historic structures and/or
historic districts list maintained by the Township, or has been
designated by the Township to be of historical significance.
§ 245-14.16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.16
227:782
(d) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and,
once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these WCF provisions.
The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse
the Township for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection
with these activities.
(e) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a non-tower WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring and related costs.
(f) Development regulations. Non-tower WCFs shall be located or
co-located on existing wireless support structures, such as
existing buildings or tower-based WCFs, are subject to the
following conditions:
[1] The total height of any wireless support structure and
mounted WCF shall not exceed 20 feet above the
maximum height permitted in the underlying zoning
district.
[2] In accordance with industry standards, all non-tower WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Township
justifying the total height of the non-tower WCF. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such
justification on an individual basis.
[3] If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the related
equipment in a separate building, the building shall
comply with the minimum requirements for the applicable
zoning district.
[4] A security fence of not less than six feet and not more than
eight feet shall surround any separate communications
equipment building. Vehicular access to the
communications equipment building shall not interfere
with the parking or vehicular circulations on the site for
the principal use.
(g) Design regulations.
[1] Non-tower WCFs shall employ stealth technology and be
treated to match the wireless support structure in order to
minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject
to the approval of the Township.
§ 245-14.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.16
227:783
[2] Non-commercial usage exemption. Township residents
utilizing satellite dishes, citizen and/or band radios, and
antennae for the purpose of maintaining television, phone,
and/or Internet connections at their respective residences
shall be exempt from the regulations enumerated in this
section.
(h) Removal, replacement and modification.
[1] The removal and replacement of non-tower WCF and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or
repairing the WCF is permitted, so long as such repair or
upgrade does not substantially change the overall size of
the WCF or the number of antennae.
[2] Any material modification to a WCF shall require notice to
be provided to the Township, and possible supplemental
permit approval to the original permit or authorization.
(i) Inspection. The WCF owner shall inspect the WCF on an
annual basis and provide the Township with written proof of
such inspection, signed by a registered engineer certified in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Township further
reserves the right to inspect any WCF to ensure compliance
with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and any other
provisions found within the Township Code or state or federal
law. The Township and/or its agents shall have the authority to
enter the property upon which a WCF is located at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such
compliance.
B. Regulations applicable to all non-tower WCFs located in the public
rights-of-way. In addition to the non-tower WCF provisions listed in
§ 245-14.16.A, the following regulations shall apply to non-tower WCFs
located in the public rights-of-way:
(1) Location. Non-tower WCFs in the ROW shall be located or colocated
on existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light
poles. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the WCF
applicant shall locate its non-tower WCF on existing poles or
freestanding structures that do not already act as wireless support
structures with the Township's approval.
(2) Design requirements:
(a) WCF installations located above the surface grade in the public
ROW including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and
joint utility poles, shall consist of equipment components that
are no more than six feet in height and that are compatible in
scale and proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly
intrusive equipment feasible.
§ 245-14.16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.16
227:784
(b) Antenna and related equipment shall be treated to match the
supporting structure and may be required to be painted, or
otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the support
structure upon which they are mounted.
(3) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all non-tower WCFs in the ROW based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.215
(4) Equipment location. Non-tower WCFs and related equipment shall
be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety
hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the
Township. In addition:
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb
or within an easement extending onto a privately-owned lot;
(b) Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to
the satisfaction of the Township.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(d) Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any related
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(e) Any proposed underground vault related to non-tower WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
(5) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any WCF when the Township, consistent
with its police powers and applicable Public Utility Commission
regulations, shall have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
215. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 245-14.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.16
227:785
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Township.
C. General and specific requirements for all tower-based wireless
communications facilities.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities.
(a) Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including, but not
limited to, the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and
responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. Any tower-based WCF shall at
all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so
that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any
property in the Township.
(b) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower-based
WCF and the scheduling of the public hearing upon the
application, the WCF applicant shall mail notice to all owners
of every property within 300 feet of the proposed facility. The
WCF applicant shall provide proof of the notification to the
Township.
(c) Conditional use authorization required. Tower-based WCFs are
permitted in certain zoning districts by conditional use and at a
minimum height necessary to satisfy their function in the WCF
applicant's wireless communications system. No WCF
applicant shall have the right under these regulations to erect
a tower to the maximum height specified in this section unless
it proves the necessity for such height. The WCF applicant
shall demonstrate that the antenna/tower/pole for the towerbased
WCF is the minimum height necessary for the service
area.
[1] Prior to the Board's approval of a conditional use
authorizing the construction and installation of towerbased
WCFs, it shall be incumbent upon the WCF
§ 245-14.16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.16
227:786
applicant for such conditional use approval to prove to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the WCF
applicant cannot adequately extend or infill its
communications system by the use of equipment such as
redoes, repeaters, antenna(s) and other similar equipment
installed on existing structures, such as utility poles or
their appurtenances and other available tall structures.
The WCF applicant shall further demonstrate that the
proposed tower-based WCF must be located where it is
proposed in order to serve the WCF applicant's service
area and that no other viable alternative location exists.
[2] The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed
tower or other communication facilities and equipment, a
description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed
transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range
(megahertz band) assigned to the WCF applicant, the
power in watts at which the WCF applicant transmits, and
any relevant related tests conducted by the WCF applicant
in determining the need for the proposed site and
installation.
[3] The conditional use application shall also be accompanied
by documentation demonstrating that the proposed towerbased
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning aviation safety.
[4] Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the WCF applicant shall present
documentation to the Board of Commissioners that the
owner of the property has granted an easement for the
proposed WCF and that vehicular access will be provided
to the facility.
[5] The conditional use application shall also be accompanied
by documentation demonstrating that the proposed towerbased
WCF complies with all applicable provisions the
Upper Allen Township Zoning Ordinance.
(d) Engineer inspection. Prior to the Township's issuance of a
permit authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based
WCF, a structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall
issue to the Township a written certification of the proposed
WCF's ability to meet the structural standards offered by either
the Electronic Industries Association or the
Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper
construction of the foundation and the erection of the
structure. This certification shall be provided during the
conditional hearings or at a minimum be made as a condition
§ 245-14.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.16
227:787
attached to any approval given such that the certification be
provided prior to issuance of any building permits.
(e) Visual appearance and land use compatibility. Tower-based
WCFs shall employ stealth technology which may include the
tower portion to be painted silver or another color approved by
the Board of Commissioners, or shall have a galvanized finish.
All tower-based WCFs and related equipment shall be
aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the
surrounding environment and shall maximize the use of a like
facade to blend with the existing surroundings and
neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible. The
Board of Commissioners shall consider whether its decision
upon the subject application will promote the harmonious and
orderly development of the zoning district involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development
existing in the area; benefit neighboring properties by
preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic character of the
community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site
to the greatest possible extent; and encourage sound
engineering and land development design and construction
principles, practices and techniques.
(f) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based
WCF shall demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF
cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved structure
or building, or sited on land owned and maintained by Upper
Allen Township. The Board of Commissioners may deny an
application to construct a new tower-based WCF if the WCF
applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the
commercial communications antenna(s) on an existing
structure. The WCF applicant shall demonstrate that it
contacted the owners of structures that are 50 feet or more in
height and towers within a 1/4 of a mile radius of the site
proposed, sought permission to install an antenna on those
structures, buildings, and towers and was denied for one of the
following reasons:
[1] The proposed antenna and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
[2] The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure, or tower
and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost.
[3] Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to
§ 245-14.16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.16
227:788
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to
perform its intended function.
[4] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owner of such building, structure, or
tower.
(g) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible
under applicable state and federal law, any WCF applicant
proposing the modification of an existing tower-based WCF,
which increases the overall height of such WCF, shall first
obtain a building permit from the Township. To the extent
permissible under law, non-routine modifications shall be
prohibited without a permit.
(h) Gap in coverage or capacity. A WCF applicant for a towerbased
WCF must demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless
coverage or capacity exists in the applicable area and that the
type of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive means by
which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The existence or
non-existence of a gap in wireless coverage or capacity shall be
a factor in the Township's decision on an application for
approval of tower-based WCF.
(i) Additional antennae. As a condition of approval for all towerbased
WCF, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township with
a written commitment that it will allow other service providers
to co-locate antennae on tower-based WCF where technically
and economically feasible. To the extent permissible under
state and federal law, the owner of a tower-based WCF shall
not install any additional antennae without obtaining the prior
written approval of the Township.
(j) Wind and ice. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be
designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts and ice to the
standard designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as amended.
(k) Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the
minimum functional height. The maximum total height of a
tower-based WCF, which is not located in the public ROW, shall
not exceed 200 feet, as measured vertically from the ground
level to the highest point on the structure, including antennae
and subsequent alterations.
(l) Related equipment. Either one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding 500 square
feet in area or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad
not exceeding 10 feet by 20 feet in area housing the receiving
and transmitting equipment may be located on the site for each
§ 245-14.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.16
227:789
unrelated company sharing commercial communications
antenna(e) space on the Tower-Based Wireless
Communications Facility greater than 40 feet.
(m) Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(n) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall
apply:
[1] Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the WCF in order to promote the safety and
security of the Township's residents, and utilize the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
(o) Radio frequency emissions. A tower-based WCF shall not, by
itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations
of the FCC, including, but not limited to,, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(p) Historic buildings or districts. A tower-based WCF shall not be
located upon a property, and/or on a building or structure that
is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of
Historic Places, or eligible to be so listed, or is included in the
official historic structures and/or historic districts list
maintained by the Township.
(q) Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a non-illuminated sign
of no more than five square feet in size in a readily visible
location identifying the name and phone number of a party to
contact in the event of an emergency and Federal
Communication Commission (FCC) registration number (if
applicable). Such signage shall not include commercial
advertising and is subject to approval by the Township. The
only other signage permitted on the WCF shall be those
required by the FCC, or any other federal or state agency.
(r) Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted,
except as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF
applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting,
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations. The WCF
applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of
§ 245-14.16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.16
227:790
FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental
authorities and to the Township Secretary.
(s) Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so
as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards
under state law and the Township Code, except in emergency
situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such
noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(t) Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with all
federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation
safety.
(u) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant
and/or expert necessary to assist the Township in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the tower-based
WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any
potential violations of the terms and conditions of these
provisions. The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall
reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation
in connection with these activities.
(v) Timing of approval. All application for the placement of towerbased
WCFs shall be acted upon within the appropriate time
frames prescribed by state and federal law.
(w) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCFs
which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason
or cause may be repaired and restored at their former location,
but must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of
this section. The co-location of Antennae is permitted on
nonconforming structures.
(x) Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is
planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written
notice to the Township of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed as follows:
[1] All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within 90 days of the cessation
of operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved by the Township.
[2] If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within
90 days of the cessation of operations at a site, or within
any longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and
accessory facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the
owner of the WCF.
§ 245-14.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.16
227:791
[3] Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs, including
antennae, shall be removed within 90 days of the time of
cessation of operations. The Township must approve all
replacements of portions of a tower-based WCF previously
removed.
(y) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a tower-based WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring, and related costs.
(z) FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current
FCC license, including the name, address, and emergency
telephone number for the operator of the facility.
(aa) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law, the
Township reserves the right to deny an application for the
construction or placement of any tower-based WCF for
numerous factors, including but are not limited to, visual
impact, design, and safety standards.
(bb) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Township
with a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering the towerbased
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF 40 feet or less in height shall provide the Township with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in
the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence covering each tower-based WCF.
(cc) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a towerbased
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a tower-based WCF shall defend any actions or
proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of tower-based WCF. The obligation to
§ 245-14.16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.16
227:792
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(dd) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower-based
WCF shall contain a seal and signature of a professional
structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(ee) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a building or building
permit for the construction or placement of a tower-based
WCF, the WCF applicant shall provide to the Township financial
security sufficient to guarantee the removal of the tower-based
WCF. Said financial security shall remain in place until the
tower-based WCF is removed.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located outside the Public Rights-of-Way:
(a) Development regulations.
[1] Tower-based WCFs shall not be located in, or within 100
feet of, and area in which all public utilities are located
underground.
[2] Tower-based WCFs are permitted outside the public
Rights-of-Way in the following zoning districts by
conditional use, subject to the above prohibition:
[a] Agricultural District (A) (In Designated Conservation
Areas).
[b] Highway Commercial District (C-2).
[c] Industrial District (IND).
[d] Low-Density Residential (R-1) (In Designated
Greenway Areas).
[3] Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted as
a sole use on a lot, provided that the lot complies with the
regulations of the applicable zoning district and is a
minimum of 6,000 square feet.
[4] Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a
vacant parcel in combination with another use, subject to
the following conditions:
[a] The existing use on the property may be any permitted
use in the applicable district, and need not be
affiliated with the WCF.
§ 245-14.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.16
227:793
[b] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with
the requirements for the applicable district and shall
be the area needed to accommodate the tower-based
WCF and guy wires, the equipment building, security
fence, and buffer planting if the proposed WCF is
greater than 40 feet in height.
[c] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between
the base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining
property line or street right-of-way line shall equal
110% of the proposed WCF structure height or the
minimum setback of the underlying zoning district,
whichever is greater.
(b) Design regulations.
[1] The WCF shall employ the most current Stealth
Technology available in an effort to appropriately blend
into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic
impact. Application of the Stealth Technology chosen by
the WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval of the
Township.
[2] To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to
an existing tower-based WCF shall require prior approval
of the Township.
[3] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennae and
comparable antennae for future users.
[4] Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be
equipped with an anti-climbing device, as approved by the
manufacturer.
(c) Surrounding environs.
[1] The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing
vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity to
the WCF structure shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
[2] The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the
Township complying with the standards of Appendix I:
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as
amended, to document and verify the design specifications
of the foundation of the tower-based WCF, and anchors for
guy wires, if used.
(d) Fence/screen.
§ 245-14.16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.16
227:794
[1] A security fence having a minimum height of six feet and a
maximum height of eight feet shall completely surround
any tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height, as
well as guy wires, or any building housing WCF
equipment.
[2] Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a
newly constructed tower-based WCF as possible. The
Board of Commissioners may permit any combination of
existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences
or other features instead of landscaping, if, in the
discretion of the Board, they achieve the same degree of
screening. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
(e) Accessory equipment.
[1] Ground-mounted related equipment associated, or
connected, with a tower-based WCF shall be placed
underground or screened from public view using Stealth
Technologies, as described above.
[2] All related equipment, utility buildings and accessory
structures shall be architecturally designed to blend into
the environment in which they are situated and shall meet
the minimum setback requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
(f) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking
shall be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service
access to tower-based WCF. Maximum use of existing roads,
whether public or private, shall be made to the extent
practicable. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours
to assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion.
Where applicable, the WCF owner shall present documentation
to the Township that the property owner has granted an
easement for the proposed facility.
(g) Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in
height, there shall be two off-street parking spaces.
(h) Inspection. The WCF owner shall inspect the WCF on an
annual basis and provide the Township with written proof of
such inspection, signed by a registered engineer certified in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Township further
reserves the right to inspect any WCF to ensure compliance
with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and any other
provisions found within the Township Code or state or federal
law. The Township and/or its agents shall have the authority to
enter the property upon which a WCF is located at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such
compliance.
§ 245-14.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.16
227:795
(3) The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located in the Public Rights-of-Way
(ROW).
(a) Location and development standards.
[1] Tower-based WCFs in the public ROW shall not exceed 40
feet in height.
[2] Tower-based WCFs in the ROW shall not be located in the
front facade area of any structure.
(b) Tower-based WCFs in the ROW shall be permitted along all
roads throughout the Township, regardless of the underlying
zoning district and whether all public utilities are located
underground.
(c) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW,
and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place
and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police
powers of the Township and the requirements of the Public
Utility Code.216
(d) Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and related equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined
by the Township. In addition:
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls,
or landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of
the curb.
[2] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Township.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Township.
[4] Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
[5] Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
216. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 245-14.16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.16
227:796
(e) Design regulations.
[1] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
The application of the stealth technology chosen by the
WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval of the
Township.
[2] To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall
require prior approval of the Township, and shall not
increase the overall height of the tower-based WCF to
more than 40 feet.
[3] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennae and
comparable antennae for future users.
(f) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following
written notice from the Township, or such longer period as the
Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of tower-based
WCFs in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any WCF when the Township, consistent with its police powers
and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Township or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Township or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Township.
(g) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every tower-based WCF in the ROW
is subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and
reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW.
Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
Township's actual ROW management costs including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of
all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other
ROW management activities by the Township. The owner of
§ 245-14.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.16
227:797
§ 245-14.17. Confined livestock operations.
each tower-based WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township
to compensate the Township for the Township's costs incurred
in connection with the activities described above.
A. The parcel of contiguous land owned by the owner of a large livestock
operation must be and remain at least 50 acres. In the event the parcel
of contiguous land in common ownership consists of more than one
"tract," as defined in this chapter, the owner must merge such tract by a
recordable agreement with the Township, which will preclude the tract
from being placed in separate ownership without Township subdivision
approval.
(1) Irrespective of the provisions of this section, any large livestock
operation in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter may
not expand such operation without obtaining a conditional use
approval from the Board of Commissioners and shall be subject to
the following limitations:
(a) The gross floor area of buildings housing such livestock may
not be expanded to more than double the gross floor area
housing such livestock.
(b) The number of equivalent animal units may not be more than
doubled. For this purpose, both the number of animal
equivalent units present on the property prior to the enactment
of this chapter and the number permitted by this section shall
be calculated by reference to Title 25, Chapter 83, subchapter
D, Table A, referred to in the Pennsylvania Code (§ 83.212).
(2) Any building constructed after the date of the enactment of this
chapter to house animals in a confined livestock operation must
maintain the following setbacks:
(a) From a dwelling not owned by the owner of the confined
livestock operation, a church, a building used in connection
with a home occupation or small business, or other building
occupied by human beings at least 10 hours a week: 500 feet.
(b) From a property line: 100 feet.
(c) Buildings housing animals shall not be located within the
floodplain.
(d) From a well not owned by the owner of the confined livestock
operation: 150 feet.
B. Irrespective of the setback requirements of this section, a new building
to provide housing for animals may be located in the aforesaid setback
area, provided:
§ 245-14.16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.17
227:798
(1) There was, prior to the enactment of this chapter, other building
housing animals within the required setback area.
(2) The new building housing livestock will not project further into the
required setback area than did the building in existence prior to the
enactment of this chapter.
(3) The number of equivalent animal units on the parcel where the
large livestock operation is or will be located, after construction of
the proposed building, not be more than double the number that
were present on such tract prior to the enactment of this chapter.
C. The owner of the confined livestock operation must establish and
maintain an access to the large livestock operation so that all motor
vehicles making a right turn (whether entering or leaving the property)
can do so without first having to enter the left-hand side of the public
highway. Such access is required only for motor vehicles going in one
direction, with the direction of travel to be selected by the Township,
provided such vehicles do not in fact travel in the other direction. In the
event vehicles should travel in the other direction, the owner of the
large livestock operation shall be required to alter the access so that
vehicles will not be required to enter the left side of the public highway
to complete the turn. In the event motor vehicles entering or leaving
the large livestock operation by making a right turn in fact enter the left
lane of the public highway, the owner of the operation shall revise the
access so that motor vehicles entering or leaving the operation by
making a right turn can do so without entering the left lane of the public
highway.
(1) The confined livestock operation must establish and maintain
compliance at all times with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Nutrient Management Law.217
(2) The confined livestock operation must ensure dead animals, if
disposed of on the property, are disposed of in strict accordance
with the applicable standards of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and until such disposition, irrespective of
whether such disposition occurs on the property, are kept in
airtight containers, if turkeys, chickens or piglets, and are kept in a
manner so as to minimize the spread of odors and disease of larger
animals.
(3) The owner of the property on which a building to house animals in a
confined livestock operation is located shall remove such building
within five years following the time such building ceases to be
utilized to provide housing for livestock, unless prior thereto such
owner attains a use or occupancy certificate from the Township to
utilize such building for another purpose. Such a use or occupancy
217. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 7-6-2005 by P.L. 112, No. 38. See now 3 Pa.C.S.A. §
501 et seq.
§ 245-14.17 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.17
227:799
§ 245-14.18. Continuing care retirement community.
certificate shall not be granted to permit use of such building for
storage purposes, unless:
(a) Such storage is of materials utilized in conjunction with the
agricultural use of the property.
(b) At least 50% of the gross floor area of the building is utilized
for such storage purposes.
(c) A property owner shall not obtain a use or occupancy
certificate permitting a different use unless the owner has
maintained the buildings so that windows are not out,
substantial rust does not appear, and the building is in
otherwise reasonably good condition. Following the issuance of
such use or occupancy certificate, the building must be
maintained in the same condition as at the time the certificate
is issued.
A. The continuing care retirement community is designed primarily for
persons aged 55 and over.
B. The following uses shall be permitted as principal uses within the
continuing care retirement community.
(1) Residential uses:
(a) Long-term care nursing centers, in accordance with
§ 245-14.36.
(b) Personal care centers, in accordance with § 245-14.36.
(c) Single-family detached dwellings.
(d) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(e) Single-family attached dwellings.
(f) Multifamily dwellings.
(2) Public uses:
(a) Public park, recreational areas and greenways.
(b) Public libraries and community activity buildings.
(c) Recreation areas and structures operated for the benefit or use
of the community.
(3) Institutional uses. Churches and similar places of religious worship
in accordance with § 245-14.51.
§ 245-14.17 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.18
227:800
C. The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses in the
continuing care retirement community for the use of residents and
guests:
(1) Accessory service uses:
(a) Adult and child day care.
(b) Dispensaries.
(c) Medical facilities.
(d) Common dining facilities.
(e) Group recreation facilities.
(2) Accessory commercial uses:
(a) Banks and financial institutions.
(b) Florists, stationery and gift stores.
(c) Food and beverage stores.
(d) Personal care services.
(e) Restaurants.
(f) Sporting goods, hobby, book, and music stores.
(3) Each accessory use shall be located in a building occupied by
residential uses or in a community activities building.
(4) Each accessory commercial use shall not exceed 2,500 square feet
of net floor area (for accessory commercial uses, net floor area as
defined herein shall also exclude food preparation areas and
lavatories).
(a) The total area reserved of commercial accessory uses shall not
exceed 4% of the total land area, including buildings,
sidewalks, open space, access drives and parking, and no more
than 25,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(b) Five parking spaces per net floor area shall be provided for
each accessory commercial use in addition to other required
parking for the facility.
D. Continuing care retirement communities in the R-3 and INS Zones shall
meet the following area, density, coverage and yard requirements:
(1) Minimum development area shall be 10 acres.
(2) Maximum density for residential units shall be 18 units per acre.
(3) Maximum impervious lot coverage shall be 60%.
§ 245-14.18 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.18
227:801
(4) Minimum vegetative coverage shall be 40%.
(5) Yards shall meet the following minimum setback requirements:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yards: 30 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(6) More than one building on a single lot shall meet the following
minimum interior yard spacing requirements:
(a) Front to front: 70 feet.
(b) Front to side: 50 feet.
(c) Front to rear: 40 feet.
(d) Side to rear: 20 feet.
(e) Side to side: 15 feet.
(f) Rear to rear: 30 feet.
(g) Corner to corner: 20 feet.
(7) The minimum habitable floor area for residential units shall be in
accordance with § 245-16.7 herein. For those facilities regulated by
Pennsylvania statute, commonwealth rules and regulations shall
take precedence over Township regulations.
E. Continuing care retirement communities shall be permitted as a
conditional use in the R-2 Zone and shall, in addition to the general
conditional use standards and criteria set forth in § 245-19.14, also
meet the following requirements:
(1) Minimum development area shall be eight acres.
(2) Maximum density for residential units shall be 18 units per acre.
(3) Maximum impervious lot coverage shall be 45%, and not more than
30% of the lot shall be occupied by buildings.
(4) Minimum vegetative coverage shall be 55%.
(5) Yards shall meet the following minimum setback requirements:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yards: 50 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) More than one building on a single lot shall meet the following
minimum interior yard spacing requirements:
§ 245-14.18 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.18
227:802
(a) Front to front: 70 feet.
(b) Front to side: 50 feet.
(c) Front to rear: 40 feet.
(d) Side to rear: 20 feet.
(e) Side to side: 15 feet.
(f) Rear to rear: 30 feet.
(g) Corner to corner: 20 feet.
(7) The minimum habitable floor area for residential units shall be in
accordance with § 245-16.7, herein; for those facilities regulated by
Pennsylvania statute, the commonwealth rules and regulations
shall take precedent over Township regulations.
(8) Continuing care retirement communities shall only be permitted as
a conditional use in the R-2 Zoning District when the tract upon
which the continuing care retirement community to be constructed
is located within 100 feet of an R-3 Zoning District.
(9) The exterior materials of all proposed structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the residential dwellings located
upon adjacent properties.
(10) The Board of Commissioners may require an applicant for the
conditional use to complete a traffic study to demonstrate
compliance with the criteria set forth in § 245-19.14.C.
F. Staging of development. When the continuing care retirement
community is to be developed in stages, the following criteria must be
met:
(1) The land development plan presented to the Township must show
the approximate location and type of use for each stage of the
development.
(2) If nonresidential uses will be a part of the development, the
sequencing shall be shown so that not all residential development
is constructed prior to the construction of the nonresidential
development, unless the development involves an existing
continuing care retirement community that already includes
existing nonresidential components, in which case the staging
requirement would not apply.
G. Public water and public sewer shall be required.
H. A landscaping plan for the entire tract shall be required. A landscape
architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
retained to complete such a plan to ensure the proper species, use,
arrangement of plant materials and installation by the developer. All
§ 245-14.18 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.18
227:803
§ 245-14.19. Convenience stores with or without gas dispensing;
gasoline service stations.
areas of the development not covered by impervious surfaces shall be
landscaped and maintained with suitable ground cover and plants.
(1) The plan shall indicate the extent in which existing vegetation will
be preserved for landscaping purposes.
(2) When deemed necessary by the decision-making body, earthen
berms shall be incorporated into the landscaping plan along public
street frontage and along property lines abutting existing
dwellings, in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.218
(3) Landscaped areas shall be continually maintained by the
landowner or retirement community association. Care, grooming,
and replacement of plants shall be included as part of the required
maintenance. Failure to adequately maintain landscaped areas
shall be subject to a citation issued by the Township.
(4) In addition to landscape elements, the plan shall include the layout
of walkways, lighting in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and recreation areas
throughout the development for the safety and security of the
residents.
(a) Entrances to dwelling units shall be provided with all-weather
walkways to parking and refuse collection points, if applicable.
(b) The development shall have shaded sidewalks or shaded paved
walking paths throughout the development.
(c) The layout and design of pedestrian-level streetlighting shall
be provided throughout the development and parking areas.
(5) Parking areas within the continuing care retirement community
shall be adequately landscaped in order to provide shade, to screen
vehicles from public streets, and to reduce glare and noise within
the development itself, and shall be designed in accordance with
the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(6) Buffers shall be in accordance with § 245-16.5 herein.
I. The continuing care retirement community shall provide proof that all
applicable state, county and Township licenses have been obtained.
A. The minimum lot size shall conform to the lot size of the zoning district
in which the use is located.
218. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.18 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.19
227:804
B. All height, setback and coverage standards shall be in accordance with
the zoning district in which the use is located.
C. A site circulation plan shall be provided that depicts the separation of
fueling service areas and convenience store areas. The plan shall show
the location and dimensions of all structures, fuel pumps and location of
the tank field; the location and dimensions of parking, landscaping
areas and signage; and the description of internal circulation and
access, in accordance with the standards herein.
D. Driveway locations shall be in accordance with Article XVII of this
chapter. Minimum setback for access drives shall meet the following
standards:
(1) From the intersection of street right-of-way lines: 40 feet;
(2) From the side lot line: 10 feet;
(3) Minimum width of access drive: 12 feet;
(4) Maximum width of access drive: 35 feet;
(5) Minimum separation of drives on same lot: 25 feet.
E. Minimum setbacks from street right-of-way lines for structures and/or
buildings shall be in accordance with the following dimensional
characteristics:
(1) Pumps: 40 feet.
(2) Building: 50 feet.
(3) Canopies: 55 feet.
F. Motor vehicles shall not be permitted to be parked on sidewalk areas.
G. Minimum setback of fuel pumps from parking areas shall be 20 feet.
H. Outdoor display. All merchandise, except oil racks, shall be displayed
within a building. Vending machines shall be maintained in a semienclosed
structure or within the building.
I. Outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with §§ 245-16.10 and 245-17.8.
J. All uses involving drive-through service shall provide on-site stacking
lanes for at least five cars to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining
roads, in accordance with § 245-14.21.
K. Fuel delivery shall not impede traffic-flow patterns.
L. A traffic study is required to demonstrate safe access and control of
traffic into and out of the facility. The traffic study shall include at a
minimum the following study elements:
§ 245-14.19 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.19
227:805
§ 245-14.20. Conversion apartments.
§ 245-14.21. Drive-in facilities for permitted uses.
(1) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area
to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles
and convenient access to the development and nearby areas.
(2) The traffic study shall be completed in accordance with the
Township subdivision and land development requirements.
A. Plans for alterations shall be in accordance with the Upper Allen
Township Building Code219 and shall be approved, in writing, by the
Zoning Officer before presentation to the Zoning Hearing Board and/or
the Board of Commissioners.
B. No outside alterations to the building shall be permitted except those
required by fire protection regulations.
C. No more than two dwelling units shall be added.
D. The conversion apartments shall meet the minimum habitable floor
area requirements of § 245-16.7 in this chapter.
E. A common principal entrance shall be maintained unless there is more
than one principal entrance in existence at the time alterations are
made.
A. Ingress and egress standards shall meet the requirements of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance along with the
following criteria:
(1) The minimum distance of any driveway to property line shall be 10
feet.
(2) The minimum distance between driveways on the site shall be 65
feet, measured from the two closest driveway curbs.
(3) The minimum distance of a driveway into the site from a street
intersection shall be 60 feet, measured from the intersection of the
street right-of-way to the nearest end of the curb radius.
(4) The angle of driveway intersection with the street shall be based
upon safe traffic movements and shall be approved by the Township
Engineer or his/her designee.
(5) Drive-in facilities adjacent to or integrated in a shopping center or
cluster of commercial facilities shall use the common access with
other business establishments in that center.
219. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112.
§ 245-14.19 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.21
227:806
§ 245-14.22. Emergency medical treatment facilities.
B. All drive-in-facility buildings and structures shall be designed and
planned to take advantage of and be compatible with natural features of
the site and area.
C. Outdoor lighting; see § 245-16.10.
D. All drive-through windows shall be separated from the parking lot's
interior driveways and have stacking lanes of at least 100 feet in length
for professional offices, pharmacies and financial institutions and 160
feet for fast-food businesses.
E. Outside speakers shall not be audible from any residential area.
F. All automated teller machines shall be located so that the on-site
movement of vehicles will not be hampered by those cars belonging to
persons using the automated teller machines in accordance with
Subsection D above.
G. A traffic study is required to demonstrate safe access and control of
traffic into and out of the facility. The traffic study shall include at a
minimum the following study elements:
(1) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area
to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles
and convenient access to the development and nearby areas.
(2) The traffic study shall be completed in accordance with the
Township subdivision and land development requirements.
A. Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
B. Public sewer and public water shall be used.
C. All height, area, setback and coverage standards within the underlying
district shall apply.
D. Emergency entrances, service bays, and garage doors shall be located
on a building wall facing away from adjoining residential uses and
residential districts.
E. A traffic study is required to demonstrate safe access and control of
traffic into and out of the facility. The traffic study shall include, at a
minimum, the following study elements:
(1) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area
to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles
and convenient access to the development and nearby areas.
(2) The traffic study shall be completed in accordance with the
Township subdivision and land development requirements.
§ 245-14.21 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.22
227:807
§ 245-14.23. Farmers markets.
F. The applicant shall demonstrate proof of an approved means of disposal
of all solid, medical and hazardous wastes.
A. Setbacks.
(1) Outdoor farmers market structures, including display stands,
booths, tables, and stalls, shall comply with the accessory building
setbacks in the district in which they are located unless a more
restrictive setback is required by this section.
(2) Outdoor farmers market structures, including display stands,
booths, tables, and stalls, shall be set back 25 feet from adjacent
residential property lines and zoning districts.
(3) Structures shall be set back at least 10 feet from a street right-ofway
and shall not be situated such that it interferes with any clear
sight triangle.
B. Area/coverage.
(1) The retail sales area shall be considered to be that of the smallest
rectangle, or other regular geometric shape which encompasses all
display stands, booths, tables or stalls, plus any adjoining aisles
and/or walkways from which consumers can inspect items for sale.
The retail sales shall include all indoor and or outdoor areas as
listed in Subsection A above.
(2) Farmers markets in the Agricultural and Low-Density Residential
Districts shall have no more than 10 vendors or a retail sales area
of no greater than 1,500 square feet.
C. Height.
(1) Outdoor farmers market structures shall be in conformance with
building height regulations for principal structures of the zoning
district in which it is located.
D. Parking.
(1) Off-street parking and access requirements shall be provided in
accordance with Article XVII, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of
this chapter.
(2) In the event that a farmers market is located on a property that has
a principal use with days or hours of operation that does not
overlap with the days or hours of operation of a farmers market,
any parking spaces serving the principal use may be counted
toward the required number of parking spaces for a farmers
market. In the event that a farmers market is located on a property
that has a principal use with hours of operation that overlap with
the hours of operation of a farmers market, shared parking may be
§ 245-14.22 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.23
227:808
permitted only if the applicant can demonstrate that the parking
provided will be sufficient for each use.
(3) No vehicles shall block access to neighboring properties or traffic
flow while unloading and loading material.
E. Hours of operation.
(1) Hours of operation, including setup and removal of all displays and
products, for outdoor farmers market shall be limited to the hours
between sunrise and sunset.
F. Market operations.
(1) All farmers market shall have a market manager authorized to
direct the operations of all vendors participating during all hours of
operation.
(2) All farmers market shall have an established set of operating rules
addressing the governance structure of the farmers market, hours
of operation, maintenance and security requirements and
responsibilities, and appointment of a market manager.
(3) At least 75% of the products for sale shall be farm products or
value-added farm products. At least 75% of the vendors regularly
participating during the market's hours of operation shall be
producers, or family members or employees of producers.
(4) Exterior public address systems for outdoor farmers markets shall
be arranged and designed so as to prevent objectionable impact on
neighboring properties.
(5) All temporary structures used for outdoor farmers market shall be
removed on the same day of operation. In the event that an outdoor
farmers market will operate for two or more consecutive days on a
property, temporary structures shall be removed after operations
or stored in a building on site.
(6) All applications shall include a plan for the cleanup of litter.
Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided for all outdoor farmers
market. All trash generated from a farmers market shall be
disposed of immediately following the closing of the operation.
(7) An outdoor farmers market cannot obstruct a sidewalk or path that
is part of a pedestrian or bicycle transportation system.
(8) All farmers markets and their vendors shall receive all required
operating and health permits and licenses from the Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture or local health department. These
permits/licenses (or copies) shall be in the possession of the
farmers market manager or the vendor, as applicable, on the site of
the farmers market during all hours of operation.
§ 245-14.23 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.23
227:809
§ 245-14.24. Golf courses.
Golf courses, including accessory uses (e.g., clubhouse, parking lots,
storage sheds, pro shop, snack bar, restaurant, swimming pools, etc.), are
subject to the following criteria:
(9) A site plan shall be submitted with the permit application showing
all existing improvements on the property, number and location of
off-street parking areas and driveways (including traffic control
patterns), locations used for unloading and loading of products,
and the specific area (dimensioned) of the property to be occupied
by the farmers market.
A. The minimum lot area shall be not less than: 45 acres for a par 3,
18-hole course; 60 acres for a nine-hole or executive golf course; and
100 acres for a regulation 18-hole course.
B. A golf course may include the following accessory uses:
(1) A clubhouse with a pro shop, offices, restaurant/snack bar, game
room, and child-care room.
(2) Golf cart maintenance and equipment storage and service facilities.
No outdoor maintenance or storage of golf carts shall be permitted.
(3) Practice putting greens and driving range, without outdoor
lighting.
C. The construction of a golf course shall be considered a "development"
and subject to all appropriate requirements of the Township Zoning
Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
D. All applicants shall submit plans to the Township Engineer or his/her
designee and Cumberland County Conservation District at least 30 days
before the public hearing. In addition to requirements of the Upper
Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the
plans shall include the following information:
(1) Earth-moving and erosion-control management;
(2) Runoff controls for herbicides, pesticides, fungicides, and fertilizer,
and plans for disposal of the containers for those items;
(3) Water use plan, including emergency condition usage;
(4) Wastewater treatment and disposal plan;
(5) Traffic study. A traffic study shall be submitted by the applicant in
accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.220 The traffic study shall include, at a
minimum, the following study elements:
220. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.23 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.24
227:810
§ 245-14.25. Group day-care centers and older adult living centers.
(a) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking
area to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and
vehicles and convenient access to the development and nearby
areas.
(b) Traffic generation impact on adjacent roadway systems within
1/2 mile from the edge of the facility.
(6) Mosquito control; and
(7) Nutrient plan to ensure no excess nitrates, herbicides, pesticides,
fungicides or other fertilizer is used; when alternatives that are less
potentially harmful to the environment are available, they shall be
used.
E. No golf hole shall be arranged to require a golf ball to be driven across
any building, road, driveway or parking lot.
F. Any points when the golf course crosses a road(s), driveway or parking
lot shall be signed, warning motorists and pedestrians, and any private
road shall contain speed bumps.
G. In addition to the setback regulations of the district in which the use is
located, the following setback regulations shall be required.
(1) Fairways and greens shall be set back a minimum of:
(a) One hundred and fifty feet from any residential structures. For
undeveloped residential lots abutting the golf course, the onehundred-
fifty-foot setback shall be measured from the closest
setback line of the abutting property and common property
line.
(b) Fifty feet from any nonresidential lot line of an abutting
property or the existing street right-of-way line.
(2) All accessory uses of the golf course shall be set back at least 100
feet from all lot lines.
(3) All golf course buildings shall be set back 100 feet from any
adjoining roads and parcels.
(4) Parking shall be set back at least 30 feet from any adjoining lot
lines, be paved with asphalt, and screened from adjoining
residentially zoned or used property in accordance with buffer yard
type 1, as set forth in the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance221 and Article XVII of this chapter.
The number of required parking spaces shall be the amount
required for the golf course plus accessory uses.
221. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.24 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.25
227:811
§ 245-14.26. Group homes and family care facilities.
A. Facility operators shall be responsible for meeting all state and federal
licensing and registration requirements and shall provide proof of
compliance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Code, Title 55,
Chapters 3270, Child Day Care Centers, or Title 6, Chapter 11, Older
Adult Daily Living Centers.
B. The group day-care center shall provide off-street parking in
accordance with Article XVII.
C. The group day-care center provides safe off-street pickup and dropoff
points in order to minimize traffic congestion. Vehicles shall enter and
exit from the pickup and dropoff points at least 60 feet from any
intersection. The passenger pickup and dropoff points shall be arranged
so that the passengers do not have to cross traffic.
D. An outdoor play area shall be provided in accordance with state
regulations for day-care centers. Adult passive recreation areas may be
provided for older adult daily living centers. Off-street parking
compounds shall not be used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas
shall not be located within the front yard and must be set back 25 feet
from all property lines. Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed
by a four-foot-high fence and screened from adjoining residentially
zoned or used properties. Any vegetative materials located within the
outdoor play areas shall not be of a harmful type (poisonous, thorny,
allergenic, etc.). All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade,
such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s).
A. Group homes and family care facilities shall meet the following
purposes:
(1) To develop reasonable guidelines so as not to discriminate against
any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of
a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection
with such dwelling, because of a handicap, as provided by the Fair
Housing Act.222
(2) To reasonably regulate family care facilities that are recognized as
socially important but are not afforded the same protection as
group homes, under the Fair Housing Act and this chapter.
(3) To promote the safety, health, morals, convenience and general
welfare of Upper Allen Township residents.
(4) To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the
Township.
(5) To conserve and stabilize the value of property in the Township.
222. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 3601 et seq.
§ 245-14.25 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.26
227:812
(6) To prevent the overcrowding of land and building in the Township.
(7) To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers.
B. Group homes. A group home, as defined by this chapter, is permitted in
all zoning districts in Upper Allen Township except in districts where
dwellings are not permitted. To assist the Township in its review
process, the following information shall be provided to the Upper Allen
Township Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of a building permit:
(1) In a narrative form, a statement of the proposed use, including its
location, number of residents, name, telephone number and
contact person of the sponsoring agency.
(2) A statement that all required approvals, permits and licenses have
been granted from the federal, state, and county governments or
other public agencies.
(3) The group home shall comply with all zoning regulations in the
district in which the group home is located.
(4) All other information that is required by the Upper Allen Township
Building Department prior to issuing a building permit shall also be
provided to the Township.
(5) The group home shall maintain a similar appearance, condition and
character to the existing dwellings in the immediate vicinity of the
group home.
(6) Occupants of the group home facilities shall live as a family unit.
(7) Under no circumstances shall any uses qualifying for or falling
under the definition of "halfway house" be considered a group
home.
C. Family care facilities. To assist the Township in its review process, the
following information shall be provided to the Upper Allen Township
Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(1) In a narrative form, a statement of the proposed use, including its
location, number of residents, name, telephone number and
contact person of the sponsoring agency.
(2) A statement and verification that all required approvals, permits
and/or licenses have been granted from the federal, state, and
county governments or other public agencies.
(3) The family care facility shall comply with all zoning regulations in
the district in which the family care facility is located.
(4) All other information that is required by the Upper Allen Township
Building Department prior to issuing a building permit shall also be
provided to the Township.
§ 245-14.26 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.26
227:813
§ 245-14.27. Group quarters.
Group quarters. Group quarters include, but are not limited to, lodging
houses or boardinghouses, fraternity and sorority houses, and quarters of
an institutional nature.
§ 245-14.28. Halfway houses.
(5) No family care facility shall be established within 1,000 feet of
another family care facility or a group home.
(6) The family care facility shall maintain a similar appearance,
condition and character to the existing dwellings in the immediate
vicinity of the family care facility.
(7) Occupants of the family care facilities shall live as a family unit.
(8) Under no circumstances shall any uses qualifying for or falling
under the definition of "halfway house" be considered a family care
facility.
A. Any group quarters shall have a minimum of 350 square feet of
habitable floor area provided for each occupant.
B. A common kitchen and dining facility shall be provided, and no cooking
or dining facilities shall be provided in individual rooms or suites. This
provision is not intended to require any kitchen and dining facilities if
the affiliated institution provides them elsewhere.
C. All group quarters shall be connected to public water and public
sanitary sewage facilities.
D. All group quarters shall comply with the Federal Life Safety Code, the
rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry, and all other applicable building, safety, and fire codes of the
federal, state, or local government.
A. A halfway house must be licensed where required by an appropriate
government agency(ies) and shall be in compliance with all applicable
rules and regulations of the licensing body(ies). A copy of any required
license must be delivered to the Township prior to beginning the use.
B. A halfway house shall be directly affiliated with a parent institution or
organization, which shall provide full-time supervision and
administration to the residents of the house.
C. A common cooking and eating area must be provided; no cooking or
dining facilities shall be provided in individual rooms or suites.
D. The residents of the halfway house shall reside on the premises to
benefit from the services provided.
§ 245-14.26 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.28
227:814
§ 245-14.29. Honeybee apiaries.
E. Necessary permits for water supply and sanitary waste disposal must
be obtained.
F. The halfway house shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any religious
structure, public recreation facility, school facility, day-care center or
public library.
G. The halfway house shall not be located with 1,000 feet of another
halfway house.
H. Each special exception application shall be accompanied by a statement
describing the following:
(1) The composition of the halfway house;
(2) The policies and goals of the halfway house and the means
proposed to accomplish those goals;
(3) The characteristics of the residents and number of residents to be
served;
(4) The operating methods and procedures to be used; and
(5) Any other facts relevant to the proposed operation of the halfway
house.
I. Any use permit granted for the halfway house shall be bound to the type
and number of offenders listed on the application. Any change in the
type or number of offenders being housed shall require a new hearing
before the decision-making body.
A. Honeybee apiaries for noncommercial purposes shall be permitted as
an accessory use in certain zoning districts for residential or
agricultural lots with a single-family detached dwelling.
B. Honeybee apiaries, where permitted as an accessory use, shall comply
with the Pennsylvania Bee Law (3 Pa. C.S.A. §§ 2101 to 2117), and
subject to the following regulations:
(1) Best management practices. Beekeeping facilities must be
consistent with the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture "Best
Management Practices for Maintaining European Honey Bee
colonies in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania."
(2) Registration. The apiary must be properly registered with the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Plant Industry,
pursuant to applicable Pennsylvania state laws.
(3) Ownership and care. Ownership, care and control of the honeybee
shall be the responsibility of a resident of the dwelling on the lot or
the individual listed on the registration.
§ 245-14.28 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.29
227:815
§ 245-14.30. Hospitals and medical labs and clinics.
C. Colony density. One hive is permitted for every 4,000 square feet of lot
area, with a maximum of three hives that may be kept on a lot.
D. Location.
(1) No apiary shall be kept in a front yard.
(2) Apiaries must be located a minimum of 25 feet from any lot line.
(3) The front of any apiary shall face away from the property line of the
residential property or residential zone closest to the hive.
E. Flyway barriers. For all colonies located on a property, a flyway barrier
of at least six feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence or dense
hedge parallel to the property line and extending at least 10 feet
beyond the apiary in each direction is required.
F. Water. A supply of fresh water shall be maintained in a location readily
accessible to all bee colonies on the site throughout the day to prevent
bees from congregating at neighboring swimming pools or other
sources of water on nearby properties.
G. Safety.
(1) In any instance in which a hive exhibits unusually aggressive
characteristics it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to destroy or
requeen the hive.
(2) Hives must be located within a secured area to protect the colony
and prevent direct access by the public.
(3) Hive type. No person shall keep or maintain honeybees in any hive
other than a modern moveable frame hive which permits thorough
examination of every comb to determine the presence of bee
disease.
H. Signage. Signage shall be posted at a residential location where
beekeeping occurs.
A. The facility operator shall meet all state and federal rules and
regulations for health-care facilities.
B. All applicants shall provide evidence that the hospital will be conducted
in a manner that will not be detrimental to neighboring property
owners.
C. Minimum lot area: five acres.
D. Minimum street frontage: 300 feet.
E. Public sewer and public water shall be used.
§ 245-14.29 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.30
227:816
§ 245-14.31. Junkyards.
§ 245-14.32. Keeping of animals and animal structures.
F. The subject property shall have frontage along an arterial or collector
roadway or have direct access to an arterial roadway via a collector or
local street that intersects with an arterial roadway within one-half mile
of such facility.
G. All height, area, setback and coverage standards within the underlying
district shall apply.
H. Emergency entrances shall be located on a building wall facing away
from adjoining residential uses and residentially zoned properties.
I. A traffic study is required. A traffic study shall be submitted by the
applicant in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.223 The traffic study shall include at a
minimum the following study elements:
(1) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area
to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles
and convenient access to the development and nearby areas.
(2) A description of the location of bus stops to be conveniently
accessible for patrons traveling to and from the site by bus. The
location for a bus stop must be provided even if current bus service
is unavailable. The bus stop area shall include a shelter, seating,
waste receptacle, and shaded area.
J. The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations plan
(EOP) to the Township Emergency Management Agency Coordinator.
The EOP shall include detailed information regarding solid, medical and
hazardous materials and waste handling, including a listing of all
medical and hazardous materials and wastes used and generated on
site and evidence indicating the disposal of all materials and wastes will
be accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal
regulations.
A. Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
B. All junkyards shall meet the requirements of Chapter 160, Junk and
Junkyards, of the Upper Allen Township Codified Ordinances.
A. The keeping or raising of livestock, horses, or fur-bearing animals shall
be limited to lots of at least five acres in area. Lots of five acres shall be
limited to two head of livestock or horses. Lot sizes ranging from six
acres to 10 acres shall allow two additional head of livestock or horses
per acre.
223. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.30 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.32
227:817
§ 245-14.33. Keeping of chickens or poultry.
B. The keeping or raising of chickens or poultry shall be subject to the
provisions within § 245-14.33 herein.
C. Livestock shall be considered those animals commonly raised on farms
in this area, such as: cows, sheep, goats and pigs.
D. Any building used for the keeping or raising of livestock, horses, furbearing
animals shall be situated not less than 200 feet from any street
line or residential property line. Not more than 3% of the total lot area
shall be impervious surfaces.
E. Riding academies, livery or boarding stables, commercial dog kennels
are not included in this provision.
F. All buildings associated with this use, i.e., barns, sheds and silos, shall
be permitted.
G. Where this use adjoins existing residential uses, buffering in
accordance with § 245-16.5 of this chapter shall be provided.
H. All grazing or pasture areas shall be fenced to prevent livestock from
roaming.
I. All manure management practices and operations shall comply with the
provisions set forth in the Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act, as
amended,224 and § 245-16.3 herein.
A. The keeping or raising of chickens or poultry for noncommercial
purposes shall be permitted as an accessory use for residential or
agricultural lots with a single-family detached dwelling. The keeping or
raising of chickens or poultry for commercial purposes shall be subject
to the provisions within § 245-16.5 of this chapter.
B. The keeping of chickens or poultry shall be limited to three fowl per
every one acre of land for residential or agricultural lots of less than
five acres in size. Lots of five acres shall be limited to 50 fowl. Lot sizes
ranging from six to 10 acres shall allow 50 fowl per acre.
C. Keeping of roosters is prohibited on lots of less than five acres.
D. All fowl shall be provided with a stationary, covered, predator-proof
cage or other shelter, designed to be easily accessed and cleaned. The
minimum coop size shall provide at least three square feet per chicken
in order to permit free movement of the chickens, exclusive of areas
used for storage of materials or vehicles. Coops shall have vents to
ensure adequate ventilation. If an outside run is permitted, it shall allow
for a minimum of 10 square feet per fowl and shall be enclosed in a way
that contains the fowl and is predator proof.
224. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 7-6-2005 by P.L. 112, No. 38. See now 3 Pa.C.S.A. §
501 et seq.
§ 245-14.32 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.33
227:818
§ 245-14.34. Keeping of exotic wildlife.
E. Coops shall be maintained of hen droppings, uneaten feed, feathers and
other waste weekly and as is necessary to ensure that the coop and yard
do not become a health, odor or other nuisance.
F. Coops shall be constructed as to prevent rodents from being harbored
underneath or within the enclosure.
G. Feces and deceased fowl shall be disposed of in a legal manner that
does not become a nuisance to adjoining properties.
H. Any building used for the keeping or raising of poultry may be erected,
set or placed inside rear or side yards, provided that:
(1) For lots less than five acres in size, the accessory structure shall be
situated not less than five feet from the lot line and no less than 25
feet from any residential or nonresidential structure on an adjacent
lot.
(2) For lots of five acres or more, the accessory structure shall be
situated not less than 200 feet from any street line or property line.
(3) All accessory buildings or structures shall be included in the lot
coverage.
I. All grazing or pasture areas shall be fenced to prevent the poultry from
roaming.
J. All manure management practices and operations shall comply with the
provisions set forth in the Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act, as
amended,225 and § 245-16.3 herein.
K. In the event any chickens or fowl give birth, thereby exceeding the
number of animals allowed by the maximum set forth in this subsection,
the owner of said chickens or fowl and/or the occupier of the premises
shall conform to the maximum number permitted for the lot within six
months of the birth of the animal.
A. All exotic wildlife shall be properly caged or restricted to prevent harm
to residents of the Township.
B. Anyone in possession of exotic wildlife must possess an exotic wildlife
possession permit issued by the Pennsylvania Game Commission under
the guidelines of the Game and Wildlife Code, 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 2963.
C. No manure shall be stored within 200 feet of any property line.
D. All manure management practices and operations shall comply with the
provisions set forth in the Nutrient Management Act of 1999, as
amended,226 and § 245-16.3 herein.
225. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 7-6-2005 by P.L. 112, No. 38. See now 3 Pa.C.S.A. §
501 et seq.
§ 245-14.33 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.35
227:819
§ 245-14.35. Landscaping and garden service, nonretail/retail.
§ 245-14.36. Long-term-care nursing and personal care facilities.
A. No vehicle, material, or display of goods shall occupy any part of the
existing or future street right-of-way, front yard, required parking area,
or required buffer area.
B. Pickup and receiving (loading and unloading) areas shall be located
behind the front face of the building and otherwise compliant with
setback and screening requirements of the underlying zoning district.
All pick-up and receiving areas shall contain an all-weather, dust free
surface.
C. Outdoor storage of products and material is permitted as part of a
nonretail or retail landscaping and garden service; however, these
areas shall be screened from view by a six-foot high privacy fence or a
hedge row during off business hours.
D. The entire lot shall be screened from adjoining residentially zoned
properties as provided by § 245-16.5 of this chapter and the Upper
Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
A. In addition to residential units (living and sleeping quarters with or
without kitchen facilities), the following accessory uses may be
provided for the exclusive use of residents and their guests. These
special services may include, but are not limited to, the following
services:
(1) Dispensaries.
(2) Medical facilities.
(3) Common dining facilities.
(4) Group recreation facilities.
B. In addition to residential units, the following accessory commercial
uses shall be permitted.
(1) Adult and child day care.
(2) Banks and financial institutions.
(3) Florists, stationery and gift stores.
(4) Food and beverage stores.
(5) Personal care services.
(6) Restaurants.
226. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 7-6-2005 by P.L. 112, No. 38. See now 3 Pa.C.S.A. §
501 et seq.
§ 245-14.35 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.36
227:820
(7) Sporting goods, hobby, book, and music stores.
C. Each accessory use shall be located in a building occupied by
residential units.
D. Each accessory structure shall not occupy more than 2,500 square feet
of net floor area (excluding food preparation areas and lavatories).
E. The total space allotted for accessory commercial uses within a single
building shall not exceed 10% of the total gross building area.
F. The maximum density for residential units in the R-3 and INS Zoning
Districts shall be 20 units per acre and in the R-2 Zoning District shall
be 18 units per acre.
G. Long-term-care nursing and personal care facilities in the R-3 and INS
Zoning Districts shall meet the following bulk and area requirements:
(1) Minimum tract area shall be eight acres.
(2) Yards shall meet the following minimum setback requirements:
(a) Front yard: 30 feet.
(b) Side yards: 15 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Buildings on a single tract shall meet the following minimum
interior yard spacing requirements:
(a) Front to front: 70 feet.
(b) Front to side: 50 feet.
(c) Front to rear: 40 feet.
(d) Side to rear: 20 feet.
(e) Side to side: 15 feet.
(f) Rear to rear: 30 feet.
(g) Corner to corner: 20 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious lot coverage shall be 60%.
(5) Minimum vegetative coverage shall be 40%.
H. Long-term-care nursing and personal care facilities shall be permitted
as a conditional use in the R-2 Zoning District and shall, in addition to
the general conditional use standards and criteria set forth in
§ 245-19.14, also meet the following requirements:
(1) Minimum tract area shall be eight acres.
§ 245-14.36 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.36
227:821
(2) Yards shall meet the following minimum setback requirements:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 50 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(3) Buildings on a single tract shall meet the following minimum
interior yard spacing requirements:
(a) Front to front: 70 feet.
(b) Front to side: 50 feet.
(c) Front to rear: 40 feet.
(d) Side to rear: 20 feet.
(e) Side to side: 15 feet.
(f) Rear to rear: 30 feet.
(g) Corner to corner: 20 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious lot coverage shall be 45%.
(5) Minimum vegetative coverage shall be 55%.
(6) Long-term-care nursing and personal care facilities shall only be
permitted as a conditional use in the R-2 Zoning District when the
tract upon which the long-term-care nursing or personal care
facility is located is within 100 feet of an R-3 Zoning District.
(7) The exterior materials of all proposed structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the residential dwellings located
upon adjacent properties.
(8) The Board of Commissioners may require an applicant for the
conditional use to complete a traffic study to demonstrate
compliance with the criteria set forth in § 245-19.14.C.
I. Public water and public sewer shall be required.
J. A landscaping plan for the entire tract shall be required. A landscape
architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
retained to complete such a plan to ensure the proper species, use,
arrangement of plant materials and installation by the developer. All
areas of the development not covered by impervious surfaces shall be
landscaped and maintained with suitable ground cover and plants.
(1) The plan shall indicate the extent in which existing vegetation will
be preserved for landscaping purposes.
(2) When deemed necessary by the decision-making body, earthen
berms shall be incorporated into the landscaping plan along public
§ 245-14.36 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.36
227:822
§ 245-14.37. Laundry and dry-cleaning establishments.
street frontage and along property lines abutting existing dwellings
in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.227
(3) Landscaped areas shall be continually maintained by the
landowner or home operator. Care, grooming and replacement of
plants shall be included as part of the required maintenance.
Failure to adequately maintain landscaped areas shall be subject to
a citation issued by the Township.
(4) In addition to landscape elements, the plan shall include the layout
of walkways, lighting in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance228 and recreation
areas throughout the development for the safety and security of the
residents.
(a) Entrances to dwelling units shall be provided with all-weather
walkways to parking and refuse collection points, if applicable.
(b) The development shall have shaded sidewalks or shaded paved
walking paths throughout the development.
(c) The layout and design of pedestrian-level streetlighting shall
be provided throughout the development and parking areas.
(5) Parking areas within the continuing care retirement community
shall be adequately landscaped in order to provide shade, to screen
vehicles from public streets, and to reduce glare and noise within
the development itself and shall be designed in accordance with the
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(6) Buffers shall be in accordance with § 245-16.5 herein.
K. The facility shall provide proof that all applicable state, county and
Township licenses have been obtained.
A. Laundry and dry-cleaning establishments shall be intended for personal
use only.
B. Public sewer and public water shall be required.
C. All activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
D. Dry-cleaning services shall be limited to pickup and dropoff only, with
no on-site dry cleaning permitted.
227. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
228. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.36 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.37
227:823
§ 245-14.38. Mini storage warehouses.
§ 245-14.39. Mixed uses.
§ 245-14.40. Mobile/manufactured home parks.
E. Any exhaust ventilation equipment shall be directed away from
adjoining residentially zoned or used property.
F. Self-service laundromats shall require one off-street parking space for
each 1.5 washing machines; other laundry-related uses shall provide
one off-street parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area.
G. During operation or cleanup or maintenance, all windows and doors on
walls facing adjoining residential zones or uses shall be kept closed.
H. The decision-making body may require a traffic study in accordance
with the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
A. Parking for the individual storage units shall be provided by parking/
driving lanes adjacent to the buildings. These lanes shall be at least 20
feet wide where access to storage units is on both sides of the aisle and
based on review by the Township Fire Chief.
B. If a manager/business office is established on the site, at least four
parking spaces must be provided adjacent to the office.
C. The servicing or repair of stored equipment shall not be conducted on
the premises. Also, no business activities, other than rental of storage
units, shall be conducted on the premises.
D. The storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive
materials, or hazardous chemicals is prohibited.
E. If a parking area is to be provided for the outdoor storage of
recreational vehicles, such parking shall be in addition to any required
parking.
F. All access drives, parking and loading areas must be paved and shall be
mud free.
A. The mixed use shall consist only of combinations of uses permitted in
the district where the mixed use is to occur. Uses may be mixed both on
the horizontal and vertical plane.
B. The required off-street parking shall be equal to no less than the sum of
the off-street parking required for each of the mixed uses.
A. A mobile home park shall only include mobile homes of single width or
multiple widths but shall not include travel trailers or motor homes.
B. The tract of land to be developed for a mobile home park shall be in
single and separate ownership.
§ 245-14.37 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.40
227:824
C. Any parcel to be used as a mobile home park shall have a minimum
tract area of 25 acres.
D. Any site proposed for a mobile home park shall not be subject to any
hazard nuisance, such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic
matter, radiation, heat, odors or glare, as defined by the Board of
Commissioners and all appropriate ordinances.
E. The location of all mobile home parks shall be subject to § 245-16.5,
General buffering regulations, as set forth herein, and screening in
accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.229
F. Every area to be used as a mobile home park must be served exclusively
by a public water supply system and municipal waste disposal system.
G. The applicant shall provide a traffic analysis in accordance with the
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
prepared by a professional engineer experienced in the field of traffic
analysis. The analysis shall investigate the following conditions:
(1) Any tract of land proposed for a mobile home park must have direct
access to a collector-type road or a road of higher classification, as
defined by the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, and
must demonstrate the roadway's capability to accommodate the
transport of mobile home units.
(2) Provision of safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from the
public streets and highways servicing the park, without causing
undue interference with the normal traffic flows and based on the
adequacy of the thoroughfare to carry the additional traffic
generated by the park.
H. Density. The total number of lots in a mobile home park shall not exceed
a maximum density of five per adjusted tract area. Calculations of
density shall be by the adjusted tract area method as defined herein and
described in § 245-11.8 herein.
I. Yard and area regulations. The following yard setback and lot area
regulations shall apply to all mobile home parks developed pursuant to
this section:
(1) Setback from tract boundary. No mobile home or other primary
building may be located closer than 35 feet to any boundary of a
mobile park, regardless of whether that boundary abuts a lot, water
body, road or other right-of-way.
(2) Lot area. All mobile home lots in a mobile home park, regardless of
tenure, shall have a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet.
(3) Lot width.
229. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.40 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.40
227:825
§ 245-14.41. Mortuaries or undertaking establishments.
§ 245-14.42. Motels or hotels.
(a) No individual mobile home lot shall be less than 55 feet in
width at the building setback line.
(b) No individual mobile home lot shall be less than 25 feet in
width at the right-of-way line or the edge of the pavement of a
private street.
(4) Building area. The maximum coverage of any individual mobile
home lot by all primary and accessory buildings and structures,
including covered patios or decks, shall not exceed 25%.
(5) Minimum structure setbacks.
(a) Front yard. In no case shall the long side, of a mobile home be
located closer than 50 feet from the center line of a public or
private street or right-of-way; provided, however, that the short
side (ends of unit) of a mobile home may be located no closer to
the ultimate right-of-way than 15 feet. No more than six mobile
homes in a row shall have the same setback distance; where
varied setbacks are implemented, the difference shall be at
least four feet.
(b) Side and rear yards. No mobile home or accessory building
may be located closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line
of an individual mobile home lot.
(6) Distance between structures. Mobile homes and roofed structures
of areas attached thereto shall be separated from each other and
from other buildings, other than accessory structures, at their
closest points by a minimum of 20 feet; provided, however, that
whenever two mobile homes have their longer sides parallel or
essentially parallel to each other for more than 25% of the length of
either, the minimum distance between the two mobile homes shall
be 30 feet.
J. The development of all mobile home parks shall conform to the Upper
Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.230
A. A one-hundred-foot off-street stacking area for the formation of the
funeral procession shall be provided on the site.
B. No funeral procession will be allowed to form on public streets.
A. Minimum lot area shall be one acre.
B. Front, side and rear yards shall be permanently landscaped and
maintained in good condition.
230. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.40 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.42
227:826
§ 245-14.43. Multifamily dwellings.
C. All buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from
any lot line.
D. Where more than one building occupies a lot, the following minimum
interior yard spacing shall be required:
(1) Front to front: 70 feet.
(2) Front to side: 50 feet.
(3) Front to rear: 70 feet.
(4) Side to rear: 30 feet.
(5) Side to side: 15 feet.
(6) Rear to rear: 50 feet.
(7) Corner to corner: 20 feet.
E. A landscaping plan for the entire tract shall be required. A landscape
architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
retained to complete such a plan to ensure the proper species, use and
arrangement of plant materials. All areas of the development not
covered by impervious surfaces shall be landscaped and maintained
with suitable ground cover and plants. Existing vegetation is
encouraged to be preserved for landscaping purposes.
(1) When deemed necessary by the decision-making body, earthen
berms shall be incorporated into the landscaping plan along public
street frontage and along property lines abutting existing dwellings
in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.231
(2) Landscaped areas shall be continually maintained by the
landowner. Care, grooming, and replacement of plants shall be
included as part of the required maintenance. Failure to adequately
maintain landscaped areas shall be subject to a citation issued by
the Township.
(3) Buffers shall be in accordance with § 245-16.5 herein and
screening in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
F. In the case of a hotel with conference/convention center, no more than
1/3 of the gross floor area of the hotel shall be devoted to conference/
convention center.
A. Lot area per dwelling unit shall not be less than the area required by
the district regulations.
231. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.42 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.43
227:827
B. The minimum habitable floor area shall be in accordance with
§ 245-16.7 of this chapter.
C. Public water and public sewer shall be required.
D. Entrances to dwelling units shall be provided with all-weather
walkways to parking and refuse collection points, if applicable.
E. A landscaping plan for the entire tract shall be required. A landscape
architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
retained to complete such a plan to ensure the proper species, use and
arrangement of plant materials. All areas of the development not
covered by impervious surfaces shall be landscaped and maintained
with suitable ground cover and plants. Existing vegetation is
encouraged to be preserved for landscaping purposes.
(1) When deemed necessary by the decision-making body, earthen
berms shall be incorporated into the landscaping plan along public
street frontage and along property lines abutting existing
dwellings, in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(2) Landscaped areas shall be continually maintained by the
landowner or a homeowners' association or a condominium
association. Care, grooming and replacement of plants shall be
included as part of the required maintenance. Failure to adequately
maintain landscaped areas shall be subject to a citation issued by
the Township.
(3) Parking areas within a multiple-family development shall be
adequately landscaped in order to provide shade, to screen
vehicles from public streets, and to reduce glare and noise within
the development itself and shall be designed in accordance with the
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.232
(4) Buffers shall be in accordance with § 245-16.5 herein.
F. In the C-1 and PO Districts, the maximum density of multifamily
dwelling units shall not exceed three dwelling units per acre of the total
land area of the tract that is supposed to be subdivided or developed
under a preliminary or final subdivision or land development plan and
such plan proposes the development of permitted nonresidential uses in
addition to multifamily dwelling units.
G. In the PO, C-1, and VIL Districts, multifamily housing shall be located
on the second floor and above in the same building as permitted
nonresidential uses, or above a nonresidential use, provided that:
232. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.43 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.43
227:828
§ 245-14.44. Natural production uses.
(1) No nonresidential use shall be permitted on the same floor that is
used for residential purposes, with the exception of legal home
occupations.
(2) No floor may be used in whole or in part for a nonresidential use on
a floor located above a floor used for residential purposes.
(3) Where there are nonresidential and residential uses in a building,
the residential uses shall be provided with separate, private
entrances.
A. As a part of each application, the applicant shall furnish an accurate
survey site plan, at a scale no less than one inch equals 400 feet,
showing the location of the tract or tracts of land to be affected by the
operation. The surveyed site plan shall be sealed by a registered
professional engineer or a registered professional land surveyor and
shall include the following:
(1) The boundaries of the proposed affected area, together with
drainage area above and below the area.
(2) The location and names of the types of resources to be extracted or
quarried and names of all natural and man-made features, such as
streams, roads, railroads, and utility lines, on or immediately
adjacent to the area.
(3) The location of all buildings within 1,000 feet of the parcel; and the
names and addresses of the owners and present occupants; total
acreage; names and addresses of adjacent landowners; and the
location of rights-of-way and easements, abutting and/or adjacent
zoning districts and land uses.
(4) The purpose for which each building is used, and estimated depth
of the proposed operation and land area to be excavated, with
dimensions.
(5) Proposed alterations to watercourses to ensure stream quality and
quantity.
(6) Any proposed fencing and landscaping, which must comply with
§ 245-16.3 and § 245-16.5.
(7) A contour map showing cross sections of the proposed quarry area,
including a detailed hydrogeologic groundwater study based on
complete site studies.
B. The applicant shall obtain any required permit or permits from the
Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or any successor agency thereto, and shall present such
permit or permits to the Board of Commissioners.
§ 245-14.43 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.44
227:829
C. The applicant shall present duplicate sets of the plans, specifications,
applications and supporting data that have been or shall be presented
to the Department of Environmental Protection for review to the Board
of Commissioners. If such conditional use is granted, the operator shall
continue to present such documentation to the Township when it is
submitted to the Department of Environmental Protection.
D. Operation of the facility shall at all times comply with all applicable
state and federal statutes and regulations. This shall include, but not be
limited to, the Noncoal Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation
Act, Act of December 19, 1984, P.L. 10993, No. 219, as amended, 52 P.S.
§ 3301 et seq., or any subsequent amendment or enactment of the
Pennsylvania General Assembly regulating mining, and the regulations
of the Department of Environmental Protection implementing such
statutes.
E. The minimum lot area shall be 50 acres.
F. A fence measuring eight feet high must enclose the area of actual
quarrying or excavation. It shall not be less than 50 feet from the edge
of excavation. The fence used shall have openings less than three
inches in any dimension, if any. A vegetative screen must be provided
along the outside of the fence, facing away from the quarry, with
plantings (which shall be evergreen at planting) at least 36 inches high
and placed in a double-staggered row with no more than five feet on
center between plants. The vegetation shall be of a variety to obtain a
height of at least eight feet at maturity. Where adjacent to a residential
district or public right-of-way, trees and shrubs shall be planted which
will screen the operation completely from normal view. All screenings
and buffers required by § 245-16.5 herein shall be provided.
G. The applicant shall demonstrate that the water supplies for neighboring
properties shall not be adversely affected by the proposed use. In order
to fulfill this requirement, the applicant shall submit to the Board of
Commissioners a hydrogeologic study performed by a qualified
hydrogeologist or other similar professional. Such study shall be
prepared in accordance with accepted hydrogeological standards and
practices; shall contain the sources of all test data, including, but not
limited to, wells evaluated as a part of the study; and shall clearly set
forth the conclusions and recommendations of the professional.
H. The operator shall limit access to the site to those posted times when an
attendant is on duty. In order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, access drives shall be secured by fences, locks, gate, and other
means to deny access at unauthorized times.
I. Vehicular access shall be designed as to minimize danger and
congestion along adjoining roads and to avoid the creation of nuisances
to nearby properties.
§ 245-14.44 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.44
227:830
J. Sufficiently long vehicle-stacking lanes into the facility shall be
provided so that waiting vehicles to be weighed will not back up onto
public roads.
K. All access drives onto the site shall be paved to a cartway width of 35
feet for a distance of at least 200 feet from the street right-of-way line.
In addition, a one-hundred-foot-long crushed-stone section of driveway
shall be placed just beyond the preceding two-hundred-foot paved
section to help collect any mud that may be attached to a vehicle's
wheels.
L. The facility shall front upon, and gain access from, an arterial or
collector, as defined in the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan,
as amended.
M. The applicant shall provide an analysis, prepared by a professional
engineer experienced in the field of traffic analysis, of the physical
conditions of the primary road system serving the site. A traffic study
shall be submitted by the applicant in accordance with the Upper Allen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.233
N. If the traffic study demonstrates that improvements to Township or
state roads shall be required in order to serve the proposed use or to
alleviate the direct impacts of the proposed use upon the traffic
network, the applicant shall make and/or guarantee cost of such
improvements.
O. The operator shall maintain and make available to the public at its
office all permits and approved plans required by all governmental
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the permitting, operation,
maintenance and/or reclamation of such a facility.
P. The operator shall provide the Township with copies of any notices of
violation received from the Department of Environmental Protection or
United States Environmental Protection Agency within two weeks from
the date such notice of violation was received by the operator.
Q. There shall be no operations on Sunday or legal holidays and no
operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on other days.
R. All mining operations shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Shall not injure or detract from the lawful existing or permitted use
of neighboring properties.
(2) Shall not create any damage to the health, safety or welfare of the
Township or its residents or property owners.
(3) Shall not pollute the air in excess of standards set by federal or
state statutes or regulations.
233. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.44 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.44
227:831
(4) Shall not create noises in excess of permitted levels established by
federal or state statutes or regulations or Township ordinances.
(5) Shall not exceed the blasting parameters established by the
Pennsylvania Bureau of Mining and Reclamation.
(6) Shall not permit vibrations perceptible as detected by the adjacent
or adjoining landowners' natural innate sensory input at any
adjoining or adjacent property in different ownership or at public
rights-of-way.
(7) Shall not permit the emission of dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor,
gas, fumes, noise or similar substances or conditions which can
endanger the health, safety or general welfare or which can cause
any soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond
the property line of the use creating the emission.
(8) Shall not impede the flow of natural watercourses.
(9) Shall be conducted in a manner which will not allow water to
collect and permit stagnant water to remain in quarries or
excavations.
(10) The storage of explosives and blasting agents, the bulk storage of
flammable or combustible liquids and the bulk storage of liquefied
petroleum gas must comply with the Township's Building
Construction Code234 and all other state and federal regulations
applicable to the types of storage stated in this subsection.
S. At the time of application for a conditional use, an operations statement
shall be submitted which shall include a detailed description of methods
for satisfactorily handling operations with respect to the emission of
noise, dust, blast, smoke, refuse matter or water, odor, gas, fumes or
similar substances or conditions which may endanger the health, safety
or general welfare or which can cause any soiling or staining of persons
or property beyond the property line. All such operations statements
shall be in full compliance with all applicable state and federal statutes
and regulations as well as this chapter. All pollution, soil erosion and
sedimentation control, and other environmental problems created
during the operation, including the production, transportation,
processing, stockpiling, storage and disposal of products, by-products
and wastes, shall be corrected by the operator.
T. At the time of application for a conditional use, a reclamation plan shall
also be submitted setting forth the following information:
(1) An engineering drawing showing ownership, existing and future
topography, streams, existing roads, buildings, boundaries and
legal description of the tract.
234. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112.
§ 245-14.44 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.44
227:832
(2) A description of the location, type, extent, methods and time
schedule for the operation proposed.
(3) A drawing showing the location and/or proposed relocation of land,
trees, buildings, structures, public roads, streams, drainage
facilities and utility lines on the tract or adjacent tracts as may
require protection, repairs, clearing, demolition or restoration
either during or following the completion of the operations
proposed.
(4) A plan for reuse of the land after completion of the operations
which shall permit the carrying out of the purposes of this chapter
and appropriately provide for any restoration, reclamation,
reforestation or other correction work deemed necessary and
which shall comply with all applicable state and federal statutes
and regulations governing the reclamation of the proposed facility.
Such reuse plan shall comply with the filing requirements of
§ 245-14.44.A.
U. As a condition of approval, the operator must certify that, after the
termination of operations, he/she must rehabilitate the area to conform
to the reclamation plan and all applicable federal and state statutes and
regulations.
V. Within 90 days after the commencement of surface mining operations
and each year thereafter, the operator shall file an operations and
progress report with the Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer
setting forth the following:
(1) The name and address and telephone number of the operator.
(2) The location of the operation with reference to the nearest public
road.
(3) A description of the tract or tracts, including a site plan showing
the location of all improvements, stockpiles, quarry pits, etc.
(4) The name and address of the landowner or his duly authorized
representative.
(5) An annual report of the type and quantity of material produced.
(6) The current status of the reclamation work performed pursuant to
the approved reclamation plan.
(7) A maintenance report for the site verifying that all required
fencing, berming and screening has been specifically inspected for
needed repairs and/or maintenance and that such needed repairs
and/or maintenance have been performed.
(8) Verification that the proposed use continues to comply with all
applicable state regulations. The operator shall furnish copies of
any approved permits and/or any notices of violations issued by the
§ 245-14.44 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.44
227:833
§ 245-14.45. Nightclubs.
§ 245-14.46. Power-generation facilities.
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to the
Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer.
W. A five-hundred-foot setback shall be maintained from all property lines
during the operation of the quarry or mine, within which quarrying or
mining activities, including blasting and stone crushing, shall not be
permitted.
X. No structures or parking areas shall be located closer than 100 feet to
any property line.
Y. Waste products or waste containers may be placed within side and rear
yards, provided that they are screened from adjoining roads and
properties. All such containers shall be set back not less than 100 feet
from any adjoining property. All such containers shall be completely
enclosed by a solid fence or wall.
Z. Where screening, plantings or fencing has been installed, such
screening, plantings and fencing shall be permanently maintained. All
required plant materials which die shall be promptly replaced in
accordance with recognized nursery standards. All fencing shall be
maintained in good repair.
A. The site shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from any school, child
or adult day-care facility, community activity center, cultural facility or
church or house of worship.
B. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to the use of adjoining properties, owing to hours of
operation, light, and/or litter.
C. The applicant shall furnish evidence as to how the use will be controlled
as to not constitute a nuisance due to noise or loitering outside of the
building. Noise levels shall not exceed 45 dBA or 5 dBA above ambient
noise levels as measured at the side and rear property lines.
D. Nightclubs shall only operate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 2:30
a.m. the following day.
E. All nightclubs shall hold a valid license for the premises on which the
establishment is located.
F. No nightclub shall contain less than 500 square feet of usable floor
area.
G. All nightclubs shall comply with all state and local codes regulating
such establishments.
§ 245-14.44 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.46
227:834
A. Heat, glare, radiation, noise, vibration, fumes, odors or other
objectionable emissions. Every use shall be operated so that it does not
emit a dangerous level of heat, glare, radiation, noise, vibration, fumes,
odors or other objectionable emission beyond any boundary of the site
on which the use is located.
B. Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
(1) No material or wastes shall be deposited upon a site in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off site by natural causes or
forces.
(2) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise
attractive to rodents shall be stored outside in closed containers.
C. The proposed facility shall comply with all applicable federal and state
air, water quality, environmental and regulatory permits and
requirements, including, but not limited to, the permits and approvals
listed below. Approval would be contingent upon obtaining required
permits and approvals.
(1) NPDES water quality and earth disturbance permits.
(2) Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
(3) Chapter 105, Encroachment permit, 25 Pa. Code.
(4) Water consumptive permit from Susquehanna River Basin
Commission.
(5) Water allocation/withdrawal permit from Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection.
(6) Air quality permits.
(7) Public Utility Commission approvals.
D. Landscape requirements.
(1) The landscape provisions in this chapter are intended to encourage
development of an attractive working environment for
development, to buffer objectionable views, to provide year-round
landscape, and to provide for the mitigation of environmental
impacts. The landscape requirements shall be as provided in the
Upper Allen Township's Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance235 and § 245-16.5 herein. Where conflict exists between
this chapter and the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
with regards to landscape requirements, this chapter will take
precedent.
235. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.46 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.46
227:835
§ 245-14.47. Private and semipublic outdoor recreation areas.
(2) Suitable planting and landscaping shall be provided in areas
required as setback under the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Landscaping is not required for side and rear property lines behind
the front building setback line for property abutting other
industrial zoned property.
(4) Parking shall not be permitted in the landscape setback abutting
any street.
E. Emergency plan of access. A written plan of access must be provided by
the owner in the event of emergency conditions such as fire, assuming
the worst condition. The owner's plan of action for emergency access to
the building shall be submitted to the Township's Emergency
Management Agency Officer and the fire companies at the time of
submission for a building permit.
A. Parking shall be required as shall be determined to be necessary for the
use and site by the decision-making body.
B. A buffer yard of 30 feet in width and a screen planting, of a height and
type as approved by the decision-making body, shall be provided.
C. Where an outdoor recreational use other than a golf course adjoins a
residential district or residential use, trees and shrubs must be planted
on the site of this use so as to form an effective visual barrier between
the outdoor recreational use and adjoining residential properties, as set
forth by the Zoning Hearing Board and/or Article XIX and the table in
§ 245-16.5.
D. A traffic study is required to demonstrate safe access and control of
traffic into and out of the facility. The traffic study shall include at a
minimum the following study elements:
(1) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area
to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles
and convenient access to the development and nearby areas.
(2) The traffic study shall be completed in accordance with the
Township subdivision and land development requirements.
(3) A description of the location of bus stops to be conveniently
accessible for patrons traveling to and from the site by bus. The
location for a bus stop must be provided even if current bus service
is unavailable. The bus stop area shall include a shelter, seating,
waste receptacle, and shaded area.
E. The decision-making body shall decide the appropriateness of the
design of parking, lighting and similar features of the proposed use to
minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
§ 245-14.46 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.47
227:836
§ 245-14.48. Professional and other home occupations (other than
no-impact home-based businesses).
F. Existing trees and vegetation shall be preserved to the extent possible
to keep the area natural.
A. The use shall be carried on completely within the dwelling unit or a
detached accessory structure.
B. Not more than two persons other than the occupants of the dwelling
unit shall be employed.
C. Not more than 35% of the floor area of the dwelling unit, excluding
attached accessory structures, shall be utilized.
D. Articles sold or offered for sale shall be limited to those produced on the
premises.
E. There shall be no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior
indication of the home occupation or variation of the residential
character of the main building.
F. No traffic shall be generated by such occupation or business in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.
G. Deliveries from commercial suppliers may not be made more than once
each week, and the deliveries shall not restrict traffic circulation.
H. There shall be no other exterior indications of the use or variation of the
residential character.
I. The use shall not cause any external effect, such as increased noise,
excessive lighting, air pollution or offensive odor, which is incompatible
with the characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood or in violation
of the provisions of any applicable code or ordinance.
J. A home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the following:
commercial stables and kennels, tearooms, tourist homes, animal
hospitals, animal grooming, or similar uses.
K. The owner shall provide a minimum of two parking spaces, plus one
parking space for each additional employee who is not an occupant of
the dwelling, in addition to the required number of parking spaces for
the residential use. Overflow or public parking spaces may not be used
to meet this requirement. All required parking spaces must be located
on the same property as the residential dwelling.
L. A home occupation which is located in a detached accessory structure,
does not have any impact, and does not employ anyone other than those
family members residing in the dwelling shall be exempt from
Subsection K above.
§ 245-14.47 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.48
227:837
§ 245-14.49. Professional and other home occupations, no-impact.
§ 245-14.50. Public and nonpublic schools.
M. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
A. The business or commercial activity, as defined in Article II, Land Use
Definitions, shall be permitted in all zones in accordance with the
following requirements, except that such accessory use shall not
supersede any deed restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the
use of land, nor any master deed, bylaw or other document applicable
to a common-interest-ownership community.
B. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
C. The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
D. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
E. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
F. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
G. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
H. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more the 25% of the habitable floor area of the dwelling
unit.
I. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
A. The public and nonpublic schools shall adhere to the following
dimensional characteristics with the exception of the Village (VIL)
District, in which case the requirements of the VIL District shall take
precedence.
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(2) Minimum setback requirements:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 50 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
§ 245-14.48 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.50
227:838
§ 245-14.51. Public and semipublic buildings, including churches
and similar places of worship, libraries, community activity
buildings, cultural facilities, municipal buildings.
(3) Minimum street frontage: 100 feet.
(4) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(5) Maximum lot impervious coverage: 70%.
(6) Minimum vegetative coverage: 30%.
B. No part of a public/nonpublic school property shall be located within
1,000 feet of a property containing an adult-related facility (as defined
herein), nor 300 feet of a property containing an automobile or gasoline
service station. All off-street parking shall be set back at least 25 feet
and screened from adjoining property lines.
C. Off-street parking lots shall not be used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor
play areas shall not be located within the front yard and must be set
back 25 feet from all property lines. Outdoor play areas shall be
screened from adjoining residentially zoned properties in accordance
with buffer yard screening type 1, as set forth in the Upper Allen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. All outdoor
play areas must provide a means of shade, such as a shade tree(s) or
pavilion(s).
D. Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students on the
site at any one time during a seven-day period.
E. Passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided and arranged so
that students do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the
site.
F. A traffic study is required. A traffic study shall be submitted by the
applicant in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.236 The traffic study shall include, at a
minimum, the following study elements:
(1) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area
to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles
and convenient access to the development and nearby areas.
(2) A description of the location of bus stops to be conveniently
accessible for students traveling to and from the site by bus.
G. The subject property shall have frontage along a minor arterial or
collector street, as defined in the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive
Plan, as amended.
236. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.50 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.51
227:839
A. The public and semipublic buildings shall adhere to the following
dimensional characteristics with the exception of the Village (VIL)
District, in which case the requirements of the VIL District shall take
precedence.
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(2) Minimum setback requirements:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 50 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum street frontage: 150 feet.
(4) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(5) Maximum lot impervious coverage: 70%.
(6) Minimum vegetative coverage: 30%.
B. Outside storage of material shall be prohibited within residential zones.
Outdoor storage of materials in other areas shall be completely
enclosed in accordance with § 245-16.8 herein.
C. The storage of maintenance vehicles and related apparatus shall be
within wholly enclosed buildings in residential districts.
D. All off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XVII
and the following requirements:
(1) Off-street parking shall not be allowed within 10 feet of the
adjoining property line and shall be screened in accordance with
the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(2) Portions of the required front yard setback may be used for offstreet
parking when authorized as a special exception; however,
off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the
street right-of-way.
E. In the case of churches and similar places for religious worship, no
restrictions shall be in violation of the Religious Land Use and
Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000.237
F. All utilities shall be underground.
G. The use shall emit no obnoxious noise, glare, dust, odor, vibration,
electrical, or microwave disturbance, or any other objectionable
impact, nuisance, or safety hazard beyond the subject property.
237. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 2000cc et seq.
§ 245-14.51 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.52
227:840
§ 245-14.52. Public utility buildings and structures.
Public utility buildings and structures may be established as a conditional
use in all districts upon the approval of the Board of Commissioners. The
following standards shall apply to public utility buildings and structures.
§ 245-14.53. Racetracks.
A. The applicant must demonstrate that the selected location is necessary
for public service and the use cannot be supplied if located elsewhere.
B. If located within a residential district, all buildings and structures shall
be designed (to the extent possible) to have the exterior appearance of
a residence.
C. In any residential district, the outdoor storage of vehicles or equipment,
used in the maintenance of a utility, shall not be permitted; in a
nonresidential district, all outdoor storage, parking and/or loading
areas shall be screened from adjoining roads and all properties in
accordance with Article XIV herein and the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.238
D. There shall be no specific minimum lot size; however, each lot shall
provide front, side, and rear yard setbacks and comply with the
maximum lot coverage requirements and impervious surface as
prescribed in the underlying district.
E. All other structures or accessory structures shall be set back a distance
at least equal to the height of the structure from all adjoining property
lines, and height regulations for the district shall be followed.
F. The use shall emit no obnoxious noise, glare, dust, odor, vibration,
electrical, or microwave disturbance, or any other objectionable
impact, nuisance or safety hazard beyond the subject property.
A. Minimum acreage shall be 25 acres.
B. The minimum setbacks of all structures from public roads shall be 100
feet.
C. Such facility shall be situated so that no residential use is located closer
than 500 feet from any property line of the principal use at the time of
approval.
D. Access to such facility shall be by a paved road. All racetracks shall
have direct access to minor arterial or collector roadway, as identified
in the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended. Traffic
shall not be directed through residential subdivisions or on minor
residential streets.
238. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.52 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.53
227:841
§ 245-14.54. Resorts.
§ 245-14.55. Riding academies and boarding stables.
E. Off-street parking shall be provided at a minimum of one space for each
three patrons or seats. For those facilities which are not used on a
regular or frequent basis, parking may be provided on adjacent parcels
of land, provided that any parcel so used is located no more than 500
feet from the lot boundary.
F. Any lighting provided at such facilities shall be subject to the provisions
of § 245-16.10 regarding outdoor lighting of the Upper Allen Township
Zoning Ordinance.
G. Accessory uses and/or structures may be permitted in conjunction with
the principal use of the property, provided that such uses are physically
designed as a part of or within the principal structure. Such uses may
include food sales, beverage sales, gift or souvenir shops, and similar
activities. The accessory structures may not be located within any
required setback or buffer area.
H. Noise from the racetrack shall not exceed 80 decibels at 100 feet from
the racetrack property line.
I. Hours of operation of the racetrack shall be between 10:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.
A. Those uses involving outdoor activities shall provide sufficient
screening and/or landscaping to mitigate any visual and/or audible
impacts on adjoining properties. The site shall be buffered and
landscaped in accordance with the provisions contained in this
chapter's § 245-16.5 and the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.239
B. All resorts shall front and have access to an arterial or collector
roadway, as defined in the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan,
as amended.
C. Performance standards addressed in § 245-16.10 shall be required.
D. The construction of a resort shall be considered a "development" and is
subject to the provisions contained in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and all other appropriate requirements.
E. If the resort includes a conference/convention center, no more than 1/3
of the gross floor area of the hotel shall be devoted to the conference/
convention center.
F. Golf courses may be permitted as regulated under § 245-14.24.
A. The use shall have a minimum lot size of five acres.
239. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.53 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.55
227:842
§ 245-14.56. Sale of agriculture products.
§ 245-14.57. Schools, commercial.
B. No more than 10 equine animals are kept with the exception that one
additional equine animal may be kept for each additional acre of land
over five acres.
C. All animals, except while exercising or pasturing, shall be confined in a
building erected or maintained for that purpose and shall meet the
following requirements.
(1) The building shall not be erected or maintained within 300 feet of
any lot line and 75 feet from any public or private road.
(2) The building shall not be less than 200 square feet in size for one
equine animal, with an additional 200 square feet for each added
animal.
D. All outdoor training, show, riding, boarding or pasture areas shall be
enclosed by a minimum four-foot-high fence and shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent residence whose owner is not
the owner of this use.
E. Satisfactory evidence must be presented to indicate that adequate
storage and disposal of animal waste will be provided in a manner that
will not create a public health hazard or nuisance.
F. All parking compounds and unimproved overflow parking areas shall be
set back at least 10 feet from adjoining lot lines. Unimproved overflow
parking areas shall also provide a fence delineating such occasional
parking facilities and preventing the parking and/or movement of
vehicles across neighboring properties. There shall be one space for
each nonresident employee and one space for every two equine animals
kept on the property.
A. Any structure used to display agricultural products in an R-1 District
shall not exceed 1,000 square feet in size. The sales area within any
structure shall not exceed 400 square feet.
B. No structure used to display agricultural products shall be located less
than 25 feet from any property line.
C. At least 1/2 of the products by sales volume displayed for sale must
have been produced on the premises.
A. The commercial school shall adhere to the following dimensional
characteristics with the exception of the Village (VIL) District, in which
case the requirements of the VB District shall take precedence.
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(2) Minimum setback requirements:
§ 245-14.55 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.57
227:843
§ 245-14.58. Semitrailer parking lots.
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 50 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum street frontage: 150 feet.
(4) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(5) Maximum lot impervious coverage: 70%.
(6) Minimum vegetative coverage: 30%.
B. Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students on the
site at any one time during a seven-day period.
C. Passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided and arranged so
that students do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the
site.
D. A traffic study is required. A traffic study shall be submitted by the
applicant in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance. The traffic study shall include at a
minimum the following study elements:
(1) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area
to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles
and convenient access to the development and nearby areas.
(2) A description of the location of bus stops to be conveniently
accessible for patrons traveling to and from the site by bus. The
location for a bus stop must be provided even if current bus service
is unavailable. The bus stop area shall include a shelter, seating,
waste receptacle and shaded area.
E. The subject property shall have frontage along a minor arterial or
collector street, as defined in the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive
Plan, as amended.
A. A semitrailer parking lot shall be permitted under this chapter only
where operated in connection with an existing warehouse,
transportation terminal, trucking terminal, manufacturing, or other
industrial use located on another lot. An applicant for a building and/or
zoning permit for a semitrailer parking lot shall be required to submit
evidence of an existing trucking terminal, transportation terminal,
warehouse, manufacturing, or other industrial use that the semitrailer
parking lot is to serve.
B. All semitrailers shall have a valid registration and safety inspection. The
Township shall be permitted to inspect semitrailers on the site
§ 245-14.57 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.58
227:844
§ 245-14.59. Shopping centers, malls, plazas and large commercial
establishments.
quarterly. Any violation of this standard shall be corrected within 30
days after notice of such violation is issued by the Township.
C. No toxic or hazardous substance or material shall be stored or
maintained in violation of any state or federal law or regulation. No
toxic or hazardous waste shall be stored in semitrailers or on the
premises.
D. The use of any semitrailer parking lot shall comply with the Diesel-
Powered Motor Vehicle Idling Act, 35 P.S. § 4601 et seq. Between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., no idling of motors or engines shall
be permitted and yard jockey trucks shall be utilized to pick up and
drop off semitrailers.
E. The use shall comply with all applicable noise standards of the
Township's ordinances.
F. In the Industrial District, where a buffer yard type 3 is installed on an
earthen berm having a maximum slope of three to one and having a
minimum height of five feet above grade, the required buffer yard width
may be reduced by a maximum of 50%.
G. Where screening, plantings or fencing has been installed, such
screening, plantings and fencing shall be permanently maintained. All
required plant materials which die shall be promptly replaced in
accordance with recognized nursery standards. All fencing shall be
maintained in good repair. Litter control measures shall be
implemented to prevent scattering of materials, and a plan for the
cleanup of litter shall be submitted to the Township's Zoning Officer or
other authorized Township official.
A. Shopping centers, malls, plazas and large commercial establishments
shall meet the following area, bulk and dimensional requirements:
Area, Bulk and Dimensional Requirements for Shopping Centers,
Malls, Plazas and Large Commercial Establishments
Requirements
Up to 50,000
Square Feet of
Gross Floor
Area
Between 50,000
and 100,000
Square Feet of
Gross Floor
Area
Over 100,000
Square Feet of
Gross Floor
Area
Minimum lot area In accordance with the district in which the use is
located.
Minimum lot width 250 feet 300 feet 500 feet
Minimum lot depth 250 feet 500 feet 750 feet
Minimum yard
setbacks
§ 245-14.58 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.59
227:845
Area, Bulk and Dimensional Requirements for Shopping Centers,
Malls, Plazas and Large Commercial Establishments
Requirements
Up to 50,000
Square Feet of
Gross Floor
Area
Between 50,000
and 100,000
Square Feet of
Gross Floor
Area
Over 100,000
Square Feet of
Gross Floor
Area
Front 50 feet for
buildings and
structures
50 feet for
buildings and
structures
50 feet for
buildings and
structures
Side 15 feet for
buildings and
structure
15 feet for
buildings and
structures
15 feet for
buildings and
structures
Rear 15 feet for
buildings and
structures, offstreet
parking
and loading
spaces and
dumpsters
15 feet for
buildings and
structures, offstreet
parking
and loading
spaces and
dumpsters
15 feet for
buildings and
structures, offstreet
parking
and loading
spaces and
dumpsters
Minimum setback
from residences or
residential zones**
50 feet for
buildings and
structures, offstreet
parking
and loading
spaces and
dumpsters
75 feet for
buildings,
structures,
loading spaces
and dumpsters,
and 50 feet for
off-street
parking*
75 feet for
buildings,
structures,
loading spaces
and dumpsters,
and 50 feet for
off-street
parking*
Minimum vegetative
coverage
35% 40% 45%
Minimum
impervious lot
coverage
65% 60% 55%
NOTES:
* The minimum setback may be reduced by 50 feet if buffer yard type 3 is
provided in accordance with § 245-16.5 and the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 220.
** The minimum setback for off-street parking and loading spaces shall not
be required for residences that are contained in mixed-use buildings
that also contain commercial uses.
B. No off-street loading or dumpsters shall be allowed in the front or side
yards.
C. All shopping centers, malls, plazas or large commercial establishments
shall be under unified management, which shall clearly establish
§ 245-14.59 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.59
227:846
centralized responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the
project including all common areas.
D. The shopping center, mall, plazas and large commercial establishments
shall be designed in accordance with a unified architectural theme.
Similar and complementary building dimensions, materials and
rooflines shall be designed for all proposed uses.
E. A landscaping plan for the entire tract shall be required. A landscape
architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
retained to complete such a plan to ensure the proper species, use and
arrangement of plant materials. All areas of the development not
covered by impervious surfaces shall be landscaped and maintained
with suitable ground cover and plants. Existing vegetation is
encouraged to be preserved for landscaping purposes.
(1) When deemed necessary by the decision-making body, earthen
berms shall be incorporated into the landscaping plan along public
street frontage and along property lines abutting existing
dwellings, in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.240
(2) Landscaped areas shall be continually maintained by the
landowner. Care, grooming and replacement of plants shall be
included as part of the required maintenance. Failure to adequately
maintain landscaped areas shall be subject to a citation issued by
the Township.
(3) Buffers and screens shall be in accordance with § 245-16.5 herein
and the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
F. A traffic study shall be submitted by the applicant in accordance with
the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. The traffic study shall include at a minimum the following
study elements:
(1) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area
to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles
and convenient access to the development and nearby areas.
(2) A description of the location of bus stops to be conveniently
accessible for patrons traveling to and from the site by bus. The
location for a bus stop must be provided even if current bus service
is unavailable. The bus stop area shall include a shelter, seating,
waste receptacle and shaded area.
G. All shopping centers, malls, plazas and large commercial
establishments shall front and have a full access driveway on an arterial
roadway or shall have direct access to an arterial roadway via a
240. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.59 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.59
227:847
collector or local street that intersects with an arterial roadway within
one-half mile of such use.
H. All access drives shall be set back at least 200 feet from the intersection
of any street right-of-way.
I. In addition to the above requirements, all large commercial
establishments and shopping centers, malls and plazas in excess of
25,000 square feet shall be subject to the following design
requirements:
(1) Building facades in excess of 100 horizontal feet shall incorporate
recesses and projections.
(2) Windows, awnings, and arcades must total at least 60% of the
facade length abutting a public street.
(3) Variation in rooflines is required to preclude the appearance of flat
roofs from all public and residential uses and districts;
furthermore, all rooftop mechanical equipment shall be fully
screened from all public and residential uses and districts.
(4) Each principal building shall have a clearly defined and visible
customer entrance. All sides of the principal building that directly
face an abutting public street shall feature at least one customer
entrance per street; however, in the case where the building may
face more than two streets, only two entrances shall be required.
(5) To complement existing commercial development and surrounding
residential neighborhoods, the following building materials and
colors are prohibited: smooth-faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete
panels, and prefabricated steel panels; high-intensity colors,
metallic colors, black or fluorescent colors are prohibited. Neon
tubing is prohibited as an accent material.
(6) Each shopping center, mall, plaza or large commercial
establishment shall provide at least two community amenities, such
as a patio/seating area, water feature, clock tower or pedestrian
plaza with benches, regardless if it is part of a shopping center,
mall or plaza. In the case of outdoor cafes, the sidewalk area shall
be increased to allow a six-foot obstacle-free pedestrian walkway.
(7) The following requirements address pedestrian safety.
(a) Perimeter sidewalks of at least eight feet in width shall be
provided along all sides of the lot that abut a public street.
(b) The perimeter sidewalks shall be connected to a continuous
internal pedestrian walkway the full length of building along
the facade featuring the principal customer entrance and
abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located
at least six feet from the facade of the building to provide
planting beds for foundation landscaping.
§ 245-14.59 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.59
227:848
§ 245-14.60. Shotgun, rifle, pistol or archery ranges (outdoor).
(8) The internal walkway shall include streetscape elements,
including, at a minimum, landscaping and benches for no less than
50% of its length.
(9) The internal walkway must provide a weather-protection feature
within 30 feet of the customer entrance.
(10) The internal walkway must be distinguished from driving surfaces
through the use of special pavers, bricks or scored concrete to
enhance pedestrian safety.
J. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
of Article XVII of this chapter. Parking areas shall be broken into
modules separated by landscaping and other features. No more than
50% of the off-street parking area shall be located between the front
facade and the street.
A. Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
C. Adjacent areas must be predominantly undeveloped and the range area
must be at least 200 feet from any property or street right-of-way line.
The use must also be located at least 1,000 feet from any existing
residential dwelling.
D. An earthen background berm must be provided within 20 feet of the
farthest target post to prevent wild or ricocheting bullets or wild or
stray arrows. The berm shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The berm shall have a slope of not less than one vertical to two
horizontal and must extend at least eight feet above the ground
level of the highest target.
(2) The crest of the berm at the eight-foot-minimum height limit shall
be at least four feet in width as measured between the wall of the
berm facing the range and the opposite wall.
(3) Earthen side berms, as described in Subsection D(1) and (2) above,
must be provided immediately adjacent to the range and shall
extend from the firing line to the background berm.
E. Only targets mounted on target posts shall be permitted. No targets of
any kind shall be set directly on the ground.
F. Warning signs must be posted at least 10 feet from the outside of the
berm.
G. The firing range shall be free of gravel and other hard surface materials
and be adequately drained.
H. Adult supervision must be provided for children under 16 years of age.
§ 245-14.59 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.61
227:849
§ 245-14.61. Single-family attached dwellings.
§ 245-14.62. Solar energy systems, accessory (ASES).
A. No more than eight units shall be attached in a row.
B. Lot area per dwelling unit shall not be less than the area required by
the district regulations.
C. Minimum habitable floor area shall be in accordance with § 245-16.7 of
this chapter.
D. Public water and public sewer shall be required.
E. In single-family attached buildings, staggered setbacks of individual
dwelling units accompanied by a variation in facade design are required
so the buildings offer visual variety, individualism, and provide private
yard areas. No more than two contiguous units shall have the same
facade setback within a building. Changes in unit setback shall involve
a minimum of four feet.
F. Entrances to dwelling units shall be provided with paved walkways to
parking and refuse collection points, if applicable.
G. A landscaping plan for the entire tract shall be required. A landscape
architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
retained to complete such a plan to ensure the proper species, use and
arrangement of plant materials. All areas of the development not
covered by impervious surfaces shall be landscaped and maintained
with suitable ground cover and plants. Existing vegetation is
encouraged to be preserved for landscaping purposes.
(1) When deemed necessary by the decision-making body, earthen
berms shall be incorporated into the landscaping plan along public
street frontage and along property lines abutting existing dwellings
in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.241
(2) Landscaped areas shall be continually maintained by the
landowner or a homeowners' association or a condominium
association. Care, grooming and replacement of plants shall be
included as part of the required maintenance. Failure to adequately
maintain landscaped areas shall be subject to a citation issued by
the Township.
(3) Buffers shall be in accordance with § 245-16.5 herein.
A. ASES are an accessory use permitted in all zoning districts.
B. ASES with an aggregate collection and/or focusing area of 10 square
feet or less are exempt from the requirements herein.
241. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.61 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.62
227:850
C. ASES constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be
required to meet the terms and conditions of this section. Any physical
modification to an existing ASES whether or not existing prior to the
effective date of this chapter that materially alters the ASES shall
require approval under this chapter. Routine maintenance or like-kind
replacements do not require a permit.
D. The ASES layout, design, installation, and ongoing maintenance shall
conform to applicable industry standards, such as those of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters
Laboratories (UL), the American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Solar
Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC), Electrical Testing
Laboratory (ETL), Florida Solar Energy Center (FSEC), or other similar
certifying organizations, and shall comply with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code as enforced by the Township, and with all
other applicable fire and life safety requirements. The manufacturer
specifications for the key components of the system shall be submitted
as part of the application.
E. Upon completion of installation, the ASES shall be maintained in good
working order in accordance with the standards of the Township codes
under which the ASES was constructed. Failure of the property owner
to maintain the ASES in good working order is grounds for appropriate
enforcement action by the Township in accordance with applicable
ordinances.
F. All on-site utility, transmission lines, and plumbing shall be placed
underground to the extent feasible.
G. The owner of an ASES shall provide the Township with written
confirmation that the public utility company to which the ASES will be
connected has been informed of the customer's intent to install a grid
connected system and approved of such connection. Off-grid systems
shall be exempt from this requirement.
H. The display of advertising is prohibited except for reasonable
identification of the manufacturer of the system.
I. Glare.
(1) All ASES shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or
glare does not project onto nearby structures or roadways.
(2) The applicant has the burden of proving that any glare produced
does not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or
adjacent uses either through siting or mitigation.
J. Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, applicants must acknowledge
in writing the following:
§ 245-14.62 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.62
227:851
(1) The issuing of said permit for a solar energy system shall not and
does not create in the property owner, its, his, her or their
successors and assigns in title or, create in the property itself: (a)
the right to remain free of shadows and/or obstructions to solar
energy caused by the development of adjoining or other property or
the growth or any trees or vegetation on such property; or (b) the
right to prohibit the development on or growth of any trees or
vegetation on such property.
(2) The applicant has notified the Township's Fire Chief or Fire
Marshal that an ASES will be installed on the property.
K. Decommissioning.
(1) Each ASES and all solar related equipment shall be removed within
12 months of the date when the use has been discontinued or
abandoned by system owner/operator, or upon termination of the
useful life of same.
(2) The ASES shall be presumed to be discontinued or abandoned if no
electricity is generated by such solar collector for a period of 12
continuous months.
(3) The ASES owner shall, at the request of the Township, provide
information concerning the amount of energy generated by the
ASES in the past 12 months.
L. Permit requirements.
(1) Zoning/building permit applications shall document compliance
with this section and shall be accompanied by drawings showing
the location of the system on the building or property, including
property lines.
(2) The zoning/building permit shall be revoked if the ASES, whether
new or preexisting, is moved or otherwise altered, either
intentionally or by natural forces, in a manner which causes the
ASES to not be in conformity with this chapter.
(3) The ASES must be properly maintained and kept free from all
hazards, including, but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose
fastenings, being in an unsafe condition or detrimental to public
health, safety, or general welfare. In the event of a violation of any
of the foregoing provisions, the Zoning Officer shall give written
notice specifying the violation to the owner of the ASES to conform
or to remove the ASES.
M. Roof-mounted and wall-mounted accessory solar energy systems.
(1) A roof-mounted or wall-mounted ASES may be located on a
principal or accessory building.
§ 245-14.62 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.62
227:852
§ 245-14.63. Solid waste processing and/or disposal facilities.
(2) ASES mounted on roofs or walls of any building shall be subject to
the maximum height regulations specified for principal and
accessory buildings within each underlying zoning district.
(3) Wall-mounted ASES shall comply with the setbacks for principal
and accessory structures in the underlying zoning district.
(4) Solar panels shall not extend beyond any portion of the roof edge.
(5) Roof-mounted solar panels shall be located only on a rear- or sidefacing
roofs as viewed from any adjacent street unless the
applicant demonstrates that, due to solar access limitations, no
location exists other than the street-facing roof, where the solar
energy system can perform effectively.
(6) For roof- and wall-mounted systems, the applicant shall provide
evidence that the plans comply with the Uniform Construction
Code and adopted building code of the Township that the roof or
wall is capable of holding the load imposed on the structure.
N. Ground-mounted accessory solar energy systems.
(1) A ground-mounted ASES shall meet the general requirements for
accessory buildings or structures as defined within § 245-13.2.
(2) The surface area of the arrays of a ground-mounted ASES,
regardless of the mounted angle of any solar panels, shall be
considered impervious and calculated in the lot coverage of the lot
on which the system is located.
(3) Ground-mounted ASES shall be screened from any adjacent
property that is residentially zoned or used for residential
purposes. The screen shall consist of plant materials which provide
a visual screen. In lieu of a planting screen, a fence may be
installed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(4) Appropriate safety/warning signage concerning voltage shall be
placed on ground mounted electrical devices, equipment, and
structures. All electrical control devices associated with the ASES
shall be locked to prevent unauthorized access or entry.
(5) Ground-mounted ASES shall not be placed within any legal
easement or right-of-way location, or placed within any stormwater
conveyance system or in any other manner that would alter or
impede stormwater runoff from collecting in a constructed
stormwater conveyance system.
A. The applicant shall obtain any required permit or permits from the
Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or any successor agency thereto, and shall present such
permit or permits to the Board of Commissioners.
§ 245-14.62 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.63
227:853
B. The applicant shall present duplicate sets of plans, specifications,
applications and supporting data that have been or shall be presented
to the Department of Environmental Protection for review to the Board
of Commissioners. If such conditional use is granted, the operator shall
continue to present such documentation to the Township when it is
submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
C. Operation of the facility shall at all times comply with all applicable
state and federal statutes and regulations. This shall include, but not be
limited to, the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act242 or any subsequent amendment or enactment of the
Pennsylvania General Assembly regulating waste recycling and
recovery, and the regulations of the Department of Environmental
Protection implementing such statutes.
D. Operation of the facility shall at all times comply with all applicable
regulations of the Cumberland County Solid Waste Authority or any
successor agency. Any permits or approvals required by such agency
shall be obtained by the applicant, and evidence of the grant of such
permits or approvals shall be submitted to the Township.
E. The minimum lot area shall be 50 acres for solid waste disposal
facilities and 10 acres for solid waste processing facilities.
F. A fence measuring eight feet high shall enclose the facility. The fence
used shall have openings less than three inches in any dimension, if any.
A vegetative screen must be provided along the outside of the fence,
facing away from the facility, with plantings at least 36 inches high and
placed in a double-staggered row with not less than five feet on center
between plants. The vegetation shall be of a variety to obtain a height of
at least eight feet at maturity. All screening shall be in accordance with
the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, and buffers yards required shall be in accordance with
§ 245-16.5 herein. The use shall be screened completely from normal
view.
G. The applicant shall demonstrate that the water supplies for neighboring
properties shall not be adversely affected by the proposed use. In order
to fulfill this requirement, the applicant shall submit to the Board of
Commissioners a hydrogeologic study performed by a qualified
hydrogeologist or other similar professional. Such study shall be
prepared in accordance with the accepted hydrogeological standards
and practices; shall contain the sources of all test data, including, but
not limited to, wells evaluated as a part of the study; and shall clearly
set forth the conclusions and recommendations of the professional.
H. The operator shall limit access to the site to those posted times when an
attendant is on duty. In order to protect the public health, safety and
242. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 245-14.63 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.63
227:854
welfare, access drives shall be secured by fences, gates, locks or other
means to deny access at unauthorized times.
I. Vehicular access shall be designed as to minimize danger and
congestion along adjoining roads and to avoid the creation of nuisances
to nearby properties.
J. Sufficiently long vehicle-stacking lanes (inspected and approved by the
Township Engineer or his/her designee) into the facility shall be
provided so that vehicles waiting to be weighed will not back onto
public roads.
K. All driveways onto the site shall be paved to a cartway width of 35 feet
for a distance of at least 200 feet from the street right-of-way line. In
addition, a one-hundred-foot-long crushed-stone section of access drive
shall be placed just beyond the preceding two-hundred-foot paved
section to help collect any mud that may be attached to a vehicle's
wheels.
L. The facility shall front upon and gain access from a minor arterial
roadway, as defined in the Upper Allen Township Comprehensive Plan,
as amended.
M. The applicant shall provide an analysis, prepared by a professional
engineer experienced in the field of traffic analysis, of the physical
conditions of the primary road system serving the site.
N. If the traffic study in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance243 demonstrates that
improvements to Township or state roads shall be required in order to
serve the proposed use or to alleviate the direct impacts of the
proposed use upon the traffic network, the applicant shall make such
improvements and/or provide or guarantee financial security in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of such improvement.
O. The operator shall maintain and make available to the public at its
office all permits and approved plans required by all governmental
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the permitting, operation,
maintenance and/or reclamation of such a facility.
P. The operator shall provide the Township with copies of any notices of
violation received from the Department of Environmental Protection or
United States Environmental Protection Agency within two weeks from
the date such notice of violation was received by the operator.
Q. The applicant shall submit an operating schedule to the Township for
review by the Zoning Officer.
243. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.63 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.63
227:855
§ 245-14.63.5. Special occasion facilities. [Added 2-7-2018 by Ord.
No. 776]
R. Litter control measures shall be implemented to prevent scattering of
materials and a plan for the cleanup of litter shall be submitted to the
Township's Zoning Officer or other authorized Township official.
S. All municipal waste awaiting recycling or resource recovery shall be
stored within an enclosed area bounded by solid walls or fences.
T. A three-hundred-foot setback shall be maintained from all property
lines during the operation of the recycling or resource recovery facility
within which recycling or resource recovery activities shall be
permitted.
U. No structures or parking areas shall be located closer than 300 feet to
any property line.
V. Where screening, plantings or fencing has been installed, such
screening, plantings and fencing shall be permanently maintained. All
required plant materials which die shall be promptly replaced in
accordance with recognized nursery standards. All fencing shall be
maintained in good repair.
W. The unloading, transfer and deposition of materials shall be
continuously supervised by a qualified facility operator. Vibrations and
emissions into the air shall not be permitted outside the property. All
regulations relating to the control of noise shall be observed.
A. One of the structures intended to accommodate guests must have been
in existence for at least 50 years.
B. There shall be a minimum lot area of 15 acres.
C. The property shall front on and gain direct access to a minor arterial or
collector road, as designated in the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
D. The combined floor area of all buildings intended to accommodate
guests shall not exceed 25,000 square feet.
E. Accommodations for overnight lodging at a special occasion facility
shall be limited to no more than 10 guest rooms and to no more than 20
guests at a given time. The guest rooms shall be rented to overnight
guests on a daily basis for periods not exceeding one week.
F. Catered food service from a licensed facility is permitted without
additional licensing requirements.
G. Outdoor music shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
§ 245-14.63 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.63.5
227:856
§ 245-14.64. Special occasion homes.
§ 245-14.65. Student housing.
§ 245-14.66. Taverns.
H. Notwithstanding the limitations in § 245-18.2, projecting signs, wall
signs and monument signs shall be permitted in compliance with Article
XVIII, Signs, in this chapter.
A. Special occasion functions may be conducted on the grounds
surrounding the home and in buildings accessory to a residential home.
B. Catered food service from a licensed facility is permitted without
additional licensing requirements.
C. The use of a residential dwelling for a special occasion home must be
approved by the Township's Sewage Enforcement Officer and the
system upgraded if necessary.
D. The source of water to be used by the special occasion home or inn shall
be a potable water source as certified by a test laboratory and a
certified provider.
E. All special occasion homes shall comply with the Federal Life Safety
Code, the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry, and all other applicable building, safety and fire
codes of the federal, state or local government.
A. Owners of student housing shall annually register and obtain a student
housing permit from the Township, providing the permitted number of
students. Inspection shall be performed prior to issuance of permits to
landlords to ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and shall be
reviewed on an annual basis.
B. One off-street parking space per occupant shall be provided for each
student housing property. Location of parking shall be in accordance
with Article XVII; stormwater management of the parking area shall be
in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.244
C. Student housing may not be located within 500 feet of another student
housing, group home or family care center, group quarters, or longterm
nursing center or personal care center.
D. The Zoning Officer or other duly authorized Township official shall keep
record of noise and other disorderly conduct complaints and report the
same to the Township police for follow-up and documentation.
Landlords' permits shall be revoked for repeated violations/citations of
four times within a twelve-month period.
244. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.63.5 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.66
227:857
§ 245-14.67. Transportation and trucking terminals.
§ 245-14.68. Vehicle body shops; repair garages.
A. The site shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from any school, child
or adult day-care facility, community activity center, cultural facility or
church or house of worship.
B. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to the use of adjoining properties, owing to hours of
operation, light, and/or litter.
C. The applicant shall furnish evidence as to how the use will be controlled
as to not constitute a nuisance due to noise or loitering outside of the
building. Noise levels shall not exceed 45 dBA or 5 dBA above ambient
noise levels as measured at the side and rear property lines.
D. Taverns shall only operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:30 a.m.
the following day.
E. All taverns shall comply with all state and local codes regulating such
establishments.
F. No tavern shall contain less than 300 square feet of usable floor area.
A. The facility shall front on and gain direct access to a minor arterial or
collector road, as designated in the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
B. Under no circumstances shall access to the terminal be through a
residential neighborhood.
C. The applicant shall furnish a traffic study prepared by a professional
traffic engineer in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. A traffic study shall be
submitted by the applicant in accordance with the Upper Allen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The traffic
study shall include at a minimum the following study elements:
(1) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area
to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles
and convenient access to the development.
(2) Specific documentation of anticipated truck volume, including data
collected at locally comparable sites.
A. All vehicle body service and/or repair activities shall be conducted
within a wholly enclosed building.
B. No outdoor storage of discarded parts, equipment, lubricants, fuel or
other materials shall be permitted.
§ 245-14.66 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.68
227:858
§ 245-14.69. Vehicle, mobile/manufactured homes or trailer sales
lot.
§ 245-14.70. Vehicle washes.
C. All exterior storage areas of vehicles, parts, equipment, lubricants, fuel
or other materials shall be screened from adjoining residentially zoned
or residentially used properties and roads in accordance with
§ 245-16.5 herein and the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
D. The storage of unlicensed vehicles for more than 90 days is prohibited.
E. Any ventilation equipment outlets associated with the service/repair
work area(s) shall not be directed towards any adjoining residentially
zoned or used property and conform to all outside agency
requirements.
F. Any use involving the generation of waste grease and/or oil shall be
required to collect these waste products. Such uses shall also
demonstrate a regular and proper means of disposal of such greases
and/or oils, as required by the applicable state and/or federal
regulations.
G. All vehicles shall be repaired and removed from the premises within 90
days.
H. The demolition or junking of vehicles, trailers, boats and other
machinery is prohibited.
A. No vehicle, mobile/manufactured home or trailer or display shall
occupy any part of the existing or future street right-of-way, required
parking area, or required buffer area.
B. All vehicle, manufactured/mobile home sales lot shall be screened from
adjoining residentially zoned properties as provided by § 245-16.5 of
this chapter and the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.245
A. All structures housing washing apparatus shall be set back at least 50
feet from the front street right-of-way line and 25 feet from any side
property line.
B. Trash receptacles must be provided and routinely emptied to prevent
the scattering of litter.
C. Each washing bay shall provide a forty-foot-long on-site stacking lane.
D. Direct access shall be provided from a minor arterial or collector road.
E. Public water and sewer shall be provided.
245. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-14.68 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-14.71
227:859
§ 245-14.71. Wholesaling, storage and warehousing.
A. The facility shall front on and gain direct access to a minor arterial or
collector road, as designated in the Upper Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
B. Under no circumstances shall access to the terminal be through a
residential neighborhood.
C. The applicant shall furnish a traffic study prepared by a professional
traffic engineer in accordance with the Upper Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. A traffic study shall be
submitted by the applicant in accordance with the Upper Allen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The traffic
study shall include at a minimum the following study elements:
(1) A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area
to ensure the safe movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles
and convenient access to the development.
(2) Specific documentation of anticipated truck volume, including data
collected at locally comparable sites.
§ 245-14.71 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-14.71
227:860
ARTICLE XV
Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Buildings
§ 245-15.1. Continuation of nonconforming uses and buildings.
All lawful uses of land, buildings, signs or other structures existing on
the effective date of this chapter may be continued, altered, restored,
reconstructed, sold or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 245-15.2. Existing nonconforming lots of record.
A. Continuation. Any nonconforming lot, due to its lot area or lot width,
existing as of the effective date of this chapter or created by an
amendment to this chapter, may be continued, although such lot does
not conform to the lot requirements for the district in which it is
located.
B. Development. The following requirements apply to the development
and use of the nonconforming lot.
(1) All the requirements of this chapter shall be met with the exception
of lot area and lot width. Furthermore, no lot shall be developed
unless the following requirements are met.
(a) Each lot shall have an approved on-lot water and wastewater
system or access to public water and public sewer. Additionally,
for those lots utilizing on-lot water, the minimum required
isolation distance between the well and the on-lot wastewater
system shall be provided.
(b) In residential districts, only one single-family dwelling may be
erected, and the following minimum side yards shall be
provided.
[1] Interior lots with a width of 50 feet or more, two side yards
shall be provided as required by the district regulations.
[2] Corner lots with a width of 50 feet or more, two front yards
shall be provided. The front yard opposite the interior side
yard may be reduced by the number of feet the lot width is
less than the district requires, but may not be reduced to
less than the minimum side yard. The side yard shall be
provided as required by the district regulations.
[3] On lots less than 50 feet but not less than 27 feet in width,
two side yards shall be provided, each equaling 20% of the
lot width.
(c) On a lot in a commercial or industrial district, the required side
yards shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board upon
§ 245-15.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-15.2
227:861
§ 245-15.3. Existing nonconforming uses and buildings.
application for a variance based on the same criteria as above
for residential structures.
(2) Where possible, contiguous parcels under common ownership shall
be replatted to create conforming lots.
(3) A nonconforming lot shall not be subdivided to create another
nonconforming lot.
A. Alterations and reconstruction.
(1) Repairs and structural alterations not constituting extensions,
expansions or enlargements may be made to a nonconforming
building or to a building occupied by a nonconforming use.
(2) A nonconforming building which is damaged by fire, explosion or
an act of God may be rebuilt and used for the same purposes,
provided that:
(a) The reconstruction of the building is commenced within one
year from the date of the destroying of the building and is
carried to completion without undue delay; and
(b) The reconstructed building does not exceed in height, area and
volume the building destroyed.
B. Extensions, expansions and enlargements. Land, building or buildings
occupied or used for residential or nonresidential purposes which are
nonconforming and otherwise not permitted in the zoning district in
which they are located shall be allowed to expand, extend or enlarge.
All extensions, expansions and enlargements of lawful nonconforming
uses and buildings shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) Any extension, expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming
building use shall be permitted as long as the maximum building
coverage is not exceeded.
(2) Any expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming building or use
shall not exceed 50% of the total gross floor area of the
nonconforming building from the time it became nonconforming.
(3) Any extension, expansion or enlargement shall conform to the
height, area, yard and coverage regulations of the district in which
it is located.
(4) All required parking spaces for any expansion or enlargement shall
comply with the requirements of Article XVII.
(5) Any extension, expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming
building or use shall not be permitted to extend into vacant parcels
§ 245-15.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-15.3
227:862
§ 245-15.4. Change of use.
Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use,
such use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use only by
special exception. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a
more restricted classification or to a conforming use, such use shall not
hereafter be changed to a use of less-restricted classification.
§ 245-15.5. Abandonment and discontinuance.
§ 245-15.6. Registration.
of land adjacent to the parcel containing the nonconforming
building or use, where such vacant parcels have been separately
recorded or acquired prior to the effective date of this chapter.
A. A nonconforming use shall be presumed abandoned when operations
associated with the nonconforming use have ceased by an apparent act
or failure to act on the part of the tenant or owner to reinstate such use
within one year from the date the activity stopped, and the use is not
actively advertised for sale or lease. Such nonconforming use shall not
thereafter be reinstated except in conformance with this chapter. A
nonconforming building or land which is actively marketed but has not
been sold or leased shall not be considered abandoned.
B. The removal of a nonconforming mobile home from the site it occupied
(and if such site is not leased, actively marketed, or purchased within
one year or less) shall constitute abandonment of the site so occupied,
and subsequent use of said site shall conform with the provisions of this
chapter.
C. The removal of a mobile home from a residential lot already occupied by
a residential building shall constitute abandonment of the
nonconforming use, and such use shall not thereafter be permitted.
D. Mobile home parks, trailer camps or trailer parks which are
nonconforming under the terms of this chapter shall be operated in
accordance with Public Health Regulations, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection, under the
provisions of the Act 175 of April 9, 1929, P.L. 177, as amended,246 and
all other applicable laws.
A. Nonconforming uses and structures may be reported to the Zoning
Officer by the owner, user, lessor, or lessee, and be registered by the
Zoning Officer within one year of the effective date of this chapter, in
which case the Zoning Officer shall certify the existence of the
nonconforming uses and/or structures.
246. Editor's Note: See 71 P.S. § 51 et seq.
§ 245-15.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-15.6
227:863
B. A certification of nonconformance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer
for all structures in conflict with the use designated for the zone in
which they are situated, when requested by the owner of such
structure.
C. Upon notification, each occupant or owner of a premises used for
nonconforming use shall make available to the Zoning Officer such
information as may be necessary to determine the extent and nature of
the nonconforming use.
D. Should a nonconforming use or building not be reported or identified,
the owner of the nonconforming use shall have the right to show by a
preponderance of the evidence to the Zoning Hearing Board that the
use or building was nonconforming upon the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 245-15.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-15.6
227:864
ARTICLE XVI
General Regulations
§ 245-16.1. Application.
The regulations contained in this article shall apply to all uses within the
Township.
§ 245-16.2. General requirements for accessory buildings or
structures.
§ 245-16.3. Specific requirements for accessory structures,
buildings and uses.
A. An accessory building or structure shall not be erected, set or placed in
the front yard of any zoning district, with the exception of security
guard stations and outdoor lighting fixtures.
B. An accessory building or structure may be erected, set, or placed inside
rear or side yards, provided that:
(1) The accessory building or structure shall be no closer than 10 feet
to the nearest wall of the principal or main building. Any accessory
building or structure erected, set or placed less than 10 feet from
the principal or main building shall be attached to the principal or
main building and shall be considered as part of that structure.
Decks, patios and arbors may be placed less than 10 feet from a
principal or main building provided they conform to the regulations
herein.
(2) When an accessory building or structure is to be erected, set or
placed in a side or rear yard, the accessory building or structure
shall be located not less than five feet from the lot lines for a
permanent structure or three feet for temporary structures.
C. An accessory building or structure shall be included in the lot coverage.
D. Except as exempt by the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, all
accessory buildings and structures shall be erected, set or placed in
accord with the Township Building Codes.
E. An accessory building or structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height
except for those listed under § 245-16.6 herein.
F. All accessory buildings or structures erected on Township-owned
property shall be exempt from the regulations herein.
A. Fences, walls and structures.
(1) No fence or wall (except a retainer wall of a building permitted
under this chapter) shall be erected to a height of more than 38
inches in a front yard and more than 74 inches in any other yard
within all zoning districts, except for the C-1, C-2, PO, INS, and IND
§ 245-16.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-16.3
227:865
Districts. In those districts, no fence, hedge or wall, shall be
erected to a height of more than eight feet in any yard. No fence
or hedge or wall shall block the clear sight triangle for a motorist's
view of vehicles entering or exiting the property, in accordance
with § 245-16.9 herein.
(2) Fences, walls and structures must not be located less than two feet
from the paved portion or berm of any private right-of-way or
public easements, including any roads, streets or alleys maintained
by either Upper Allen Township or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(3) Fences shall be finished on both sides in the same manner or, if
finished only on one side, then said fence shall be erected so that
the finished side faces outward away from the lot or parcel of
ground where the same is erected.
(4) Fences, walls and structures shall not be constructed or erected in
whole or in part from scrap metal, sheet metal, broken glass,
spikes, junk, sheets of plywood, plastic cloth, canvas or other like
material (unless manufactured for the purpose of fencing), and
shall be uniform in construction materials and design. All fences,
walls and structures shall be maintained in good condition and be
structurally sound at all times.
(5) No fence, wall or structure shall be permitted or erected in a public
or private drainage, utility or access easement. Any such fence
erected in violation of this section shall be removed or relocated at
the owner's expense.
(6) It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any fence over two feet
high without first having secured a zoning permit. Fences less than
two feet high shall be considered ornamental and shall not require
a permit. It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the approved
submitted plans and specifications unless such variations are
submitted in an amended application to the Zoning Officer or other
designated Township official and approved by this official.
(7) Application for such permits shall be made to the Zoning Officer
and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, in duplicate,
showing the work to be done; such plans shall be verified by the
signature of either the owner of the premises or the contractor in
charge of the operation. Payments for permit applications or
requests are due when such permits are approved.
(8) Such applications with plans shall be referred to the Zoning Officer,
who shall examine the same to determine whether the proposed
construction or alteration is in compliance with provisions of this
chapter relative thereto and shall issue or reject the permit, in
writing, within 15 working days from receipt of the application.
Upon approval, one set of plans shall be returned to the applicant
with a permit and the other shall be retained by the Zoning Officer
§ 245-16.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-16.3
227:866
or by the Zoning Officer's designee. No permit shall be issued until
after approval of the plans.
(9) The Zoning Officer shall make or cause to be made such inspection
as is necessary to see the enforcement of the provisions of this
section.
B. Manure storage facilities.
(1) All manure management practices and operations shall comply
with the provisions set forth in the Nutrient Management Act of
1993,247 or as amended.
(2) All waste storage facilities' designs shall be reviewed by the
Cumberland County Conservation District. The applicant shall
furnish a letter from the Conservation District attesting to approval
of the design of the proposed facility; and
(3) Construction and subsequent operation of the waste storage
facility shall be in accordance with the permit and the approved
design. Any design changes during construction or subsequent
operation will require the obtainment of another review by the
Cumberland County Conservation District.
C. Swimming pools. Every outdoor swimming pool must conform to all
applicable Township and state codes and shall be subject to the
following regulations:
(1) No swimming pool shall be constructed in the front yard.
(2) Swimming pool setback shall be a minimum of 10 feet from
property line to water's edge and seven feet from impervious
surface or support structure to property line.
(3) Water may not be discharged from a swimming pool directly onto
adjacent properties or rights-of-way.
(4) Pools shall not be located over an on-lot septic system drain field or
drainage, utility or access easement.
D. Forestry operations. To encourage maintenance and management of
forested or wooded open space and promote the conduct of forestry as a
sound and economically viable use of forested land and forestry
activities, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting, and to be in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended,248 forestry shall be a permitted use by right in all zoning
districts. The following standards apply to all timber harvesting within
the Township where the value of trees, logs or other timber products
removed exceed $1,000. These provisions do not apply to the cutting of
247. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 7-6-2005 by P.L. 112, No. 38. See now 3 Pa.C.S.A. §
501 et seq.
248. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 245-16.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-16.3
227:867
trees for the personal use of the landowner or for precommercial timber
stand improvement.
(1) Policy and purpose. In order to conserve forested open space and
the environmental and economic benefits it provides, it is the policy
of Upper Allen Township to encourage the owners of forestland to
continue to use their land for forestry purposes, including the longterm
production of timber, recreation, wildlife and amenity values.
The timber harvesting regulations are intended to further this
policy by promoting good forest stewardship, protecting the rights
of adjoining property owners, minimizing the potential for adverse
environmental impacts, and avoiding unreasonable and
unnecessary restrictions on the right to practice forestry.
(2) Notification and preparation of a logging plan.
(a) For all timber harvesting operations, the landowner shall notify
the Township Zoning Officer at least 10 business days before
the operation commences and within 10 business days before
the operation is complete. No timber harvesting shall occur
until the notice has been provided. Notification shall be in
writing and shall specify the land on which harvesting will
occur, the expected size of the harvest area and, as applicable,
the anticipated starting or completion date of the operation.
(b) Every landowner on whose land timber harvesting is to occur
shall prepare a written logging plan in the form specified by
this chapter. No timber harvesting shall occur until the plan
has been prepared. The provisions of the plan shall be followed
throughout the operation. The plan shall be available at the
harvest site at all times during the operation and shall be
provided to the Township Zoning Officer upon request.
(c) The landowner and the operator shall be jointly and severally
responsible for complying with the terms of the logging plan.
(3) Contents of the logging plan. As a minimum, the logging plan shall
include the following:
(a) The design, construction, maintenance and retirement of the
access system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails and
landings;
(b) The design, construction and maintenance of water control
measures and structures such as culverts, broad-based dips,
filter strips, and water bars;
(c) The design, construction and maintenance of stream and
wetland crossings; and
§ 245-16.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-16.3
227:868
(d) The general location of the proposed operation in relation to
municipal and state highways, including any accesses to those
highways.
(e) A sketch map or drawing containing the site location and
boundaries, including both the boundaries of the property on
which the timber harvest will take place and the boundaries of
the proposed harvest area within the property; significant
topographic features related to potential environmental
problems; location of all earth disturbance activities such as
roads, landings and water control measures and structures;
location of all crossings of waters of the commonwealth; and
the general location of the proposed operation to municipal
and state highways, including any accesses to those highways.
(f) Documentation of compliance with the requirements of all
applicable state regulations, including, but not limited to, the
following: erosion and sedimentation control regulations
contained in Title 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102,
promulgated pursuant to the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S.
§ 691.1 et seq.) and stream crossing and wetlands protection
regulations contained in Title 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter
105, promulgated pursuant to the Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.).
(g) Any permits required by state laws and regulations shall be
attached to and become part of the logging plan. An erosion
and sedimentation pollution control plan that satisfies the
requirements of Title 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, shall
also satisfy the requirements for the logging plan and
associated map specified above, provided all information
required is included or attached.
(4) Forest practices. The following requirements shall apply to all
timber harvesting operations in the Township.
(a) Felling or skidding on or across any public thoroughfare is
prohibited without the express written consent of the Township
or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever
is responsible for maintenance of the thoroughfare.
(b) No tops or slash shall be left within 25 feet of any public
thoroughfare or private roadway providing access to adjoining
residential property.
(c) All tops and slash between 25 and 50 feet of any public
roadway or private roadway providing access to adjoining
residential property or within 50 feet of adjoining residential
property shall be lopped to a maximum height of four feet
above the ground.
§ 245-16.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-16.3
227:869
(d) No tops or slash shall be left on or across the boundary of any
property adjoining the operation without the consent of the
owner thereof.
(e) Litter resulting from a timber harvesting operation shall be
removed from the site before it is vacated by the operator.
(5) Responsibility for road maintenance and repair: road bonding.
Pursuant to Title 75 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes,
Chapter 49; and Title 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189, the
landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing any
damage to Township roads caused by traffic associated with the
timber harvesting operation, to the extent the damage is in excess
of that caused by normal traffic, and may be required to furnish a
bond to guarantee the repair of such damages.
(6) Enforcement. The Township Zoning Officer shall be the
enforcement officer for the standards set forth herein.
(7) Inspections. The Township Zoning Officer may go upon the site of
any timber harvesting operation before, during or after active
logging to review the logging plan or any other required documents
for compliance with the standards and inspect the operation for
compliance with the logging plan and other on-site requirements of
these regulations.
(8) Violations notices; suspensions. Upon finding that a timber
harvesting operation is in violation of any provision of these
standards and regulations, the Township Zoning Officer shall issue
to the operator and the landowner a written notice of violation
describing each violation and specifying a date by which corrective
action must be taken. The Township Zoning Officer may order the
immediate suspension of any operation upon finding that corrective
action has not been taken by the date specified in a violation notice;
the operation is proceeding without a logging plan; or the
operation is causing immediate harm to the environment.
Suspension orders shall be in writing, shall be issued to the
operator and the landowner, and shall remain in effect until, as
determined by the Township Zoning Officer, the operation is
brought into compliance with the regulations herein or other
applicable statutes or regulations.
(9) Penalties. Any landowner or operator who violates any provision of
these regulations, refuses to allow the Township Zoning Officer
access to a harvest site pursuant to Subsection D(7) of this section,
or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or suspension order
issued under Subsection D(8) of this section, is guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500, plus costs, for each separate
offense. Each day of continued violation of any provisions shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 245-16.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-16.4
227:870
§ 245-16.4. Yard adjustment regulations.
Yards shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and shall be planted with grass, seed, sod, ground cover, mulch or other
pervious decorative or vegetative cover, excepting in cases where walks,
access drives, off-street parking lots, patios and other types of surfaces are
permitted by this chapter.
A. Front yards.
(1) Each lot shall have a front yard as required in the district in which
the lot is located.
(2) On corner, double frontage or multiple frontage lots, each side of a
lot having a street frontage shall meet the required front yard
setback, but if a yard borders Route 15, then that yard which
borders Route 15 shall be deemed to be a rear yard and shall meet
the rear yard setback.
(3) Infill lots (lots within developed blocks). The required setback shall
be the average of the setback of the existing principal buildings on
either side of the lot. If the lot is the last lot in the district or at the
end of the block or row of buildings, the front setback shall be
within plus or minus five feet of the adjacent existing principal
building setback on the developed side of the lot, unless the lot is
situated on a corner, in which case the building shall be set back a
distance that shall provide a clear site triangle at the intersection,
in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.249
B. Side yards. Side yards for corner lots. On a corner lot, the side yard
abutting the street shall have a width equal to the depth of the front
yard required in the district.
C. Rear yards. Notwithstanding other regulations herein, no rear yard
shall be reduced to less than 15 feet; therefore, no principal building
shall be constructed less than 15 feet from the rear property line.
D. Interior yards.
(1) Open space between principal buildings of a dwelling group on a
lot in single ownership shall be provided as follows, unless
otherwise stipulated under Article XIV for specific uses:
(2) When parallel or obliquely aligned, buildings shall have 50 feet
between front or rear faces for one story in height, plus five feet for
each additional story.
(3) Between end walls of buildings, a yard space of 25 feet for onestory
building plus five feet for each additional story shall be
required.
249. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-16.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-16.4
227:871
§ 245-16.5. General buffer regulations.
(4) Between end walls and front or rear faces of buildings, a yard space
of 30 feet for one story plus five feet for each additional story shall
be required.
(5) When two adjacent buildings differ in the number of stories, the
spacing shall be not less than 1/2 of the sum of the required
distance between two buildings of lower height plus that between
two buildings of the greater height.
(6) The minimum distance separating multiple-family buildings from
nonresidential uses shall be not less than 75 feet between
buildings.
E. Projection in yards.
(1) Cornices, eaves, gutters, bay windows or chimneys or similar
structures may project into the front, rear or side yard of a lot not
more than 18 inches.
(2) Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be
considered as part of the main building and shall not project into
any yard.
(3) Walks, stairs and window wells, and such other structures
customarily incidental to the main building, may project into the
front, side or rear yards of a lot, providing the structure elevation
shall be not more than 12 inches above the yard grade.
A. Upper Allen Township recognizes that the processes of development
can alter natural topography and vegetation, as well as cause other
negative impacts. The Township also recognizes that development
creates impervious cover, vehicular traffic, artificial light, increases in
air temperature, accelerated runoff, erosion, sedimentation, glare,
noise and incompatible uses of land which can negatively impact the
community's ecological balance, visual character and individual, as well
as community-wide, livability. The Township intends to protect and
enhance its economic base, quality of life, and community character by
encouraging quality development. Recognizing that the Upper Allen
Township Comprehensive Plan promotes the protection of health, safety
and welfare of the public and encourages quality development, this
section is adopted in order to: 1) aid and stabilize the ecological balance
of the environment in the Township; 2) provide buffers between uses of
different character and intensity; 3) enhance the Township's general
appearance; 4) safeguard and enhance property values; 5) protect
public and private investments; 6) conserve energy; and 7) protect
natural areas thereby providing natural habitats for wildlife.
B. Any nonresidential use adjoining a residential use in any zone shall
meet the following buffer yard type and width requirements, unless
§ 245-16.4 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-16.5
227:872
otherwise stipulated in this chapter. The buffer yard shall extend the
entire length or width of the property line of the adjoining zone or lot.
Buffer Yard Requirements
Buffer Yard
Type
Nonresidential or Mixed-Use
District*
Minimum Buffer
Yard Width
(feet)
1 VIL: Village 15
1 C-1: Neighborhood Commercial;
PRD: Planned Residential
Development
30
2 C-2: Highway Commercial; PO:
Professional Office; INS:
Institutional
30
3 IND: Industrial 50
NOTES:
* Applies only when the use in the mixed-use district is other than a
single-family residence.
C. Any lot used for other than a single-family detached or semidetached
residence in a residential or mixed-use zone and abutting an existing or
planned single-family detached or semidetached residence shall meet
the requirements for buffer yard type 1, unless otherwise stipulated in
this chapter.
D. Screening in the buffer yards shall be in accordance with the Upper
Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as
related to buffer yard types.
E. No buffer yard shall be required in the Village District; however, the
screening of buffer yard type 1 shall be required in the applicable
setback area in accordance with the Upper Allen Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.250 In the case of a lot used for
nonresidential or multifamily uses abutting another lot of similar use,
no buffer yard or screening is required.
F. All buffer yards shall meet the following requirements.
(1) No buffer yard or part thereof shall be used for parking, storage,
loading and unloading.
(2) Buffer yards may coincide within any required building setback.
(3) Buffer yards may be crossed by access roads, service drives or
easements with a maximum width of 35 feet, provided that the
center line of road, drive or easement crosses the lot line and buffer
250. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-16.5 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-16.5
227:873
§ 245-16.6. Height adjustments.
yard at not less than 75°; however, no turning or maneuvering of
vehicles shall be permitted in the buffer area.
(4) Buffer yards shall extend for the entire width of the property line
adjoining the residential property or district.
(5) All screening materials and landscaping shall not encroach upon
the adjoining property line at full maturity.
G. The buffer yard for any nonresidential use separated from a residential
use by a public road shall be reduced by one foot for every two feet of
the distance between the property line for which the buffer yard is
required and the center line of the public road but by not less than 1/2
of the original buffer.
A. The following structures shall not be in excess of 50 feet in height:
agricultural buildings, spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, chimneys,
ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads, utility poles, steeples or
towers, silos, barns intended for farming operations, and ornamental or
necessary mechanical appurtenances, including radio and television
antennas. Commercial radio and television antennas might be higher
and are permitted under the appropriate special exception or
conditional use provisions.
B. The permitted height in the following zoning districts may be increased
by one foot for each one foot that the width of each side yard exceeds
the minimum required and, in the case of more than one principal
building on a single lot, for each one foot that the separation distance
between buildings is increased, providing that no buildings exceed the
maximum height for the district listed below:
(1) R-3, C-1, C-2, PRD shall not exceed 45 feet, except that multifamily
dwellings in the R-3 District shall be permitted to have a maximum
height of 55 feet if a parking garage is not provided on the first
floor of a building or 65 feet if a parking garage is provided on the
first floor of the building; provided that, for each additional one foot
above the 45 feet the width of each side yard is further increased
by two feet, or in the case of more than one principal building on a
single lot, the separation distance between buildings is further
increased by two feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing, multifamily
dwellings in the R-3 District shall not have more than three
habitable floors.
(2) Continuing care retirement community, long-term care facility and
personal care facility uses in the R-2 District shall not exceed 45
feet and/or three stories.
(3) PO, INS, and IND shall not exceed 55 feet, except that motels/
hotels with conference/convention centers in the PO District shall
be permitted to have a maximum height of 85 feet, provided that
§ 245-16.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-16.6
227:874
§ 245-16.7. Habitable floor area.
The minimum habitable floor area of a dwelling unit or any building or
structure hereafter erected or used for living purposes shall be 600 square
feet. In case of apartment houses, accessory dwelling units, conversion
apartments and mobile homes, the minimum habitable floor area shall be
not less than 400 square feet, except those apartments designed for and
occupied exclusively by one person, which apartment shall contain not less
than 350 square feet of habitable floor area.
§ 245-16.8. Unenclosed storage.
§ 245-16.9. Clear sight triangle, sight distance.
for each additional one foot above the 55 feet the width of each
side yard is further increased by two feet, or in the case of more
than one principal building on a single lot, the separation distance
between buildings is further increased by two feet.
A. Outdoor stockpiling. In all zones, no outdoor stockpiling of any material
is permitted in the front yard.
B. Dumpsters. All permanent trash dumpsters shall be located within a
side or rear yard, screened from adjoining roads and properties, and
completely enclosed within a sight-tight masonry or fenced enclosure
equipped with a self-latching door or gate, with the exception that
dumpsters located in the agriculture district shall not be required to be
screened or enclosed with fencing. Dumpsters shall be screened in
accordance with § 220-26.B(1)(e) and § 220-30 of the Upper Allen
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.251
C. Domestic composts. The placement of framed enclosure composts as an
accessory residential use is permitted, subject to all accessory use
setbacks. Only waste materials from the residential site shall be
deposited within the compost and in no case shall meat, or meat byproducts,
be composted. All composts shall be properly maintained so
as not to become a nuisance to nearby properties.
A. In a clear sight triangle, no walk, fence, sign or other structure shall be
erected or altered and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be
maintained or permitted between three and eight feet above grade
which may cause danger to traffic or a street or public road by
obscuring the view.
B. A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all intersections of streets
with streets, drives, drives with streets and private roads with streets,
within which no structure or growing material shall exceed a height of
three feet above the grade of the street, drive or road, and no branch of
251. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-16.6 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-16.9
227:875
§ 245-16.10. Performance standards for all uses.
All uses shall be subject to and comply with the following regulations, or as
amended, where applicable.
a tree or sign of any kind shall be lower than the nine feet above the
grade of the street, drive or road. The clear sight triangle shall be:
(1) Seventy-five feet measured along the center lines of intersecting
streets.
(2) Forty feet measured along the center line of a private drive or
private road and the intersected street.
A. Noise pollution and vibration: rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Air pollution, airborne emissions and odor: rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
C. Water pollution: the Clean Streams Law, June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, 35
P.S. § 691, or as amended.
D. Mine reclamation and open pit setback: Pennsylvania Act 147, the
Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act of 1971, or as
amended.252
E. Glare and heat: rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection.
F. No use or operation shall be permitted which creates a public nuisance
or hazard to adjoining property by reason of fire, explosion, radiation or
other similar cause.
G. Outdoor lighting. Where light fixtures are installed to provide exterior
illumination, excluding overhead streetlighting and warning,
emergency or traffic signals, the following restrictions shall apply.
These standards will apply to all uses (except single-family dwellings).
(1) All outdoor lighting, whether or not required by this chapter; shall
have intensities and uniformity ratios in accordance with the
current recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America (IESNA), as contained in the IESNA
Lighting Handbook.
(2) All future amendments to the recommended practices of the IESNA
shall be made a part of the chapter without further action by the
Board of Commissioners.
(3) Streetlighting fixtures, when required for safety considerations,
may be controlled by photocells for dusk to dawn operation.
252. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 1396.1 et seq.
§ 245-16.9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-16.10
227:876
(4) The lighting from any luminary shall be shaded, shielded or
directed to prevent direct light from being distributed beyond an
angle of 35° from a vertical plane onto adjacent properties and/or
surrounding areas. Unshielded lighting is not permitted, except for
temporary holiday lighting.
(5) Lighting shall be designed so that glare or direct illumination does
not exceed one footcandle beyond the property line on which the
lighting originates.
(6) Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by fixtures mounted on
top of the sign and aligned down rather than by fixtures mounted at
the bottom of the sign and aimed up. Sign lighting shall be
equipped with timers and extinguished between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and dawn.
(7) Such lighting on private, residential, commercial, industrial,
municipal, recreational or institutional property shall be aimed,
located, designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a
hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely
traverse (i.e., disabling glare).
(8) Pole-mounted lamps shall be placed directly above the area to be
illuminated and shielded at the top and sides or positioned near the
perimeter of a property and aimed toward the area requiring
illumination, subject to applicable yard setback provisions.
(9) Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary
means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved
primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields
and baffles, and appropriate application of mounting height,
wattage, aiming angle, fixture placement, etc.
(10) The installation or erection of any lighting which may be confused
with warning signals, emergency signals or traffic signals shall not
be permitted.
(11) Lighting of parking lots shall be in accordance with § 245-17.7
herein.
(12) Maintenance. Lighting fixtures shall be maintained so as to always
meet the requirements of this chapter.
(13) Nonconforming lighting. Any lighting fixture existing on the
effective date of this chapter which does not conform with the
requirements of this chapter shall be considered a lawful,
nonconforming lighting fixture. A nonconforming lighting fixtures
shall be made to comply with the requirements of this chapter
when such fixture is replaced, relocated or repaired.
§ 245-16.10 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-16.10
227:877
§ 245-16.11. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in all districts within Upper Allen
Township:
§ 245-16.12. Waste and sewage disposal.
All methods and plans for the on-lot disposal of sewage or wastes shall be
designed in accordance with all applicable regulations pertaining to the
treatment and disposal of sewage and wastes. A certificate or statement
of adequacy from the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, as applicable, shall
be prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit.
§ 245-16.13. Parking and storage of unlicensed, uninspected or
inoperable motor vehicles.
H. Subdivision and land developments shall be reviewed in accordance
with the requirements of the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.253
I. Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of
July 28, 1988, P.L., No. 101 (Act 101), as amended.254
J. Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535,
No. 537, as amended.255
A. The incineration, reduction or storage of offal, animals, fish or refuse,
unless by the authority of or under the supervision of Upper Allen
Township.
B. The incineration or reduction of garbage and grass clippings.
C. Dumps and dumping of any kind, other than solid waste landfill and
composting, unless by the authority of or under the supervision of
Upper Allen Township.
A. Motor vehicles without current, valid license plates or inspection
stickers which are more than 60 days beyond their expiration dates,
inoperable or dismantled shall not be parked or stored in any zoning
district, unless stored within a completely enclosed building or
completely covered. The provisions for a safety inspection sticker shall
not apply to an antique vehicle that is not required to have such a
sticker under state law, provided such vehicle still displays current
registration and is operable.
253. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
254. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
255. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 245-16.10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-16.13
227:878
§ 245-16.14. Repair of personal motor vehicles.
The routine maintenance, repair and servicing of personal motor vehicles,
including go-carts and racing vehicles, owned or leased by the person
performing such services when performed outside of a building within any
zone, is permitted by an occupant of the residence, subject to the following:
B. The requirements of this section shall not apply to farm implements and
other farm vehicles not normally used as a means of conveyance on
public streets.
C. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prevent the unenclosed
storage of motor vehicles without current, valid license plates and
current valid inspection stickers if such storage is performed in
conjunction with the legal operation of a motor vehicles sales
establishment, a motor vehicle service or repair establishment, or a
junkyard.
A. All vehicles shall be maintained with proper licensure.
B. All work shall be performed on the vehicle owner's or lessee's property
of residence.
C. Work shall be limited to the following:
(1) Servicing and replacement of spark plugs, batteries, distributors
and distributor parts;
(2) Repair and replacement of tires and wheels, excluding recapping
or regrooving;
(3) Replacement of water hoses, fan belts, brake fluids, transmission
fluids, oil filters, air filters, oil, grease, light bulbs, floor mats and
carpeting, seat covers, seat belts, windshield wipers, mirrors and
engine coolants;
(4) Repair and replacement of car radios, CD players, amplifiers,
speakers, and similar electronic devices;
(5) Cleaning and flushing of radiators only when flushed into a watertight
container;
(6) Repair and replacement of fuel pump and line repairs;
(7) Minor servicing and adjustments;
(8) Minor motor adjustments, not involving the removal of the motor
head or crankcase, or the prolonged revving of the motor;
(9) Minor body repairs, excluding the replacement of body parts, the
complete repainting of the body and the application of
undercoating;
§ 245-16.13 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-16.14
227:879
§ 245-16.15. Temporary construction building or trailer.
Temporary construction buildings or trailers may be installed on a property
during construction of a permanent building or structure, so long as the
construction trailer is not used as a dwelling and is located in accordance
with principal building requirements set forth in this chapter which are
applicable to the district in which the property is located. All temporary
construction buildings or trailers shall be removed within 14 days of
completion of construction of the permanent building or buildings, or within
14 days of the expiration of the zoning and/or building permit for the
project, whichever first occurs.
§ 245-16.16. Sale of personal vehicles.
In any zone, a landowner or occupant may display a maximum of one
personal passenger or recreational vehicle for sale at any time. Such
displays shall be a maximum of 60 days not more than twice a calendar
year. One sign not exceeding six square feet may be displayed for sale of
the vehicle. All vehicle sale activities shall be in accordance with applicable
state regulations.
(10) Cleaning of all exterior and interior surfaces, including washing,
shampooing, vacuuming, ribbing, polishing, waxing, and the
application of paint sealants.
D. All by-products or waste fuels, lubricants, chemicals, and other
products shall be properly disposed of.
E. No vehicle shall be stored in a "jacked-up" position or on blocks for
more than 72 consecutive hours, unless completely covered.
F. All work performed outside shall be performed during daylight hours, in
accordance with Chapter 181 of the Township Code.256
256. Editor's Note: See Ch. 181.
§ 245-16.14 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-16.16
227:880
ARTICLE XVII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 245-17.1. General parking regulations.
A. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided to lessen congestion in the
streets. The facilities required herein shall be available to patrons
throughout the hours of operation of the particular business or use for
which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term "parking
space" includes either covered garage space or uncovered parking
space located off the public right-of-way. Residential off-street parking
space shall consist of a parking lot, driveway, garage or combination
thereof and shall be located on the lot it is intended to serve.
B. Outdoor parking space shall not be deemed to be part of the open space
of the lot on which it is located, unless designated as overflow parking
in accordance with specific use regulations in Article XIV of this
chapter.
C. A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of
the principal building or attached to the outside walls.
(1) In the case of single-family residential uses, the garage may be
separated from the principal building; the garage shall conform to
all accessory or building requirements.
(2) In the case of multifamily and nonresidential uses, freestanding
parking garages, whether above or below ground, are encouraged
but must conform to all bulk and area requirements for the district
in which they are located.
(3) Garages may be constructed under a yard or court, provided that
the level of such yard or court shall conform to the general level of
the other yards or courts on the lot. The space above an
underground garage shall be deemed to be part of the open space
of the lot on which it is located, unless it has surface parking above
said garage, in which case it shall not count as open space.
D. No part of any required front yard shall be used for off-street parking
requirements in residential districts as set forth herein except for that
part of the front yard that is occupied by the driveway leading to a
garage or parking area or as otherwise needed to comply with
§ 245-17.6.A(3), which requires providing a backup area for end stalls.
At the street right-of-way, a driveway shall be limited to 24 feet in width.
All required parking spaces under this chapter must be located on the
lot area, unless the applicant meets the requirements of § 245-17.4,
Joint parking facilities.
E. For residential dwellings, parking and storage of personal vehicles,
boats, campers, and other recreational vehicles shall be permitted in
the front yard within a designated driveway or parking area. Outdoor
parking areas and storage of vehicles, boats, campers, and other
§ 245-17.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-17.1
227:881
§ 245-17.2. Off-street parking requirements.
recreational vehicles may also be provided along the side or rear yard
provided that:
(1) The parking area and approaches thereto shall be comprised of a
paved or other stabilized surface.
(2) Parking areas shall be set back behind the front building line.
(3) Parking areas shall not block access to a vehicle parking in a
garage.
(4) Parking areas for single-family units shall be set back three feet
from each side lot line.
(5) Parking areas shall be ample in size for the use in which it is
intended.
(6) No living quarters shall be maintained or any business conducted
in connection with such vehicle while the vehicle is parked or
stored on the property.
(7) All vehicles shall be current on inspection and registration if
parked or stored outside of a garage in accordance with the
requirements of § 245-16.13, Parking and storage of unlicenced,
uninspected or inoperable motor vehicles.
(8) The wheels of a recreational vehicle, boat or camper shall be
blocked or otherwise rendered immobile so as to prevent
accidental movement during storage.
(9) Parking areas shall comply with all other provisions set forth in this
chapter.
F. No vehicle, camper, boat or recreational vehicle shall block the
required sight distance or a public sidewalk.
A. The following off-street parking requirements shall be minimum
standards for uses as defined in Table XVII-1: [Added 2-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 776]
Table XVII-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
# Use Type
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
Residential Uses
1 Apartment,
accessory
1 space per unit, plus the required spaces for
the principle use
2 Apartment,
conversion
2 spaces per dwelling unit
§ 245-17.1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-17.2
227:882
Table XVII-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
# Use Type
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
3 Continuing care
retirement
communities
Combination of the following service area:
[a] Personal care or nursing facilities: 1 space
for each 4 beds, plus 1 space per employee
on largest shift
[b] Apartment units: 1.25 spaces per dwelling
unit (round total up to next whole space)
[c] Cottage units (single-family units): 1 space
per dwelling unit, plus 1 space per 5 units
for guest parking
4 Group home 1 space per 2 beds, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift
5 Group quarters 1 space per student or bed
6 Halfway house 1 space per 2 beds, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift
7 Long-term,
personal care and
nursing care
facilities
1 space for each 4 beds, based on design
capacity, plus 1 space for each employee on the
largest shift
8 Multiple-family
dwelling
2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1 space per 4
units for guest parking
9 Rooming and
boarding houses
1 space per bedroom or guest sleeping room,
plus 2 spaces for permanent residents
10 Single-family
dwelling, detached
2 spaces per dwelling unit
11 Single-family
dwelling,
semidetached or
attached
2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1 space per 4
units for guest parking
12 Student housing 1 space per student
13 Two-family
dwelling
2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1 space per 4
units for guest parking
Nonresidential Uses, Institutional, and Recreational Uses
14 Airports Parking and traffic study required
15 Animal hospital 1 space for every 15 animals of capacity, plus 1
space for each employee on the largest shift
§ 245-17.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-17.2
227:883
Table XVII-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
# Use Type
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
16 Art gallery/ studio 1 space for each 250 square feet of floor area
open to the public, plus 1 space for each
employee
17 Assembly halls 1 space for each 3 seats or 1 space per 200
square feet of gross floor area where no seats
are provided
18 Auditorium 1 space for each 3 seats or 1 space per 200
square feet of gross floor area where no seats
are provided
19 Banks and financial
institutions
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
20 Bed-and-breakfast
inn and homes
1 space per guest room, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift; spaces associated
with meeting rooms (1 space per 400 square feet
of public meeting area), restaurants and related
facilities shall be in addition to these
requirements
21 Billiards room 4 spaces per table
22 Bowling alley 5 spaces for each alley
23 Business,
professional, or
public service office
buildings
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
24 Cemeteries Parking and traffic study required
25 Clubs, lodges or
other similar
commercial
recreation
buildings
1 space for each 100 square feet of gross floor
area or of water area in a swimming pool
26 Colleges,
universities, or
business, technical,
fine arts schools or
academic clinical
research centers
1 space for each full-time employee (regardless
of shift) plus 3 spaces for every 4 on-campus
students; in addition to the above spaces, spaces
shall be provided in accordance with this
schedule for all new or expanded outdoor and
indoor recreation facilities, cultural facilities,
churches and religious institutions and day-care
centers
27 Community
buildings and social
halls
1 space for each 100 square feet of gross floor
area
§ 245-17.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-17.2
227:884
Table XVII-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
# Use Type
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
28 Contractor's office 1 space per 200 feet of gross floor area, not to
include areas used for storage
29 Convenience stores 1 space per 200 square feet of retail floor area
30 Cultural facilities 1 space for each 250 square feet of floor area
open to the public, plus 1 space for each
employee
31 Dance halls 1 space for each 100 square feet of gross floor
area
32 Day-care centers 1 space for every employee on the largest shift,
plus 1 space for every 6 students, and off-street
waiting spaces to accommodate at least six
automobiles
33 Emergency medical
treatment facility
1 space per 3 beds or examination rooms, plus 1
space for each employee on the largest shift
34 Farmers markets 1 space per 200 square feet of retail floor area
35 Funeral homes 1 space per 4 seats provided for patron use by
design capacity, plus 1 additional space for each
full-time employee and each vehicle maintained
on the premises
36 Gasoline stations 2 spaces for each service by area, plus 1
additional space for each full-time employee on
the largest shift, but in no event less than 1
space per 400 square feet of gross floor area
37 Golf course 60 spaces per 9 holes, plus 1 space per
employee on the largest shift, plus 50% of the
spaces otherwise required for any accessory
uses (e.g., restaurants)
38 Golf driving range
and miniature golf
1 space for each tee or hole, plus 50% of the
spaces otherwise required for accessory uses
39 Heliports and
helistops
Parking and traffic study required
40 Hospital 1 space for each 3 beds, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift
41 Hotels 1 space per guest room, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift; spaces associated
with meeting rooms (1 space per 400 square feet
of public meeting area), restaurants and related
facilities shall be in addition to these
requirements
§ 245-17.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-17.2
227:885
Table XVII-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
# Use Type
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
42 House of worship 1 space for each 4 seats in a place of worship
43 Junkyard Parking and traffic study required
44 Kennel 1 space for every 15 animals of capacity, plus 1
space for each employee on the largest shift
45 Landscaping and
garden service,
non-retail
1 space per employee on the largest shift, plus 1
space per business vehicle
46 Landscaping and
garden service,
retail
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift,
plus 1 space per 500 square feet of outdoor
display area
47 Laundry and drycleaning
establishments
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
48 Library 1 space for each 250 square feet of floor area
open to the public, plus 1 space for each
employee
49 Manufacturing
plants
1 space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space for each 2 employees on the largest
shift
50 Medical and dental
offices, including
outpatient clinics
5 spaces for each doctor or dentist
51 Medical marijuana
transport vehicle
office
1 space per employee on the largest shift, plus 1
space per business vehicle
52 Microbrewery 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
or 1 space per person, whichever is greater
53 Microdistillery 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
or 1 space per person, whichever is greater
54 Mill 1 space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space for every 2 employees on the
largest shift
55 Mini or self storage 1 space per 10 storage units, plus 1 space per
employee
56 Mobile/
manufactured
home sales lot
1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space per 3,000 square feet of outdoor
sales area, plus 1 additional space for each fulltime
employee
§ 245-17.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-17.2
227:886
Table XVII-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
# Use Type
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
57 Mortuaries 1 per employee on the largest shift
58 Motels 1 space per guest room, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift; spaces associated
with meeting rooms (1 space per 400 square feet
of public meeting area), restaurants and related
facilities shall be in addition to these
requirements
59 Museum 1 space for each 250 square feet of floor area
open to the public, plus 1 space for each
employee
60 Nightclub 1 space for each 100 square feet of gross floor
area
61 Outdoor
recreational
facilities
1 space for each 3 seats or 1 space per 200
square feet of gross floor area where no seats
are provided
62 Personal services
(not specifically
mentioned in the
table within)
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
63 Power generating
facilities
1 space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space for every 2 employees on the
largest shift
64 Racetrack Parking and traffic study required
65 Research or testing
laboratories
1 space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space for each 2 employees on the largest
shift
66 Resorts 1 space per guest room, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift; spaces associated
with meeting rooms (1 space per 400 square feet
of public meeting area), restaurants and related
facilities shall be in addition to these
requirements
67 Restaurants 1 space for every 4 seats of design capacity, plus
1 space for every 2 employees on the largest
shift
68 Retail, business or
sales
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
69 Roller rink 1 space for each 100 square feet of gross floor
area
§ 245-17.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-17.2
227:887
Table XVII-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
# Use Type
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
70 Schools,
elementary and
middle
1 space for each 15 students of design capacity,
plus required spaces for uses provided by the
facility other than classrooms as regulated by
this schedule
71 Schools, high 1 space per 4 students of design capacity, plus 1
space per teacher and staff member, plus
required spaces for uses provided by the facility
other than classrooms as regulated by this
schedule
72 Shotgun, rifle,
pistol, or archery
range
1 space per firing lane and/or target, plus 1
space per employee on the largest shift
73 Solid waste
processing and/or
disposal facilities
1 space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space for each employee on the largest
shift
74 Special occasion
facilities
1 space per guest room, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift, plus 1 space for
each 400 square feet of public meeting area
75 Special occasion
homes
1 space per guest room, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift; spaces associated
with meeting rooms (1 space per 400 square feet
of public meeting area), restaurants and related
facilities shall be in addition to these
requirements, plus 2 spaces for residential
occupants of the special occasion home
76 Sports arenas 1 space for each 3 seats or 1 space per 200
square feet of gross floor area where no seats
are provided
77 Studio, dance or
music
1 space for every 2 students, plus 1 space for
each employee
78 Swimming pools [a] Commercial swimming pools, public or
private: 1 space for each 100 square feet of
gross floor area or of water area in a
swimming pool
[b] Neighborhood or development swimming
pools (within the same development): 1
parking space per employee, plus 1 space
per 200 square feet of public meeting space
in a separate or attached building
79 Tavern 1 space per 50 square feet of gross floor area
§ 245-17.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-17.2
227:888
Table XVII-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
# Use Type
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
80 Theaters 1 space for each 3 seats or 1 space per 200
square feet of gross floor area where no seats
are provided
81 Trailer sales lot 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space per 3,000 square feet of outdoor
sales area, plus 1 additional space for each fulltime
employee
82 Transportation or
truck terminal
1 space for every 200 square feet of floor area
for waiting room or office space, plus 1 space for
each employee on the largest shift
83 Vehicle body shop 2 spaces for each service bay area, plus 1
additional space for each full-time employee on
the largest shift, but in no event less than 1
space per 400 square feet of gross floor area
84 Vehicle repair
garage
2 spaces for each service bay area, plus 1
additional space for each full-time employee on
the largest shift, but in no event less than 1
space per 400 square feet of gross floor area
85 Vehicle sales lot 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space per 3,000 square feet of outdoor
sales area, plus 1 additional space for each fulltime
employee
86 Vehicle wash 3 spaces for each washing bay
87 Warehouse 1 space for every 200 square feet of floor area
for waiting room or office space, plus 1 space for
each employee on the largest shift
88 Wholesale
establishments
1 space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space for each 2 employees on the largest
shift
B. When the computation of the required off-street parking spaces results
in a fraction, the requirement shall be rounded to the nearest whole
interval.
C. When the parking requirements are not specified herein for a building
or use for which an application for a permit has been filed or where the
proposal contemplates a mix of uses and parking requirements, the
Zoning Officer shall make the determination of which parking
requirement standards shall apply in order to ensure that adequate offstreet
parking spaces are provided to serve the needs of the proposed
uses in conformance with the standards set forth herein and upon
§ 245-17.2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-17.2
227:889
§ 245-17.3. Location of parking spaces.
§ 245-17.4. Joint parking facilities.
consideration of all factors entering into the parking needs of each such
use.
D. For a building or use where a parking and traffic study is required, the
applicant shall submit a plan to include rationale justifying the number
of parking spaces and loading and unloading spaces for the proposed
building or use. The plan should cite information on parking demands,
hours of operation, pedestrian access, off-site parking combinations
and other variables which would influence the number of parking
spaces provided on site. The provisions of the study shall also comply
with § 220-11.F of the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.257 The Zoning Officer shall review and
approve the number of parking spaces and loading and unloading
spaces prior to land development plan approval, zoning permit
approval, or building permit approval, whichever is required. The
applicant may appeal the Zoning Officer's decision to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
E. For nonresidential uses within the VIL District, there shall be no
minimum parking requirements.
F. Off-street parking and loading spaces as required by this section shall
be provided for all new buildings, additions to buildings, expansions of
use and changes in use.
A. Parking spaces for multiple-dwelling buildings, commercial or
industrial uses shall be on the same lot as the principal building or open
area conforming to the following regulations, unless the applicant
meets the requirements of § 245-17.4, Joint parking facilities.
B. Parking spaces for uses other than single-family detached dwellings
shall not be permitted in any front yard of a lot located in the C-1
District.
C. The required parking spaces, except for colleges and universities, shall
be suitable within 600 feet of the principal building or open space.
D. Such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the principal use to
which they are accessory and shall be subject to deed restrictions
acceptable to the Board, binding the owner and heirs or assigns to
maintain the required number of parking spaces throughout the life of
the principal use.
A. Joint parking facilities shall be allowed in the VIL, C-1, C-2, PO, INS,
IND, and PRD Districts and between nonresidential and multifamily
uses in any district.
257. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-17.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-17.4
227:890
§ 245-17.5. Parking reductions.
B. Joint parking facilities shall be allowed on separate lots subject to the
following requirements.
(1) The nearest point of the parking lot shall be no further distance to
the nearest point of the property served, as provided below:
(a) Residential use: 200 feet.
(b) Commercial use: 300 feet.
(c) Industrial use: 300 feet.
(2) The required parking shall be not less than the total required
separately for each use, with the following exceptions:
(a) It shall be demonstrated that the uses jointly utilizing the
parking facility are utilizing the same at different periods of the
day or different days of the week. A reduction may be granted
by the Zoning Officer for the total number of parking spaces
needed, requiring only the number of spaces needed based on
the one use of the facility requiring the most spaces.
(b) If Subsection B(2)(a) does not apply, then, to encourage joint
use of facilities in areas of contiguous commercial development
fronting on a collector or an arterial roadway, a parking
reduction may be granted by the Board of Commissioners in
those areas which demonstrate safe and convenient walking
distance between uses and meet the criteria in Subsection B(1)
above.
(c) The parking area must remain under the control of the owner
or operator of the use to which the parking area is appurtenant
and shall be recorded as a deed restriction, irrevocable license,
easement or other recordable document in a form satisfactory
to the Township Solicitor filed in the Cumberland County
Courthouse in the chain of title of the land to be burdened in
perpetuity or for a period to extend throughout the life of the
use requiring the maintenance of the required number of
spaces.
C. Joint parking facilities shall be allowed on the same lot which serves
more than one nonresidential use. The total number of spaces required
shall be based on the one use of the facility requiring the most spaces.
A. The Board of Commissioners, in consultation with the Township
Engineer and Zoning Officer, may authorize a reduction of minimum
parking requirements for a nonresidential use in the C-1, C-2, PO, INS,
and IND districts where the applicant can justify a reduction and still
provide adequate parking facilities to serve the proposed use of the
building.
§ 245-17.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-17.5
227:891
(1) The Board of Commissioners may also consider unimproved
overflow parking areas for institutional uses, which would be set
back at least 10 feet from adjoining lot lines. Unimproved overflow
parking areas shall also provide a fence delineating such occasional
parking facilities and preventing the parking and/or movement of
vehicles across neighboring properties.
B. Applicants requesting a parking reduction must complete a parking
analysis matrix that demonstrates how the parking required by
§ 245-17.2 of the ordinance is excessive. The parking analysis shall be
prepared by a qualified professional and include the following:
(1) Site plans containing the following:
(a) Legal property boundary.
(b) Existing and proposed project layout.
(c) All existing and proposed uses and tenant spaces.
(d) All existing and proposed parking spaces.
(2) Parking analysis matrix showing the following:
(a) List of all existing and proposed uses.
(b) List of tenant(s) for each use.
(c) Total square footage of all existing and proposed uses (should
equal the total square footage of the building).
(d) Calculation of seating/customers/exam rooms/employees, etc.
necessary to determine the parking requirements for the
proposed use(s).
(e) Number of proposed company vehicle(s).
(f) Parking requirements based on existing and proposed use.
(g) Amount of spaces currently available.
(h) Comparison of the number of parking spaces proposed through
parking reduction with the parking required by § 245-17.2 of
this chapter.
(3) Parking analysis report shall contain the following:
(a) Review of parking requirements in other local municipalities.
(b) Parking count for uses similar to the use(s) proposed.
(c) Peak hours of operation and parking occupancy.
(d) Final justification and summary of findings.
§ 245-17.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-17.6
227:892
§ 245-17.6. Design standards.
The minimum dimensions of parking facilities to be provided shall be as
follows:
A. Parking area design requirements. All parking lots or parking areas
shall meet the following design standards, along with applicable
regulations within the Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and Stormwater Management Ordinance.258
(1) In all districts, except in the case of single-family dwellings, there
shall be no less than six feet of open space between the edge of any
parking area and the outside wall of any building to allow for
access by emergency vehicles.
(2) Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the
following table:
Aisle Width
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Parking
Bay Width
(feet)
Depth
from Curb1
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90° 9.5 18 24 24
60° 9.5 21 18 20
45° 9.5 20 15 20
30° 9.5 18 12 20
0° (parallel) 9.5 24 12 24
NOTES:
1 Depth from curb is the perpendicular measurement from curb
or edge of the parking lot toward the interior portion of the lot
to be occupied by the parked vehicles and not including any
part of the drive.
(3) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient
backup area for the end stalls of the parking area.
(4) Parking areas shall be designed so that each motor vehicle may
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without
requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle.
(5) Setback for parking areas shall be provided as follows:
(a) All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least six feet
from any multiple dwelling, commercial or industrial building
on the lot.
258. Editor's Note: See Ch. 214 and Ch. 220.
§ 245-17.6 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-17.6
227:893
(b) All parking spaces shall be behind the building setback line,
except where buffer yards are required and not specifically
prohibited in § 245-17.3.B, in which case such parking spaces
may not encroach on the buffer yard area. If the developer
proposes and installs a higher-level, buffer yard screen type
than required in accordance with § 245-16.5 herein and the
Upper Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,259 or a six-foot high privacy fence along the side or
rear yards in addition to the required buffer yard screen type,
the required buffer yard area may be reduced 25% for each
level above the required type.
(c) Parking areas and on-site parking lot circulation aisles and
driveways shall be physically separated from the public and/or
private streets in conformance with the applicable building
setback requirements, excluding entrance and exit drives of
parking areas.
(d) In no case shall parking areas be designed to require or
encourage cars to back into a public or private street in order
to exit the parking area, with the exception of alleyways.
(6) Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the provisions of the Upper Allen Township Building Code.
B. Residential driveway regulations. All single-family- and two-familydwelling
driveways shall conform to the following:
(1) Each dwelling unit may have one driveway and may have no more
than two driveways where the lot on which the dwelling unit is
located has a street frontage width of 100 feet or more.
(2) Driveways may not exceed 24 feet at the right-of-way line,
excluding driveway radii.
(3) Driveways must be located in safe relationship to sight distance
and barriers to vision. The drive may not exceed a slope of 8%
within 50 feet of the street right-of-way line. Where a drive enters a
bank through a cut, the shoulders of the cut may not exceed 50% in
slope within 25 feet of the point the drive intersects the right-ofway.
(4) A clear sight triangle in conformance with Article XVI of this
chapter shall be provided for driveways.
(5) Any residential dwelling located along and accessing directly an
arterial or collector street shall provide an area to be utilized as a
turnaround area, minimum size 15 feet by 10 feet, to the side of the
main driveway so that entrance to the road can be performed in a
safe manner.
259. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220.
§ 245-17.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-17.6
227:894
(6) Driveways and parking areas for single-family units shall be set
back three feet from each side lot line.
(7) Common-use driveways for single-family semidetached units shall
be permitted with no setback required at the common interior lot
line but shall be required at the exterior side lot line. In the case of
a driveway that extends over the common property line of a
semidetached unit, a maintenance agreement shall be required
between property owners for the shared driveway facilities.
(8) Common-use driveways may be provided for single-family attached
units; however, the common driveway shall serve no more than two
attached units, and a lawn area must separate the common
driveway on both sides from an adjacent driveway. Under no
circumstances shall the front yard be covered entirely by the
common-use driveway. In the case of a driveway that extends over
the common property line of an attached unit, a maintenance
agreement shall be required between property owners for the
shared driveway facilities.
C. Multifamily residential and nonresidential access drive requirements:
(1) Number per lot. The number of access drives intersecting with
each street shall not exceed two per lot or street frontage; however,
where a lot has more than 600 feet of street frontage, the number
of access drives may exceed two per lot or street frontage, provided
that each access drive serving such lot is separated by a minimum
distance of 200 feet.
(2) Setbacks. All access drives shall be set back at least:
(a) Fifty feet from any other access drive or driveway located upon
the same lot (measured from cartway edges).
(b) Ten feet from any side and/or rear property lines; however, this
setback shall be excluded along the property line when a joint
parking lot is shared by adjoining uses.
(c) Fifty feet from any street intersection.
(3) Clear sight triangle. Access drives shall be located and constructed
so that a clear sight triangle in conformity with § 245-16.9.B is
maintained, no permanent obstructions and/or plant materials over
36 inches high are located within this area, and a minimum
adequate safe stopping sight distance is established, based on
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation standards.
(4) Access drive width. Access drives shall provide a twelve-foot-wide
cartway for each travel lane. However, in no case shall any access
drive cartway be less than 18 feet wide. See table below for further
explanation:
§ 245-17.6 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-17.6
227:895
§ 245-17.7. Drainage, surfacing and maintenance standards.
Number of
Lanes Direction of Travel
Required Access
Drive Width
(feet)
1 One-way 18
2 One- or two-way 24
3 or more One- or two-way 12 for each travel lane
(5) PennDOT permit. Any access drive intersecting with a state-owned
road shall require the obtainment of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation highway occupancy permit as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Code, Title 67, Transportation, Chapter 441, Access
to and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads, as
amended.
(6) Plans for streets, drives, service access, parking and walkways and
all such facilities shall be reviewed and approved and all such
facilities shall be designed and installed in the manner prescribed
by the Township subdivision and land development regulations for
dedication, and amendments thereto, regardless if they are
presented to the Township for dedication or not.
D. Design features shall include semipermeable surfaces, unlighted,
properly drained, safe ingress and egress. Parking facility can only be
used in designated greenway areas as an accessory use as permitted on
adjacent development area lots.
A. The area of the parking lots, including driveways, shall be graded,
surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other impervious pavers as approved
by the Zoning Officer, and drained to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer or his/her designee to the extent necessary to prevent dust,
erosion or excessive water flow across streets or adjoining property.
B. Parking areas shall be kept clean and free from rubbish and debris.
C. Permeable surface material may be used for residential driveways or
parking lots which are not regularly used by large trucks or buses. In
addition:
(1) Permeable surface parking spaces shall not exceed more than 30%
of the required parking spaces.
(2) The slope of shall not exceed 5%.
(3) It shall be demonstrated that there is sufficient soil infiltration
below permeable surface, and that design capacity and drainage is
to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer or his/her designee.
§ 245-17.6 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-17.7
227:896
§ 245-17.8. Lighting.
§ 245-17.9. Loading and unloading space.
(4) The owner shall submit a signed and recorded maintenance
agreement stating the permeable surface shall be swept with a
high-efficiency vacuum sweeper at least once a year. If the
permeable surface used is porous asphalt or porous concrete, then
the surface shall be cleaned with a high-pressure hose following a
high-efficiency vacuum sweeping at least once every two years.
(5) The Owner shall keep at least five years of written documentation
of all cleaning and make them available to the Township Zoning
Officer upon request.
A. All public parking shall be lit during evening operating hours.
B. All standards shall be located on raised parking islands and not on the
parking surface.
C. Lighting shall be arranged and shielded so the direct rays from the
luminaries shall not fall off site on adjacent properties or into the road
right-of-way or cartway.
D. Additional lighting standards shall be in accordance with § 245-16.10.G
herein.
A. An off-street loading space shall be an area of land, open or enclosed,
other than a street or public way, used principally for the standing,
loading or unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers so as to avoid
undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.
B. Off-street loading and unloading space shall be in addition to and not
considered as meeting a part of the requirements for off-street parking
space.
C. Off-street loading and unloading space shall not be used or designed,
intended or constructed to be used, in a manner to obstruct or interfere
with the free use of any street, sidewalk, alley, designated fire access
lane, or adjoining property.
D. Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall not be located so that
delivery of vehicles entering or leaving the spaces would conflict with
parking spaces and require backing maneuvers in areas of customer or
public circulation.
E. The following off-street loading and unloading berth requirements for
specific uses shall be provided.
(1) Multistory multiple-family dwellings: one off-street loading and
unloading berth at least 12 feet wide and 18 feet long for every 12
apartments.
§ 245-17.7 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-17.9
227:897
(2) Industrial plants, warehouse and wholesale storage facilities, retail
facilities, and offices. The requirements shall be based on gross
floor area of the building. For any building less than 6,000 square
feet, no loading berth is required.
(a) Six thousand to 20,000 square feet: one berth required.
(b) Greater than 20,000 and less than 80,000 square feet: two
berths required.
(c) Greater than 80,000 square feet: two berths, plus one berth for
each additional 60,000 square feet.
(3) When determination of the number of required off-street loading
berths results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction
up to and including 1/2 may be disregarded, and fractions over 1/2
shall be interpreted as one loading berth. Any fractured spaces
shall be rounded up.
(4) Continuing care retirement communities: two off-street loading and
unloading berths at least 10 feet wide and 35 feet long.
F. The off-street loading berth shall be not less than 10 feet wide and 35
feet in length and 14 feet in height, when covered. For warehouse
buildings or buildings accommodating tractor-trailers, the minimum
berth size shall be increased to 12 feet wide and 70 feet long.
G. No portion of an exterior off-street loading facility (including access
drives) shall be located within 50 feet of any land within a residential
zone or use.
H. No loading spaces shall be within any building setback and/or buffer
area.
I. When the loading zone abuts a residential use or zone, a five-foot buffer
area shall be provided contiguous to the property line of the residential
use or zone in addition to the required setback and shall be planted in
accordance with § 245-16.5.
J. Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted base, surfaced with bituminous concrete or cement
concrete pavement, of adequate thickness to support the weight of a
fully loaded vehicle.
§ 245-17.9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-17.9
227:898
ARTICLE XVIII
Signs
§ 245-18.1. Purpose.
The sign regulations, controls and provisions set forth in this section are
made in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Upper Allen Township
and are intended to promote general welfare and public safety by:
§ 245-18.2. Permitted signs.
The following signs are permitted:
A. Aiding in traffic-directional control and safety through the prohibition
of inappropriate signs, requirements for necessary signs and the
appropriate sizing of all signs.
B. Preserving and protecting property values.
C. Lessening the blight of congested land and air space which would result
from the uncontrolled proliferation of signs.
D. Establishing reasonable standards for business, institutional and
organizational identification and advertising through the use of signs as
reasonably necessary to maintain and encourage business activity and
orderly area development.
E. Establishing reasonable standards for commercial and other
advertising through the use of signs in order to maintain and encourage
business activity and area development.
F. Asserting the reasonable public interest in matters of signage and in
the visual appearance of private property which is visible from public
streets.
A. Freestanding ground pole sign. A sign supported by one or more
uprights, poles or braces placed onto/into the ground, where the sign is
affixed above ground level. Such sign shall be permitted in the
Professional Office, Highway Commercial, Industrial, Institutional,
Neighborhood Commercial, and Village Zoning Districts.
B. Projecting sign. A sign which projects from and is supported by the wall
of a building. Such sign shall be permitted in the Professional Office,
Highway Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, Neighborhood
Commercial, and Village Zoning Districts.
C. Roof sign. Any sign erected and maintained on or above the roof of a
building. A roof sign shall be permitted in the Professional Office,
Highway Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and Neighborhood
Commercial Zoning Districts.
D. Wall sign. A sign which is attached directly to or painted on a building
wall. Wall signs shall be permitted in the Professional Office, Highway
§ 245-18.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-18.2
227:899
§ 245-18.3. Number permitted.
Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, Neighborhood Commercial, and
Village Zoning Districts.
E. Message board signs and banners shall be permitted in the Professional
Office, Highway Commercial Industrial, Institutional, Neighborhood
Commercial, and Village Zoning Districts. This shall include time-andtemperature
signs with the sole purpose to announce the current time
and temperature and any nonprofit public service messages.
F. Monument signs. A freestanding sign composed of stone, brick or
masonry, with the entire base of the sign structure in contact with the
ground or supported by a base constructed of permanent material such
as stone or block, and landscaped to enhance the overall attractiveness
of the area. Monument signs shall be permitted in the Professional
Office, Highway Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and
Neighborhood Commercial Zoning Districts.
A. A property owner may erect and maintain only two signs (of any type)
per lot or parcel, except in cases of multiple street frontages on two or
more public ways, in which case, a total of three signs may be provided,
with the exception that in the VIL District the property owner shall be
allowed two signs per lot plus one attached sign for each side or rear
entryway in accordance with § 245-18.5.E.
(1) Ground pole sign, roof sign or message board sign. A property
owner may erect and maintain only one of these types of signs per
parcel, although additional signs of other types are otherwise
permitted as provided herein.
(2) No more than one sign shall be mounted to the supporting
structure of any ground pole sign.
(3) A double-faced sign shall count as a single sign.
B. For business or institutional complex in which separate lots have not
been created for each separate building: one wall sign shall be allowed
for each single-occupant building. The sign shall not be larger than 40
square feet.
C. Signs for multi-occupant nonresidential properties:
(1) Buildings which are designed to accommodate two or more
business establishments, each of which has independent exterior
access points, may have one wall sign or one projecting sign for
each designated separate business entrance. In no event shall any
individual occupant's sign be larger than 40 square feet, nor may
the total of all wall and/or projecting signs for a multi-occupant
residential property be greater than 10% of the front wall of the
building.
§ 245-18.2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-18.3
227:900
§ 245-18.4. Sign area.
The sign area shall be the area of the smallest triangle, rectangle or circle
which can wholly enclose the surface area of the sign. All visible faces of a
multifaced sign shall be counted separately and then totaled in calculating
sign area. Three-dimensional signs shall be treated as dual-faced signs,
such that the total area shall be twice the area of the smallest triangle,
rectangle or circle which can totally circumscribe the sign in the plane of its
largest dimension.
§ 245-18.5. Size limitations and restrictions.
Except for off-premises advertising signs, permitted in an industrial district
only (see § 245-18.9), and signs in the VIL District (see Subsection E below),
the following size limitations and restrictions shall apply:
(2) One wall-mounted, exterior building directory sign, with a
maximum size of eight square feet.
A. Ground pole signs, roof signs, and message boards. No ground pole
sign, roof sign or message board sign shall be larger than 30 square
feet in sign area on a single sign face nor larger than 60 square feet in
sign area for both faces combined, with the exception that in the VIL,
District § 245-18.5.E shall apply.
B. Projecting signs.
(1) No single face of a projecting sign shall exceed 25 square feet in
sign area.
(2) No projecting sign shall have a vertical dimension greater than six
feet.
(3) No portion of any projecting sign shall be less than 10 feet above
grade level.
(4) No portion of a projecting sign shall project more than five feet out
from the face of the building.
C. Wall signs.
(1) No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall on which it is
located.
(2) No wall sign or any part thereof shall project more than 18 inches
from the wall on which it is mounted.
(3) Reflectors on externally lit wall signs must be 10 feet above ground
level, equipped with mesh guards, and no part may extend more
than two feet from the wall of the building.
(4) No wall sign shall extend beyond the left and right extremities of
the wall to which it is attached.
§ 245-18.3 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-18.5
227:901
§ 245-18.6. Setback requirements.
§ 245-18.7. Height limitation.
No signs (including roof signs) or any part thereof, including braces,
supports or lights, shall exceed a height of 25 feet above ground level,
as measured from the finished floor elevation of the structure at the main
entrance or the street elevation of the street fronting the structure
(whichever is less) to the highest part of the sign.
§ 245-18.8. Safety and maintenance.
(5) The total area of any wall sign may not exceed 10% of the area of
the building face to which it is attached, up to a maximum of 40
square feet.
D. Monument signs.
(1) Monument signs shall not exceed 25 square feet in sign area on a
single face nor larger than 50 square feet in sign area for both
faces combined. Monument signs shall not exceed 7 1/2 feet in
height.
(2) Monument signs shall be landscaped with shrubbery and grasses
and other ornamental material. A landscape plan shall be
submitted to the Township with the application for review and
approval by the Zoning Officer.
E. Village District signs.
(1) The aggregate of all signs allowed in § 245-18.3.A shall not exceed
20 square feet per property.
(2) Multi-occupant nonresidential buildings shall be allowed one wallmounted
building directory sign identifying the occupants, not to
exceed eight square feet, and individual business wall signs, no
more than 5% of the ground floor building facade and not to exceed
10 square feet.
F. Signs in the Upper Allen Township Historic District shall be required to
be reviewed by the Township's Historical and Architectural Review
Board (HARB) in accordance with § 155-13 of the Township Code.
A. All signs covered by this chapter shall meet a setback requirement from
the edge of right-of-way of a street or roadway; such setback
requirement shall be half the required front yard distance for buildings
within the respective zoning district. However, no sign (in any zoning
district) shall be less than 10 feet from the street right-of-way line.
B. All signs erected within the right-of-way of a state highway shall be in
accordance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
§ 245-18.5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-18.8
227:902
§ 245-18.9. Off-premises advertising signs.
An off-premises advertising sign shall be a sign which contains a message
unrelated to a business or profession conducted on the premises where
such sign is located or which is unrelated to a commodity, service or
entertainment sold or offered on the premises where such sign is located.
A. Every sign and all parts thereof, including framework, supports,
background, and anchors and wiring systems, shall be constructed and
maintained in compliance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code.
B. Any sign which creates a hazard to public health, safety or welfare, as
determined by the Township Zoning Officer, due to disrepair or lack of
maintenance shall be removed at the expense of the owner or lessee.
C. The area immediately surrounding each sign shall be kept neat and
litter-free.
D. Any permanent sign may be illuminated, unless otherwise specifically
restricted herein and in accordance with § 245-16.10.G.
A. Such signs are permitted only in the Industrial District.
B. In addition to the provisions herein, such signs are subject to the
following standards:
(1) The maximum area for any one sign shall be 725 square feet with a
maximum height of 25 feet and maximum length of 60 feet,
inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base or apron,
supports and other structural members.
(2) The area shall be measured by the smallest square, rectangle,
triangle, circle or combination thereof which will encompass the
entire sign.
(3) A sign structure may contain one or two signs per facing and may
be placed double-faced, back to back or V-type with an internal
angle of not greater than 30°.
(4) Signs which exceed 600 square feet in area may not be doublefaced
(abutting and facing the same direction).
(5) Along the interstate system and limited access highways on the
primary system, no two sign structures shall be spaced less than
500 feet apart, and no such structures may be erected adjacent to
or within 500 feet of any interchange or safety rest area, measured
along the interstate or limited access primary from the beginning
or ending of pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the
main traveled way.
(6) Along highways on the primary system, no two structures shall be
spaced less than 300 feet apart.
§ 245-18.8 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-18.9
227:903
(7) Official and on-premises signs shall not be counted, nor shall
measurements be made from them for purposes of determining
space requirements.
(8) The distance between sign structures shall be measured along the
nearest edge of the pavement between points directly opposite the
signs along the same side of the right-of-way.
(9) Digital billboards shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Brightness (billboard luminance). The illumination and/or
intensity of the display shall be controlled so as to not create
glare, hazards or nuisances. The brightness of the digital
billboard shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candle of light above the
normal ambient light levels. Such signs shall be equipped with
automatic dimming technology which automatically adjusts the
sign's brightness based on ambient light conditions. Such signs
shall be dimmed to 500 nits between sunset and sunrise.
[1] The billboard luminance specification shall be determined
by a foot-candle metering device held at a height of five
feet and aimed towards the billboard, from a distance of
150 feet.
[2] The metering device should be at a location perpendicular
to the billboard center (as seen in plain view) as this angle
has the highest luminance.
[3] This check shall include the measurement of an all-white
image displayed by the billboard to evaluate the worst
case condition.
[4] If the difference in illuminance between the billboard-on
and the billboard-off conditions is 0.3 foot-candle or less,
then the billboard luminance is in compliance.
(b) Applicant shall permit message access for local, regional, state
and national emergency services during emergency situations.
Emergency messages are not required to conform to message
standards listed herein.
(c) An engineering certificate shall accompany any application for
a digital billboard. The certification shall indicate under seal of
a professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania that the sign has been designed in accordance
with acceptable engineering practices.
(d) Digital billboards which display no advertising or otherwise
ceases to be used for a period of three consecutive months
shall be removed. The applicant shall further provide, in a form
acceptable to the Township, proof that the record owner and
the licensee or other person in control of the signage consents
§ 245-18.9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-18.9
227:904
§ 245-18.10. Real estate development signs.
In addition to the general provisions of this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply to all real estate development signs:
to the removal of the sign for reasons as set forth in this
subsection.
(e) Audio or pyrotechnics. Audio speakers and/or any form of
pyrotechnics are prohibited.
(f) Message default mechanism. All signs must be equipped with a
properly functioning default mechanism that will stop the sign
in one position should a malfunction occur.
(g) When applicable, such signs shall be located, constructed and
maintained in accordance with all applicable Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation regulations, in addition to all
other regulations of the Upper Allen Township Code. Where
there is a conflict between regulations, the more restrictive
regulation shall apply.
(h) Residences. No digital or electronic display billboard shall be
located within 200 feet from a lot line of an existing dwelling.
(i) No digital or electronic billboard shall directly face a
residential neighborhood or residence.
(j) Condition. The digital or electronic billboard shall be
maintained in a good and safe condition. The area around the
sign shall be kept free of debris, weeds and other noxious
vegetation.
(10)No off-premises advertising sign shall be located within 200 feet
from a lot line of an existing residential dwelling.
A. The use of real estate development signs is limited to those developers
or owners having for sale a minimum of six lots in one subdivision.
B. Such signs must be located on the premises which are for sale.
C. Such signs may advertise only the real estate for sale in the subdivision
in which the sign is located. The content of such signs shall be limited to
the name of the development, the size of the property, zoning
information, utility information, the name of the developer and/or
marketing agent and their telephone number and web page address.
D. Such signs shall conform to relevant setback line requirements. If any
person shall use more than one sign for the same development area, no
two signs may be visible from the same public street unless they are
located no closer from each other than 1,000 lineal feet along the edge
of the public street.
§ 245-18.9 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-18.10
227:905
§ 245-18.11. Temporary signs.
E. The maximum sign area of any such single-faced sign shall be 30 square
feet and, for any such double-faced sign, 60 square feet. No part of such
sign shall be more than 10 feet above grade or in excess of 10 feet in
any dimension.
F. Such signs shall be removed when 75% of the lots in the subdivision
have been sold or leased.
G. The main entrance of a residential real estate development may have a
permanent monument sign which shall be no larger than 30 square feet
per face or 60 square feet for both faces combined. For purposes of a
residential real estate development main entrance sign, the sign faces
may be back to back or may be separated symmetrically on opposite
sides of the street, if part of the same architectural element to accent
the development entrance. Permanent signs for a residential real estate
development may be located at other entrances to the development if:
they are located not closer than 1,000 lineal feet from another
permanent real estate development sign of the same development, and
any single sign face shall be no longer than 15 square feet per sign face
or 30 square feet for both sign faces combined.
H. In addition to signs provided for in § 245-18.3, the main entrance of a
real estate development for nonresidential use may have a permanent
monument sign which shall be no larger than 30 square feet per face or
60 square feet for both faces combined. Permanent signs for a real
estate development for business may be located at other entrances to
the development if they are located not closer than 1,000 lineal feet
from another permanent real estate development sign of the same
development, and any single sign face shall be no longer than 15 square
feet per sign face or 30 square feet for both sign faces combined.
A. A temporary sign shall be a sign constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric,
wood or other similar material, with or without a structural frame, and
tended for a limited period of display. Permits for temporary signs are
valid for 60 days but may be renewed for one additional period of 30
days within a twelve-month period.
B. The size, content and location of a temporary sign may be varied at any
time so long as the variations remain within the overall restrictions of
this chapter.
C. All temporary signs, except those signs enumerated in § 245-18.12,
shall comply with this section.
D. Temporary signs must not be placed within the public rights-of-way or
any easement, nor shall they create a hazard for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
E. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
§ 245-18.10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-18.11
227:906
§ 245-18.12. Signs permitted in all districts without a permit.
Signs listed in this section are permitted in all zones and shall not require
licenses or stickers, and they shall not be counted when calculating the
number of signs on a premises. However, such signs shall conform to the
general regulations for signs enumerated in the remainder of this article.
F. Temporary signs placed on private property are permitted in all zoning
districts in compliance with the following standards:
(1) Yard sign. An unlimited number of yard signs are permitted on each
property provided that the maximum area (total square footage of
all the temporary yard signs) shall not exceed 12 square feet for
residential uses and 24 square feet for all other uses.
(2) Wall sign. A maximum of four signs per property are permitted.
Temporary wall signs shall conform to the requirements in
§ 245-18.5.C herein.
(3) Banner sign. A maximum of four signs per property are permitted.
G. Application for a permit for a temporary sign shall be made on a form
provided by the Zoning Officer. A permit for temporary signs must be
kept on the premises where signs are displayed and must be shown to
the Zoning Officer upon request.
A. Signs displaying the name and address of a resident, but not including
any commercial advertising, of not more than two square feet in sign
area if single-faced nor more than four square feet if double-faced.
B. "No trespassing" signs or other such sign regulating the use of a
property, such as "no hunting," "no fishing," etc., of no more than two
square feet in sign area in residential zones and five square feet in all
commercial, mixed use, institutional and industrial zones.
C. Real estate signs which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the
premises on which said signs are located. In residential zones, such
signs shall not exceed five square feet in sign area if single-faced nor
more than 10 square feet if double-faced, and in all commercial and
industrial zones, such signs shall not exceed 30 square feet in sign area
if single-faced nor more than 60 square feet if double-faced. Such real
estate signs shall be removed within 10 days after the premises
advertised has been sold, rented or leased.
D. Temporary signs for public, charitable or religious institutions, when
located on the premises thereof and with a sign area of no more than 25
square feet if single-faced nor more than 50 square feet if double-faced
and if used exclusively for noncommercial announcement.
E. Directional signs regulating on-premises traffic, parking or other
functional subdivision when less than two square feet in area and
bearing no commercial advertising.
§ 245-18.11 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-18.12
227:907
F. Signs erected by a governmental body or under the direction of such a
body and bearing no commercial advertising, such as traffic signs,
railroad crossing signs, safety signs, signs identifying public schools
and playgrounds and the like.
G. Memorial signs or tablets and signs denoting the date of erection of
buildings.
H. The flag, pennant or insignia of any government or of any religious,
charitable, educational or fraternal nonprofit organization.
I. Temporary signs no larger than five square feet in sign area if singlefaced
nor more than 10 square feet if double-faced, advertising the sale
of edible farm products produced on the premises or advertising
auctions and special events or charitable or public service groups. No
more than one temporary sign per parcel shall be permitted.
J. On-premises wall or projecting sign announcing a home occupation
carried on upon the premises, which shall be limited to two square feet
if single-faced and four square feet if double-faced.
K. One temporary nonilluminated sign erected in connection with the
development of the premises by a builder, developer or other person
interested in such sales or development, provided that the sign does not
exceed 25 square feet in area and shall be removed as of the day the
certificate of use and occupancy is issued.
L. One temporary nonilluminated sign of mechanics, contractors,
architects and artisans, etc., which may be erected or maintained
during the period such persons are performing work on the premises on
which such sign is erected, provided that such sign shall be removed on
completion of work and the total area of the sign does not exceed 60
square feet.
M. Political posters, banners, and signs about candidates, parties and
ballot issues to be removed within seven days following the election.
N. Christmas tree signs that advertise the seasonal sale of Christmas trees
shall be permitted during seasons when such products are actively
offered for sale, provided there are not more than two signs per lot and
the maximum sign area does not exceed 20 square feet per sign on
nonresidential lots and eight square feet per sign on all other types of
lots.
O. Time-and-temperature signs with the sole purpose to announce the
current time and temperature and any nonprofit public service
messages, provided there is not more than one sign per lot and the
maximum sign area does not exceed 30 square feet.
P. Signs erected by or specifically authorized by the Township for uses
operated on Township-owned property.
§ 245-18.12 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-18.13
227:908
§ 245-18.13. Signs prohibited in all districts.
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any
district, notwithstanding anything else contained in this chapter or
elsewhere. Signs which are prohibited shall be removed or brought into
conformity with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after this
chapter is passed. The following are prohibited in all districts:
A. Flashing, blinking, strobe, twinkling, animated, streaming, scrolling or
moving signs of any type, with the exception of message board signs
covered by § 245-18.2, Permitted signs, Subsection E. A sign may
change from one message to another message, provided that the
message does not change more than once every 10 seconds and the
transition from one message to another does not exceed two seconds,
except that time and temperature signs may change more frequently. In
addition, flashing lights visible from a street shall not be used to attract
attention to a business. This restriction specifically includes window
signs but does not prohibit seasonal holiday lighting or displays that
otherwise comply with the Zoning Code.
B. Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public safety or
health, including a sign which fails in the determination of the Zoning
Officer to properly shield its light source from providing unacceptable
glare to a neighboring property or the public street.
C. Signs which, by reason of size, location, content, coloring or manner of
illumination, obstruct the vision of drivers, either when leaving or
entering a roadway from another roadway or driveway, or obstruct or
detract from the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or control
device on public streets and roads.
D. Signs which make use of words such as "stop," "look," "one-way,"
"danger," "yield" or any similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or
characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
E. Abandoned and outdated signs.
(1) Signs advertising a use no longer in existence shall be removed
within 90 days of the cessation of such use. If the owner of a
property does not remove such sign within 30 days after receiving a
written notice from the Zoning Officer, the sign may be removed by
the Township at the expense of the property owner.
(2) These time limits shall not apply to a sign intended to be reused
with a new sign face serving a building that is clearly temporarily
vacant and being actively marketed to new tenants for purchase.
(3) A violation of this subsection shall be subject to enforcement and
remedies as prescribed in §§ 245-18.16.B and 245-19.25.
§ 245-18.13 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-18.13
227:909
§ 245-18.14. Permits to build new permanent signs or alter or move
existing permanent signs.
F. Signs on public property or a public right-of-way, unless erected by a
governmental body or required to be so located by order of a
governmental body. No sign located on public property or a public rightof-
way shall bear any commercial advertising or announcement.
G. Signs painted on, attached to or supported by a tree, stone, cliff or other
natural object, except temporary signs.
H. String lights, other than temporary holiday decorations, which are
unshielded from off the property on which they are located.
I. Searchlights, pennants, spinners, banners and streamers, except for
occasions such as grand openings and then only with a temporary sign
permit.
J. No sign shall be affixed to any motor vehicle or trailer in such a manner
that the carrying of such sign is no longer incidental to the vehicle's
primary purpose.
K. Video billboards.
L. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or odor.
M. Signs which contain information that states or implies that a lot may be
used for any purpose not permitted under the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
N. Signs or displays visible from a lot line that include words or images
that are obscene or pornographic.
O. Balloons of greater than 30 cubic feet that are tethered to the ground or
a structure for periods of 12 hours or greater per week.
P. Floodlights and outdoor lasers used for advertising purposes shall be
prohibited, except as allowed under Subsection I above.
Q. Vehicular signs. No sign shall be affixed to any motor vehicle or trailer
in such a manner that the carrying of such sign in no longer incidental
to the vehicle's primary purpose. This regulation does not include the
use of building logos, identification of advertising on vehicles primarily
and actively used for businesses purposes and/or general
transportation.
R. Reflective signs or signs containing mirrors.
S. Any banner or sign of any type suspended across a public street,
without the permission of the owner of the property and the road.
T. Stuffed or inflated animals used as signs.
U. Any sign that promotes illegal activity.
§ 245-18.13 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-18.14
227:910
§ 245-18.15. Nonconforming signs.
A. No permanent sign shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or
moved until the person proposing to erect, alter or move such sign shall
have obtained a permit therefor from the Zoning Officer. Such permit
shall be issued only when the Zoning Officer is satisfied that such sign
will, in every respect, comply with all the applicable provisions of this
chapter. Such permit shall be valid for 120 days. The fee for granting
such a permit shall be as per the schedule of officially approved fees.
B. Any person desiring such a permit shall file application therefor on a
form which shall contain or have attached thereto the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) A map showing the location of the building, structure or lot to
which the sign is to be attached or erected and showing the
position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings and
thoroughfares; such a map must be to scale.
(3) A plan showing the design of the sign, materials used, and method
of construction and means of attachment to the building or the
ground; such plan must be to scale.
(4) The name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting,
altering or moving said sign.
(5) The written consent of the owner of the land on which the sign is to
be erected, altered or relocated.
(6) Any electrical or building permit required and issued for said sign
under Township ordinance.
(7) Any other information as the Zoning Officer shall require in order
to show full compliance with this chapter and all other applicable
laws of the Township.
C. After permission to erect, alter or move a permanent sign has been
obtained and said sign has been constructed, painted and placed as
specified in the permit application, the owner of the sign shall notify the
Zoning Officer, who shall inspect the plan. If the sign is as specified in
the permit application and does not violate any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable ordinances, a permit shall be issued to the
owner.
A. Signs legally in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter, shall be
nonconforming signs.
B. All permanent signs and sign structures shall be brought into
conformance with the sign regulations when and if the following
occurs:
§ 245-18.14 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-18.15
227:911
§ 245-18.16. Annual inspections.
(1) The sign is removed, relocated, or significantly altered. Significant
alterations include changes in the size or dimension of the sign.
Changes to the sign copy or the replacement of a sign face on a
nonconforming sign shall not be considered a significant alteration.
(2) If more than 50% of the sign is damaged, it shall be repaired to
conform to this chapter.
(3) An alteration in the structure of the sign support.
(4) A change in the mechanical facilities or type of illumination.
(5) A change in the material of the sign face.
(6) The property on which the nonconforming sign is located submits a
subdivision or land development application requiring municipal
review and approval.
(7) Nonconforming signs shall be exempt from these provisions, under
the following conditions:
(a) The nonconforming sign possesses documented historic value.
(b) The nonconforming sign is of a unique nature or type by virtue
of its architectural value or design, as determined by the
National Park Service, Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission, or local historical commission.
(c) When a nonconforming sign is required to be moved because of
public right-of-way improvements.
C. To determine the legal status of existing signs in each case listed above,
the applicant shall submit the following information to the Zoning
Officer:
(1) Type(s) of existing sign(s) located on the property.
(2) The area and height of all signs.
(3) For freestanding ground pole or monument signs, the distance
between the property line and the nearest portion of the sign.
(4) The material of which the sign is constructed.
(5) The building frontage.
(6) The type of sign illumination.
A. The Zoning Officer shall make an annual inspection of all signs in the
Township and make such reports as the Township may require.
B. If the Zoning Officer shall find that any sign has been constructed or
erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this
§ 245-18.15 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-18.16
227:912
§ 245-18.17. Abandoned signs.
§ 245-18.18. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be considered violations of this chapter, and
penalties for violations shall be the same.
§ 245-18.19. Fees.
chapter, he/she shall promptly notify the owner or lessor thereof, in
writing. If the owner or lessor fails to remove or alter the sign so as to
comply with the provisions of this chapter within 30 days, the Zoning
Officer shall cause such sign to be removed or altered in such way as to
conform with the provisions of this chapter. The cost of such removal or
alteration shall be borne by the owner or lessor of such signs and shall
be a lien on the premises.
C. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, nonconforming signs
legally erected prior to the enactment of this chapter shall be
permitted.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property upon which an
abandoned sign is located to remove such sign within 90 days of the
sign becoming abandoned as defined in this section. Removal of an
abandoned sign shall include the removal of the entire sign, including
the sign face, supporting structure, and structural trim.
B. Where the owner of the property on which an abandoned sign is located
fails to remove such sign within 90 days, the Township may remove
such sign. Any expense directly incurred in the removal of such sign
shall be charged to the owner of the property. Where the owner fails to
pay, the Township may file a lien upon the property for the purpose of
recovering all reasonable costs associated with the removal of the sign.
A. Required fees shall be paid at the Upper Allen Township municipal
office on the filing of applications for sign permits.
B. A schedule of officially approved fees and costs is on file at the Upper
Allen Township municipal office and can be obtained upon request.
§ 245-18.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-18.19
227:913

ARTICLE XIX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 245-19.1. Appointment and powers of Zoning Officer.
§ 245-19.2. Duties of the Zoning Officer.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and such power and authority as is necessary for enforcement is
hereby conferred upon the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall examine
all applications for permits, issue permits for construction and uses which
are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, record and file all
applications for permits with accompanying plans and documents and make
such reports as the governing body may require. Permits for construction
and uses which are a special exception or a variance to requirements of
this chapter shall be issued only upon written order of the Zoning Hearing
Board. Permits for construction and uses which are a conditional use shall
be issued only upon written order of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 245-19.3. Permits.
A building and/or zoning permit shall be required prior to the following
activities: the erection, addition or alteration of any building or portion
thereof; the use or change in use of a building or land, whether it is
permitted by right, special exception, conditional use or variance; and the
change or extension of a nonconforming use. It shall be unlawful for any
person to commence work for the erection or alteration of any building or
for a change in land use until a permit has been duly issued.
A. For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer, who shall not
hold any elective office in the Township of Upper Allen, shall be
appointed.
B. The Zoning Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the
Township and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Township a working knowledge of municipal zoning.
C. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its
literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any construction or
any use or change of use which does not conform to this chapter.
D. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of
employment.
A. Application for permits. All applications for permits shall be
accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual
shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and
location of any buildings existing on the lot, the lines within which the
proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered, the existing
and intended use of each building or part of a building, the number of
§ 245-19.1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-19.3
227:915
§ 245-19.4. Fees.
families or dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, and
such information as may be necessary to determine compliance with
this chapter and all other ordinances. One copy of such plans shall be
returned to the owner when such plans have been reviewed and acted
upon by the Zoning Officer. All applications with accompanying plans
and documents shall become a public record after a permit is issued or
denied.
B. In the case of the erection or alteration of uses granted for special
exception use, conditional use, or variance, the permit shall be obtained
within 12 months following the date of the decision or within 18 months
if the activities require approval of a subdivision or land development
plan.
C. Issuance of permits. No permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer
has certified that the proposed building, addition or alteration complies
with all the provisions of this chapter as well as the provisions of all
other applicable ordinances. A permit issued hereunder shall become
void 12 months after issuance date, unless a request for extension has
been submitted to and approved by the Zoning Officer. Such request
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer at least 30 days prior to the permit
expiration date.
D. Temporary permits. A temporary permit may be authorized by the
governing body for a structure or use which it deems necessary to
promote the proper development of the community, provided that such
nonconforming structure or use shall be completely removed upon
expiration of the permit without cost to the Township. Such permits
shall be issued for a specified period of time not to exceed six months
and may be renewed once for an additional six-month period.
E. A building and/or zoning permit issued in violation of any provisions in
this Zoning Ordinance shall be automatically revoked upon discovery of
its issuance in error. The Zoning Officer will give notice of the
revocation to the permit holder immediately. The holder of a permit
issued in violation of this Zoning Ordinance who has made substantial
investment and completed substantial work based upon his good faith
belief that the permit was properly issued may appeal the revocation of
the permit. A hearing shall be held before the Zoning Hearing Board to
determine if the permit holder has established vested rights in the
permit and, if so, the permit shall be reinstated.
A. The governing body shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses, as well as a collection procedure for zoning permits,
certificates of occupancy, appeals, variances, conditional uses, special
exceptions, amendments, bonds and other matters pertaining to this
chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning
Officer.
§ 245-19.3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-19.4
227:916
§ 245-19.5. Records.
§ 245-19.6. Certificate of use.
B. Such fees shall be payable to the Township, and until all applicable fees,
charges and expenses have been paid in full, the application shall be
considered incomplete and no action shall be taken on any application
or appeal.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all
applications for building and zoning permits, a record of all permits
issued and a record of all certificates of occupancy which he
countersigns, together with a notation of all special conditions involved.
The Zoning Officer shall file and safely keep copies of all plans
submitted, and the same shall be available for the use of the Board of
Commissioners.
B. The Zoning Officer shall prepare a monthly report for the Township
Commissioners, summarizing for the period since his last previous
report all zoning permits issued and certificates countersigned and all
complaints of violations and the action taken by the Zoning Officer. A
copy of each such report shall be filed with the office of the Chief
Assessor of Cumberland County at the same time it is filed with the
Board of Commissioners.
A. A certificate of use shall be a statement issued by the Zoning Officer,
setting forth either that a building, structure, parcel or use of land
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
B. No vacant land shall be occupied or used, and no structure or part of a
structure hereafter erected, substantially altered or changed in use
shall be occupied or used until a certificate of use shall have been
issued by the Zoning Officer.
C. A certificate of use for the use or occupancy of vacant land or for a
change in the use of land or for a change in the use of an existing
building, either for a whole or part of a new building or for the
alteration of an existing building, shall be applied for coincident with
the applications for a building or zoning permit and shall be issued or
denied within 15 days after a final inspection by the Zoning Officer.
D. A certificate of use for changing or extending a nonconforming use
existing at the effective date of this chapter or of an amendment thereto
shall be applied for and issued before any such nonconforming use shall
be changed or extended. Such certificate shall be issued within 15 days
after a final inspection and approval by the Zoning Officer.
E. A record of all certificates of use shall be kept on file in the office of the
Zoning Officer, and a copy shall be furnished on request to any person
having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
§ 245-19.4 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-19.7
227:917
§ 245-19.7. Appeals and applications.
An appeal or application for an amendment, variance, special exception or
conditional use from the terms of this chapter shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer and shall contain the following information:
§ 245-19.8. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals or general welfare. In interpreting the
language of this chapter to determine the extent of the restriction upon
the use of any property, the language shall be interpreted, where doubt
exists as to the intended meaning of the language written and enacted by
the governing body, in favor of the property owner and against any implied
extension of the restriction.
§ 245-19.9. Zoning Hearing Board.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected by
such proposal.
C. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such
proposal.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the improvements thereon and the present use.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter under which the appeal or
application is filed and reasons why it should be granted or a statement
of the section of this chapter governing the situation in which the
alleged erroneous ruling is being appealed and reasons for the appeal.
F. An accurate description of the present improvements and the additions
intended to be made under this application, indicating the size and use
of such proposed improvements and general construction thereof. In
addition, there shall be attached a plot plan of the real estate to be
affected, as required to accompany applications for permits, indicating
the location and size of the lot and locations of improvements now
erected and proposed to be erected thereon.
A. There is hereby created for the Township a Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended.260
B. The membership of the Board shall consist of five residents of the
Township appointed by resolution by the Board of Commissioners. The
260. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10901 through 10918.
§ 245-19.7 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-19.9
227:918
terms of office shall be for five years and shall be so fixed that the
term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Board shall
promptly notify the Board of Commissioners of any vacancies which
occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in
the Township nor shall any member be an employee of the Township.
C. The Board of Commissions may appoint by resolution at least one, but
no more than three residents of the municipality, to serve as an
alternate member of the Board. The term of office of the alternate shall
be five years. If, by reason or absence or disqualification of a member, a
quorum is not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate the
alternate of the Board to sit on the Board to provide the quorum. The
alternate shall continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings
involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially
appointed until the Board has made a final determination of the matter
or case. When seated pursuant to these provisions, an alternate shall be
entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the Board to
the same and full extent as provided by law for Board members,
including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during
the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set forth
herein and otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other
office in the municipality, including membership on the Planning
Commission and Zoning Officer. The alternate may participate in any
proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote
as a member of the Board nor be compensated unless designated as a
voting alternate member as described herein.
D. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Board of Commissioners which appointed the member, taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such
a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the
member shall request it in writing.
E. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board
may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any
hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the
Board as provided in this chapter.
F. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the Township, and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Board of Commissioners, as requested by
the Board of Commissioners.
§ 245-19.9 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-19.9
227:919
§ 245-19.10. Hearings.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following requirements:
G. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Commissioners,
the Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the
Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as
may be fixed by the Board of Commissioners, but in no case shall it
exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members
of the Board of Commissioners.
A. The Board shall provide public notice and shall provide written notice to
the applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made
timely request for the same. Additional notices shall be given at such
time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by the rules of the
Board and the requirements of the Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq., provided that the notices conform to the following:
(1) Written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearings. Such
written notice must be printed on a sign with minimum dimensions
of 11 inches by 17 inches.
(2) The applicant shall provide written notice, by U.S. Mail, certified/
return receipt requested, to all adjacent property owners as
determined by then-current Cumberland County tax records.
Adjacent property owners are defined as owners of property
directly abutting the property subject to the hearing or of property
abutting public roads, streams, railroad rights-of-way, power lines
or pipelines rights-of-way which directly abut the property subject
to the hearing.
(3) Public notice of the hearing shall be published in at least one
newspaper of general circulation in the Township.
B. The first hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall be
commenced within 60 days from the date of the applicant's application,
unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.
Each subsequent hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall be
held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by
the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant shall complete
the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days of the first hearing.
C. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may
appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no
decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board; however,
the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Township, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
§ 245-19.9 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-19.10
227:920
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final.
D. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
E. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
F. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
G. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
H. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
I. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate; shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their Solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
J. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for; make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or of any law,
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision
§ 245-19.10 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-19.10
227:921
§ 245-19.11. Jurisdiction.
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
officer, and there has been no stipulation that the hearing officer's
decision or findings are final, the Board shall make the hearing officer's
report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days,
and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations
thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the
Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report
of the hearing officer. Except for challenges filed under § 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code as reenacted and amended,
where the Board fails to commence, conduct or complete the required
hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for a
hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor
of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, or on the
record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in
favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or
render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board shall give public
notice of the said decision within 10 days from the last day it could have
met to render a decision in the same manner as provided in Subsection
A of this section. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice, the
applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right
of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court
of competent jurisdiction.
K. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise brief notice
of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
L. The Board of Commissioners shall establish, by resolution, fees with
respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudication in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Board of Commissioners, pursuant
to §§ 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (hereinafter MPC), Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended.
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed from is the initial zoning
§ 245-19.10 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-19.11
227:922
ordinance of the municipality and a Zoning Hearing Board has
not been previously established, the appeal-raising procedural
questions shall be taken directly to court.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including,
but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to
act on the application therefor; the issuance of any cease-anddesist
order; or the registration or refusal to register any
nonconforming use, structure or lot.
(4) Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinances or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to § 910.2 of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805,
No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
(6) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain
or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to § 912.1 of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
(7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any performance density provisions of
this chapter.
(8) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under § 916.2 of
the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted
and amended.
(9) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management, insofar as the same relate to
development not involving applications under Article V or VII of the
Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear
and render final adjudication in the following matters:
(1) All applications pursuant to § 508 of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended for approval of
subdivisions or land developments under Article V of the
Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended.
(2) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this
chapter.
§ 245-19.11 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-19.11
227:923
§ 245-19.12. Variances.
(3) Applications for curative amendment to this chapter or pursuant to
§§ 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
(4) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in § 609 of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended. Any action on
such petitions shall be deemed legislative acts, provided that
nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to enlarge or
diminish existing law with reference to appeals to court.
(5) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Township Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance
or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management, insofar as the same relate to
application for land development under Articles V and VII of the
Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended. Where such determination relates only to development
not involving an Article V or VII application, the appeal from such
determination of the Zoning Officer or the Township Engineer shall
be to the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to this section.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of
application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning
Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter for
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is, therefore, necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
§ 245-19.11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-19.12
227:924
§ 245-19.13. Special exceptions.
Where the Board of Commissioners in this chapter has stated special
exceptions to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant
to express standards and criteria, the Zoning Hearing Board shall hear
and decide requests for such special exceptions in accordance with such
standards and criteria below:
§ 245-19.14. Conditional use.
Where the Board of Commissioners in this chapter has stated conditional
uses to be granted or denied by the Board of Commissioners pursuant
to express standards and criteria, the Board of Commissioners shall hear
and decide requests for such conditional uses in accordance with such
standards and criteria below:
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
A. The location of the use, including with respect to the existing or future
streets giving access to it, is in harmony with the orderly and
appropriate development for the district in which the use is to be
located.
B. The nature and intensity of the operations involved are in harmony with
the orderly and appropriate development of the district in which the use
is to be located.
C. The grant of the special exception shall not materially increase traffic
congestion on roads and highways, nor cause nor encourage
commercial or industrial traffic to use residential streets.
D. The applicant must meet all specific requirements for the specified use
in accordance with Article XIV, herein.
E. In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this
chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter and the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended.
A. The location of the use, including with respect to the existing or future
streets giving access to it, is in harmony with the orderly and
§ 245-19.12 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-19.14
227:925
§ 245-19.15. Referrals to the Upper Allen Township commissions,
committees and Engineer.
§ 245-19.16. Parties appellant before the Board.
Appeals raising the substantive validity of any land use ordinance, except
those to be brought before the Board of Commissioners pursuant to the
Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended; procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption of a land use ordinance; or appeals from the
determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the
granting or denial of any permit or failure to act on the application therefor,
the issuance of any cease-and-desist order or the registration or refusal
to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot; from a determination
by the Township Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to the
administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such
provisions within a land use ordinance; from the determination of any
officer or agency charged with the administration of any transfers of
development rights or performance density provisions of this chapter; from
the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township Engineer in the
appropriate development for the district in which the use is to be
located.
B. The nature and intensity of the operations involved are in harmony with
the orderly and appropriate development of the district in which the use
is to be located.
C. The grant of the conditional use shall not materially increase traffic
congestion on roads and highways, nor cause nor encourage
commercial or industrial traffic to use residential streets.
D. The applicant must meet all specific requirements for the specified use
in accordance with Article XIV herein.
E. In granting a conditional use, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this
chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board, in the case of special exceptions and
variances, and the Board of Commissioners, in the case of conditional
uses, may refer applications to the Planning Commission, the Township
Engineer, or any other committee, commission or advisor for their
advice but is not required to do so.
B. Within 30 days of receiving an application for a special exception or
conditional use or within 40 days of receiving an application for a
variance from the decision-making body, the referral body or advisor
must give a written report on it to the decision-making body.
§ 245-19.14 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-19.16
227:926
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference
to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management, insofar
as the same relate to development not involving subdivision and land
development or planned residential development, may be filed with the
Board, in writing, by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the
Township, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance and for special
exception may be filed with the Board by any landowner or any tenant with
the permission of such landowner.
§ 245-19.17. Time limitations.
§ 245-19.18. Stay of proceedings.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later
than 30 days after an application for development, preliminary or final,
has been approved by the Township if such proceeding is designed to
secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner, unless such
person alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge, or reason
to believe that such approval had been given. If such person has
succeeded to their interest after such approval, they shall be bound by
the knowledge of their predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone
other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on a
tentative plan or from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a
challenge to the validity of this chapter or an amendment hereto or map
or an amendment thereto shall preclude an appeal from a final approval
except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates
from the approved tentative approval.
B. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
A. Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
and during its pendency before the Board, all land development
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning
Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall
be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or
body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property; in which case, the development or
official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction
of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other
appropriate agency or body. When an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed
to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a
condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
§ 245-19.16 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-19.18
227:927
§ 245-19.19. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance amendments.
B. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by
the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
C. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
D. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney
fees incurred by the petitioner.
A. The Board of Commissioners may from time to time amend, supplement
or repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter. The
procedures for the preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance, as set
forth in § 607 of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,
as reenacted and amended, is hereby declared optional.
B. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map
change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by
the Township at points deemed sufficient by the Township along the
tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area
shall be posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing. In
addition to the requirement that notice be posted, where the proposed
amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of the public hearing
shall be mailed by the municipality at least 30 days prior to the date of
the hearing by first class mail to the addresses to which real estate tax
bills are sent for all real property located within the area being rezoned,
as evidenced by the tax records within the possession of the
municipality. The notice shall include the location, date and time for the
public hearing. A good faith effort and substantial compliance shall
satisfy the requirements of this subsection. This clause shall not apply
when the rezoning constitutes a comprehensive rezoning.
C. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Board of Commissioners shall submit each such
§ 245-19.18 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-19.19
227:928
§ 245-19.20. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the Planning
Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
D. If after any public hearing held upon an amendment the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Board of Commissioners shall hold
another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to
vote on the amendment.
E. At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the
Board of Commissioners, the Township shall submit the proposed
amendment to the county planning agency for recommendations.
F. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the county planning agency.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map or any provisions thereof
which prohibit or restrict the use or development of land in which he
has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Board of
Commissioners with a written request that his challenge and proposed
amendment be heard and decided as provided in § 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended. The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to
the Planning Commission and the county planning agency as provided
in § 609, and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as provided in
§§ 610 and 916.1 of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, as reenacted and amended.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with § 908 of the
Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended, and all references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board shall,
for purposes of this section, be references to the Board of
Commissioners; provided, however, that the deemed approval provision
of § 908 of the Pennsylvania MPC (Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 as
reenacted and amended) shall not apply and the provision of § 916.1 of
the Pennsylvania MPC shall control. If the Township does not accept a
landowner's curative amendment brought in accordance with this
subsection and a court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit,
the court's decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for this
entire chapter and Zoning Map but only for those provisions which
specifically relate to the landowner's curative amendment and
challenge.
C. The Board of Commissioners, if it determines that a validity challenge
has merit, may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or
without revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will
cure the challenged defects. The Board of Commissioners shall consider
§ 245-19.19 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-19.20
227:929
§ 245-19.21. Procedure for Township curative amendments.
the curative amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by
the landowner and shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of this chapter or Zoning Map.
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features; the degree to which these are protected or destroyed; the
tolerance of the resources to development; and any adverse
environmental impacts.
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
A. If the Township determines that this chapter or any portion hereof is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
(1) The Township shall declare by formal action this chapter or
portions hereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days
following such declaration and proposal, the Board of
Commissioners shall by resolution make specific findings setting
forth the declared invalidity of this chapter, which may include:
(a) References to specific uses which are either not permitted or
not permitted in sufficient quantity;
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses which requires revision; or
(c) Reference to this entire chapter which requires revisions.
(2) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Township shall enact a curative amendment to validate or reaffirm the
validity of this chapter pursuant to the provisions of § 609 of the
Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended, in order to cure the declared invalidity of this chapter.
§ 245-19.20 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-19.21
227:930
§ 245-19.22. Township and Municipal Authority exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to signs, properties, uses or structures owned
by Upper Allen Township or by a municipal authority created solely by
Upper Allen Township for uses and structures that are intended for a public
utility, stormwater, public works, recycling, municipal administrative, public
recreation or public health and safety purpose.
§ 245-19.23. Causes of action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed
to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained
or used in violation of this chapter, the Board of Commissioners or, with
the approval of the Board of Commissioners, an officer of the Township,
or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure,
landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act,
conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is
instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served
upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by
C. Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection A, the
Board of Commissioners shall not be required to entertain or consider
any landowner's curative amendment filed under § 609.1 of the
Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended, nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a
report requested under § 909.1 or 916.1 of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act
of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended, subsequent to
the declaration and proposal based upon the grounds identical or
substantially similar to those specified by the resolution required by
Subsection A(1). Upon completion of the procedures set forth in
Subsections A and B, no rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of §§
609.1 and 916.1 of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, as reenacted and amended, shall, from the date of the declaration
and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of this chapter for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
D. The Township having utilized the procedures set forth in this section
may not again utilize said procedure for a period of 36 months following
the date of enactment of a curative amendment or reaffirmation of the
validity of this chapter; provided, however, if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty imposed
upon the Township by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a
Pennsylvania appellate court decision, the Township may utilize the
provisions of this section to propose a curative amendment to this
chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
§ 245-19.21 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-19.23
227:931
serving a copy of the complaint on the Board of Commissioners. No such
action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 245-19.24. Enforcement notice.
§ 245-19.25. Enforcement remedies.
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested, in writing, by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of days.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
D. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board,
the municipality shall have the responsibility of presenting its evidence
first.
E. Any filing fees paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party by the
Township, if the Zoning Hearing Board or any court in a subsequent
appeal rules in the appealing party's favor.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
§ 245-19.23 UPPER ALLEN CODE § 245-19.25
227:932
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
district justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was
no such violation; in which event there shall be deemed to have been
only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice, and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. District justices shall have initiation jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this section.
§ 245-19.25 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § 245-19.25
227:933
Appendix
Chapter A250
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency medical charges — See Ch. 86,
Art. I.
Bicycles — See Ch. 92.
Construction Codes — See Ch. 112.
Attorney fees for municipal claims — See Ch.
133.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 200.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
217, Art. I.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Transient retail businesses — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 245.
§ A250-1. General fees. [Amended 1-15-2005 by Res. No.
772;26112-21-2006 by Res. No. 790; 12-17-2008 by Res. No. 842;
12-16-2009 by Res. No. 857; 2-3-2010 by Res. No. 863; 12-15-2010
by Res. No. 877; 12-21-2011 by Res. No. 891; 12-19-2012 by Res.
No. 899; 12-18-2013 by Res. No. 914262; 12-17-2014 by Res. No. 923;
12-16-2015 by Res. No. 943; 12-20-2017 by Res. No. 977; 6-6-2018
by Res. No. 986; 12-19-2018 by Res. No. 995; 4-3-2019 by Res. No.
1005; 6-19-2019 by Res. No. 1006; 10-16-2019 by Res. No. 1010;
12-18-2019 by Res. No. 1014]
The Upper Allen Township Fee Schedule shall be as follows:
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
POLICE
Accident report Per report $15
Parking ticket - fire
lane
Per violation $50
Handicapped parking Per violation $50
Other violations Per violation $25
Copy of video media Per copy $30
Contract for police
services
Per hour per officer
(3-hour minimum)
$100
261. Editor's Note: This resolution also provided that: "beginning 1 January 2005 and
thereafter, said Schedule of Fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners...”
262. Editor's Note: This resolution also provided that these general fees would become
effective 1-1-2014 and remain in effect thereafter until further revised.
§ 245-19.25 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A250-1
227:934
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
FIRE
Excessive false alarms Per year As per Chapter 83 of the
Township Code
PUBLICATIONS
Comprehensive Plan Per book $40 + tax ($42.40)
Subdivision Ordinance Per book $25 + tax ($26.50)
Township Maps Per map $5 + tax ($5.30)
Zoning Ordinance Per book $25 + tax ($26.50)
Codified Ordinance Per PDF CD $25 + any additional
costs
Comprehensive
Recreation and Open
Space Plan
Per book $15 + tax ($15.90)
Act 537 Sewerage
Facilities Plan Update
(1999)
Per book $50 + tax ($53)
Act 537 Sewerage
Facilities Plan Update
(2009)
Per book $25 + tax ($26.50)
Standard Construction
and Material
Specifications for
Sanitary Sewer
Extensions (includes
Detail Drawings)
Per book $35 + tax ($37.10)
Sanitary Sewer Detail
Drawings only
Per book $10 + tax ($10.60)
Stormwater
Management
Ordinance
Per book $15 + tax ($15.90)
SOLICITING
1 day Per person $10
1 week Per person $25
1 month Per person $50
1 year Per person $100
MEETING ROOM RENTAL
Individuals
§ A250-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § A250-1
227:935
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Township residents Per hour/day $15 (2-hour
minimum)/$100 + $100
refundable deposit
Non-Township
residents
Per hour/day $25 (2-hour
minimum)/$165 + $100
refundable deposit
Organizations/
Businesses
Township for-profits Per hour/day $25 (2-hour
minimum)/$165 + $100
refundable deposit
Non-Township forprofits
Per hour/day $40 (2-hour
minimum)/$265 + $100
refundable deposit
Township nonprofits Per hour/day No charge except for a
$100 refundable deposit
(this includes those who
may not have a
Township address but
who serve the
Township)
Non-Township
nonprofits
Per hour/day $25 (2-hour
minimum)/$165 + $100
refundable deposit
MISCELLANEOUS
§ A250-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A250-1
227:936
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Street opening permit Per permit (to include
initial review and one
inspection)
Open cut right-of-way:
For streets paved more
than five years from the
date of permit
application: $150 per
the first 100 square feet
+ $50 for each
additional 100 square
foot thereafter (or
portion thereof); For
streets paved less than
five years from the date
of permit application:
$500 per the first 100
square feet + $50 for
each additional 100
square foot thereafter
(or portion thereof) +
approval by Board of
Commissioners. Open
cuts in grass or
nonpavement area only
(within the rights-ofway):
$50 each 100
square feet (or portion
thereof). Permit fee
doubles if work
commences before
permit is obtained and
fees paid. Applicant is
responsible for charges
that may incur as a
result of additional
review time and/or
inspections. Additional
review time and
inspection time is
charged at $50 per hour
(one-hour minimum),
unless a separate
consulting firm fee is
charged, as approved by
the Board of
Commissioners.
Degradation fee: For
streets paved less than
§ A250-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § A250-1
227:937
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
five years from date of
permit application:
200% of the fee value.
Permit fee doubles if
work commences before
permit is obtained and
fees paid
Sidewalk fee (in lieu of
construction)
Per plan 110% of current cost of
construction
Returned check fee Per check $50 (plus additional
costs)
Recycling containers Per container As per Township cost
Recreation fee
(residential)
Per residential dwelling $2,300
Recreation fee
(commercial)
Per employee $200 based on use and
square footage
Board of appeals for
property maintenance,
non-UCC appeals
Per case $400 + all costs
incurred over $400 by
the Township
Appeals and
interpretations before
the governing body,
other
Per case $400 + all costs
incurred over $400 by
the Township
Excavation and fill
permit
Per permit $30 permit fee doubles
if work commences
before permit is obained
and fees paid
Leaf mulch/wood chip
delivery
Per load (full or partial) $50
Special request signs Per request Post, base and
hardware: $45; Labor:
$150; + cost of sign
§ A250-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A250-1
227:938
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Curb and sidewalk
materials and
operations testing
Per lot or right-of-way New construction/
repair/replacement as
part of an active
subdivision and/or land
development plan:
Actual cost incurred by
the Township,
Consulting Engineer, or
other designee for all
tests and inspections,
plus any costs that may
incur as a result of
testing or inspections
that result in a failing
notice.
COPYING/SCANNING/PLOTTING
Photocopies (to include
requests under PA
Right to Know Law)
Per page $0.25
Scans/plots of blackline
maps or drawings
Per square foot $2
Scans/plots of color
maps or drawings/
photo sheets
Per square foot $6
RECREATIONAL FACILITY FEES
Sports/athletic field
single use
Per field per day $75
Sports/athletic field
camp rental
Per field per half day $125
Sports/athletic field
camp rental
Per field per full day $200
League fee
[Nonresident or adult
(18+)]
Per field per day $25
§ A250-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § A250-1
227:939
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Tournament rental - All
organizations, youth
(U18) or adult (18+).
Note: A tournament is
defined as a
coordinated event
containing more than
one outside
organization using
Township playing
fields.
Per field, per day Resident youth - $75,
Resident adult $125.
Nonresident youth -
$150, Nonresident adult
- $250. A $100 deposit
is required per field for
tournament use.
Tournament concession
stand fee
Per concession per day $100
Non-field food/
merchandise vendor
fees - For-profit
vendors
Per vendor per day $50
Non-field food/
merchandise vendor
fees - Nonprofit
vendors
Per vendor per day $25
Picnic pavilion rental -
private family picnic
Daily rate per event Resident - $50;
nonresident - $100
Picnic pavilion rental -
other than private
family picnic
Daily rate per event Resident - $125;
Nonresident - $150
Picnic pavilion rental
for private special
events (combined with
tournaments, camps,
etc.)
Daily rate per event Resident - $50;
Nonresident - $100
Dog park initial
registration fee -
resident and/or
Daybreak Church
member
Annually $20 plus $10 for each
additional dog. After
April 30, the fee applies
for May, June, and the
entire next registration
year (July 1-June 30).
Dog park initial
registration fee -
nonresident
Annually $30 plus $10 for each
additional dog. After
April 30, the fee applies
for May, June, and the
entire next registration
year (July 1-June 30).
§ A250-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A250-1
227:940
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Dog park renewal
registration fee -
resident
Annually $15 plus $10 for each
additional dog.
Dog park renewal
registration fee -
nonresident
Annually $45 plus $10 for each
additional dog.
Dog park replacement
fob fee
Per occurrence $10
BUILDING PERMITS
Building permit
renewals and/or
extensions
Per permit $60 minimum or $5 per
$1,000 for work not
completed on original
permit, whichever is
greater
Residential,
commercial,
nonresidential building
permits (includes new
construction,
alterations, additions,
plumbing, mechanical,
electrical, energy, etc.)
Per permit $75 minimum for first
$1,000 of construction
cost plus $10 per
$1,000 thereafter. The
Township reserves the
right to recoup all costs
beyond the initial
permit fee paid by the
permit holder and/or
applicant Note: Permit
fees double if work
commences before
permit is obtained and
fees paid.
Demolition permits One building per
permit
$50 for residential
accessory structures;
$150 for all other
structures
Construction plan
review - residential and
commercial
Per plan (initial review
and one additional
review, or withdraw
after reviews)
$85 per hour - minimum
one-hour charge
§ A250-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § A250-1
227:941
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Operational permits Per permit Churches and schools -
$35 per building for
first permit; $10 each
additional building. All
other commercial
buildings - $50 per
building for first permit;
$10 each additional
building (multiple
permits may be
required)
Fire Marshal inspection Per inspection and
reinspection
$50 per half-hour
(round up to next 1/
2-hour increment);
minimum 1/2-hour
charge
PA State UCC Fee Per building and/or
demolition permit, as
required by the PA UCC
Act 157, as amended
$4.50
SUBDIVISION/LAND DEVELOPMENT/AMENDMENTS
§ A250-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A250-1
227:942
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Subdivision plans Per plan Preliminary or final -
$350 base (up to six
lots) + $15 each lot (for
seven lots or more) +
escrow account admin.
fee + all additional
costs incurred for
Township review and
comment. Preliminary/
final combined - $600
base (up to six lots) +
$15 each lot (for seven
lots or more) + escrow
account admin. fee + all
additional costs
incurred for Township
review and comment.
Lot add-ons - $350 base
(up to six lots) + $15
each lot (for seven lots
or more) + $500 initial
escrow account admin.
fee + all additional
costs incurred for
Township review and
comment.
Land development
plans
Per plan Preliminary or final -
$350 base + $20 per
acre (round up to next
full acre) + escrow
account administration
fee + all additional
costs incurred for
Township review and
comments. Preliminary/
final combined - $600
base + $20 per acre
(round up to next full
acre) + escrow account
administration fee + all
additional costs
incurred for Township
review and comments.
§ A250-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § A250-1
227:943
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Combined subdivision
and land development
plan/PRD
Per plan Tentative, preliminary
or final - $350 base (up
to six lots) + $15 each
lot (for seven lots or
more) + $20 per acre
(round up to next full
acre) + escrow account
administration fee + all
additional costs
incurred for Township
review and comments.
Preliminary/final
combined - $600 base
(up to six lots) + $15
each lot (for seven lots
or more) + $20 per acre
(round up to next full
acre) + escrow account
administration fee + all
additional costs
incurred for Township
review and comments.
Planning modules Per module $150
Escrow account
administration fee
Per escrow account for
a subdivision and/or
land development plan
or phase
Initial fee of $2,000 per
escrow account + $200
per year for each active
escrow account. All
accounts must maintain
a $1,000 minimum
balance.
Stormwater retention
fee
Per dedicated acre of
retention area or
fraction thereof
$5,000 flat fee + $2,000
for first acre + $1,000
for every additional 1/2 -
acre or fraction thereof
Sketch plan Per plan $200 base + all
additional costs
incurred for Township
review and comments
Plan recording service
fee
Per plan $20 administration fee
+ all costs required by
the County
Curative amendments Each $800 + all additional
costs incurred over
$800 by the Township
§ A250-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A250-1
227:944
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Zoning amendment/
change
Per petition $800 + all additional
costs incurred over
$800 by the Township
Conditional use Per application $400 + all additional
costs incurred over
$400 by the Township
DRAINAGE
Drainage Plan Per plan $25 review and
processing fee. $100
Engineer's fee escrow +
all costs incurred for
Township Engineer
(staff) and Consulting
Engineer review. NOTE:
If drainage plan is
associated with a
subdivision/land
development (S/LD)
plan and the Engineer's
fee escrow is provided
with the S/LD Plan,
additional escrow is not
required with the
drainage plan.
ZONING HEARING BOARD
Special exceptions and
variances
Per application $400 + all costs
incurred over $400 by
the Township
Appeals and
interpretations
Per case $400 + all costs
incurred over $400 by
the Township
Continuances Per case (if requested
by applicant)
$150
Hearing transcripts Per page Contact publisher to
purchase
SITE/BUILDING INSPECTIONS
Site improvements
inspection escrow
accounts related to an
approved subdivision
and/or land
development plan
Per approved plan or
phase
10% of construction
cost estimate with a
$1,000 minimum;
construction cost
estimate to be approved
by Township Engineer.
§ A250-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § A250-1
227:945
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Building reinspection
fee
Upon inspection of
same item (that failed
previous inspections)
$85 per hour (one-hour
minimum or as charged
by third party). Fee
shall be paid prior to
reinspection.
Building inspection Inspection not ready or
not cancelled
$50 per hour (one-hour
minimum or as charged
by third party)
Property maintenance
inspection
Per request $85 per hour (one-hour
minimum)
ENGINEERING FEE BASIS
Sewer Department
manager
As necessitated by
Township
$85 per hour (one-hour
minimum)
Consulting Engineer/
Traffic Engineer
As necessitated by
Township
Consulting firm's fee
schedule as approved by
Board of Commissioners
Township Planner
(staff)
As necessitated by
Township
$85 per hour (one-hour
minimum)
CHARGES TO RECOVER COMPLAINT/CLAIM/LIEN COSTS
Prepare and file
complaint/claim,
municipal lien
Per filing/case $100 + any additional
costs incurred by
Township
Township Solicitor As necessitated or
incurred by Township
and as incurred for all
Township-related
business
Actual cost incurred by
the Township and any
applicable late fees
allowed by law for
nonpayment
Prepare and file a
release of municipal
lien
Per filing/case As per current
Cumberland County
Prothonatary's Office
fee schedule
Court appearance
(Township personnel
only - does not include
Township Solicitor)
Per appearance/per
person
$100 minimum charge
and $100 per hour pro
rata thereafter
File writ of scire fascias Per filing/case As per current
Cumberland County
Prothonatary's Office
fee schedule
ZONING PERMITS
§ A250-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A250-1
227:946
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Home occupation
permits
Per application $100 flat fee
Zoning permit Per application $35 flat fee (waived for
temporary sign permit
for nonprofits)
Change of use, add a
use, confirm a use,
confirm a zoning
district,
nonconformance
certificate
Per application or
request
$30 flat fee per
certificate or request
Certificate of use and
occupancy (not
associated with a
building permit)
Per application $35 flat fee per
certificate
Additional zoning fees Per permit Zoning permit fees
double if work
commences before
permit is obtained and
fees paid.
SEWER RENTAL
Residential (per
dwelling unit)
Per quarter $112
Reservation of capacity
(ROC) fee
Per EDU 60% of current annual
sewer rental rate
Nonresidential monthly
base rate
Per EDU $34.43
Nonresidential cost per
1,000 gallons of water
used
Per EDU $2.99
Late payment fee Per billing quarter 10% of quarterly bill
after initial 35 days
(from date of mailing);
over 35 days add
additional 0.5% per
month of current unpaid
balance
SEWER TAPPING FEE
Sewer tapping fee -
collection portion (Res.
No. 810 - 9/19/07)
Per EDU $965
§ A250-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § A250-1
227:947
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
Sewer tapping fee -
capacity portion (Res.
No. 810 - 9/19/07)
Per EDU $1,840
Special sewer district
(Spring Run
Interceptor Sewer)
reimbursement
component (Ord. No.
777 - 4/4/18)
Per EDU $1,641.80
Special sewer district
(Lisburn Trunk Sewer)
reimbursement
component (Ord. No.
777 - 4/4/18)
Per EDU $914.80
Special sewer district
(Grantham Interceptor
Sewer) reimbursement
component (Ord. No.
777 - 4/4/18)
Per EDU $325.06
SANITARY SEWER INSPECTIONS
Sanitary sewer
inspection escrow
accounts related to an
approved subdivision
and/or land
development plan
Per approved plan or
phase
10% of construction
cost estimate with a
$500 minimum;
construction cost
estimate to be approved
by Sewer Department
manager
Additional building
inspections (requested
separately - not
associated with a
building permit)
Per inspection $85 per hour (one-hour
minimum or as charged
by third party)
Sewer connection
inspection
Per inspection $100 initial up to one
hour (then $100 per
hour or fraction thereof
after)
Building sewer repair
inspection
Per inspection $21.25 initial 1/4 hour
(then $85 per hour or
fraction thereof after)
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS (OLSDS)
§ A250-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A250-1
227:948
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
On-lot sewage disposal
system full permit
application (new
system)
Per application $530 (application
includes probe hole,
perc test, issuing
permit, 1st interim
inspection, 2nd interim
inspection, final
inspection, and
Township administrative
fee)
On-lot sewage disposal
system half permit
application for system
alterations or major
repair
Per application $300 (includes issuing
permit, 1st interim
inspection, 2nd interim
inspection, final
inspection, and
Township administrative
fee)
Probe hole Per probe $60
Percolation test Per test $170
Issuance of permit Per application $60
1st interim inspection Per application $60
2nd interim inspection Per application $60
Final inspection Per application $60
Township
administrative fee
Per application $60
On-lot sewage disposal
system permit
application for minor
repairs
Per application $150 (includes issuing
permit and 1st interim
inspection)
Additional inspections/
consultations by
Township SEO
Per hour $60
OLSDS Program
Pumper/Hauler
Business registration
Per year $25
OLSDS Program
administrative fee
Per pumping/inspection $20
Additional inspections/
consultations by
Township Engineer or
staff
Per hour $85
§ A250-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § A250-1
227:949
ITEM UNIT
FEE (plus any
additional costs)
GREASE TRAPS, GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND OIL/WATER
SEPARATORS
Fats, oils and grease
(FOG) permit fee (> 1
EDU)
Per year $100
Fats, oils and grease
(FOG) permit fee (< 1
EDU)
Per year $50
Oil/water separator
permit fee
Per year $25
WASTE SURCHARGE FEES FOR EXCESS CONCENTRATIONS OF
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS
Biochemical Oxygen
Demand (BOD)
Per pound $0.35
Ammonia Nitrogen
(NH3-N)
Per pound $0.80
Total Phosphorous
(Total P)
Per pound $1.50
Total Suspended Solids
(TSS)
Per pound $0.25
STORMWATER UTILITY FEE
Per ERU (Equivalent
Residential Unit)
Per quarter By resolution of the
Township Authority
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES (WCF)
Non-tower WCF Per application $500 for up to five small
wireless facilities or
non-tower WCF + $100
for each small wireless
facility or non-tower
WCF thereafter.
Tower-based WCF
(outside ROW)
Per application $2,500 each
Pole facility (inside
ROW)
Per application $1,000 each
Pole facility (inside
ROW)
Annual fee $750 each
Tower-based WCF
(outside ROW)
Annual fee $500 each
Small WCF Annual fee $270 each
§ A250-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A250-2
227:950
§ A250-2. Emergency medical service fees.
Emergency medical service (EMS) fees shall be as follows:
A. EMS base rates.
Code Item Unit Fee
100 Canceled call Per call $50
101 Response only Per call $50
103 Medical emergency Per call $250
104 Trauma, minor Per call $250
105 Trauma, serious Per call $250
106 Motor vehicle accident Per call $137.50
107 Routine transport (one way) Per call $150
110 Pennsylvania Turnpike Per call $100
120 Mileage, patient loaded Per mile $4
130 Standby, with crew Per hour $50
132 Standby, high school event Per event $100
135 Standby, director Per hour $18
137 Standby, first responder Per hour $9
138 Standby, EMT Per hour $13
150 Out-of-township response Per call $50
152 Waiting time Per 1/2 hour $25
B. Procedure fees.
Code Item Unit Fee
201 Mast application Per
procedure
$25
202 Mast inflation Per
procedure
$75
203 Splint, air Per
procedure
$15
204 Splint, traction Per
procedure
$25
205 Splint, pillow Per
procedure
$15
206 Obstetric delivery Per
procedure
$100
208 Infectious disease Per
procedure
$75
§ A250-2 TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES § A250-2
227:951
Code Item Unit Fee
209 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Per
procedure
$100
211 Airway control Per
procedure
$50
212 Long spine board Per
procedure
$25
213 Short spine board Per
procedure
$15
214 Splint, board Per
procedure
$10
215 Splint, vacuum Per
procedure
$15
216 Pediatric immobilizer Per
procedure
$20
299 Ambulance decontamination Per
procedure
$200
C. Supplies.
Code Item Unit Fee
302 Nasal airway Per unit $10
303 Suction catheter Per unit $20
305 Cervical collar Per unit $35
306 Oxygen Per unit $26
312 Instant sugar Per unit $6.50
313 Trauma dressing Per unit $6
314 Ipecac Per unit $6
315 Charcoal Per unit $6
316 Sodium chloride Per unit $5
318 Saline Per unit $5
320 Bag valve mask Per unit $35
321 Pocket mask Per unit $28
322 Obstetric kit Per unit $35
323 Surgipads Per unit $3.50
324 Kling Per unit $4
325 Occlusive dressing Per unit $3.50
350 Burn kit Per unit $150
351 Burn blanket Per unit $165
§ A250-2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A250-2
227:952
Chapter A251
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
§ A251-1. Appeal of Township action.
Any person aggrieved by an action of the Township or of its officers, agents
or employees may appeal that action.
§ A251-2. Applicability. [Amended 3-11-2003 by Ord. No. 570]
This grievance procedure shall be applicable to grievances not resolved by
other grievance procedures in this Code or other applicable contract, rule,
regulation or statute. The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable
to nonuniformed Township employees. The sole grievance procedure
applicable to nonuniformed Township employees shall be the procedures
as set forth in the then current Upper Allen Township Personnel Policies
and Benefits Manual (the "Manual"), as adopted from time to time by the
Township's Board of Commissioners, including any amendments thereto.
§ A251-3. Procedure.
Code Item Unit Fee
352 Burn wrap Per unit $67
353 Burn dressing, 8 x 18 Per unit $21
354 Burn dressing, 4 x 16 Per unit $15
361 Kling, nonsterile Per unit $2
399 Infection control supplies Per unit $5
D. Subscriptions.
Item Unit Fee
Upper Allen (June 1 to May 31) Per year $20
West Shore ALS Per year $15
CPR Course A Per course $5
CPR Course B Per course $10
CPR Course C Per course $15
A. Step A. Oral or written contact shall be made with the Township
Manager or Assistant Township Manager to explain the grievance,
giving all pertinent and relative information. Every effort shall be made
at this time to resolve the grievance informally. If the initial contact is
oral, a written report of the grievance shall be made by the Township,
which report shall be reviewed and signed by the grievant. In all cases,
§ A250-2 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE § A251-3
A251:953
Chapter A252
MEETING GUIDELINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Meetings — See Ch. 47.
a written report of the resolution of the grievance, if any, shall be
retained in the Township records.
B. Step B. In the event that the grievance is not resolved pursuant to Step
A within two (2) calendar weeks of its submission, the grievant shall
send a written statement to the Board of Commissioners. The Board
shall refer the grievance to the appropriate committee for its
recommendation.
C. Step C. Within two (2) calendar weeks after referral of the grievance,
the committee shall make its recommendation to the Board and shall
notify the grievant, in writing, of its recommendation. The notice shall
state that the grievant shall have the opportunity to present any
additional information regarding the grievance and the
recommendation within one (1) week of receipt of the notice.
D. Step D. One (1) week after receipt of additional information from the
grievant or, if no such information is submitted, two (2) weeks after
notification of the recommendation of the committee, the Board shall
render a decision in the matter. The decision shall include the reasons
therefor and shall be communicated, in writing, to the grievant. The
decision of the Board will be final.
§ A251-3 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A251-3
A252:954
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ A252-1. Applicability.
The following guidelines are applicable to meetings of the Board of
Commissioners, committees thereof and other public bodies of the
township, and they are hereby adopted as follows.
§ A252-1 MEETING GUIDELINES § A252-1
A252:955

ARTICLE II
Reorganizational Meetings of the Township Board of
Commissioners
§ A252-2. Meeting to be biannual; notice.
The Board of Commissioners shall meet and organize biannually on the first
Monday in January following a general election at which Commissioners
were elected. Notice of the time and place of the reorganizational meeting
shall be given to all Commissioners by mail at least five (5) days before
the proposed meeting by the Secretary of the Board. The reorganizational
meeting shall be a regular meeting.
§ A252-3. Call to order; new Commissioners to take oath of office.
§ A252-4. Election of officers; terms; vacancies.
§ A252-5. Appointments; terms; removal from office.
A. The reorganizational meeting shall be called to order by the past
President. In the event that the past President is no longer a
Commissioner, the meeting shall be called to order by the Township
Secretary who shall preside over the election of a temporary President
from among the holdover members of the Board. The Township
Secretary shall be secretary of the meeting. The certification of election
or appointment of all new Township Commissioners shall be read, and a
list of the legally elected or appointed and qualified Township
Commissioners shall be prepared.
B. The temporary President shall have a properly qualified official
administer the oath of office to such Township Commissioners as have
not previously taken and subscribed to the same.
A. Election of officers shall be by a majority of those present and voting.
B. The Township Commissioners shall at the reorganizational meeting
elect from their members a President, Vice President and Assistant
Secretary or Secretaries, who shall serve for two-year periods until the
next reorganizational meeting.
C. Vacancies in any office shall be filled by the Township Commissioners,
and such appointed officers shall serve the remainder of the unexpired
term.
A. The Board shall at the reorganizational meeting appoint:
(1) A Township Secretary.
(2) A Township Manager.
(3) A Police Chief.
(4) An Assistant Township Manager.
§ A252-2 MEETING GUIDELINES § A252-5
A252:957
§ A252-6. Duties of Board.
The Board shall at the reorganizational meeting:
§ A252-7. Committees.
Committees of the Township Board of Commissioners shall, when
specifically charged to do so by the Board, conduct studies, make
recommendations to the Board and act in an advisory capacity, but shall not
take action on behalf of the Board as a whole.
(5) A Township Engineer.
(6) A Township Solicitor.
(7) An independent auditor.
(8) A Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor.
(9) Citizens to such vacancies that there shall be on the various boards
and commissions of the township.
B. The terms of office for Subsection A(1) through (8) above shall be for
two-year periods until the next reorganizational meeting. The terms of
office for appointments to other boards and commissions shall be for
the term designated for that board or commission.
C. Appointees of the Board may be removed from office for incompetency,
intemperance, neglect of duty, violations of the First Class Township
Code263 or other improper conduct, provided that the appointee so
charged shall have been given due notice of the reason therefor and an
opportunity for a hearing and provided that said removal has been
approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full number of
Township Commissioners.
A. Designate a newspaper or newspapers of general circulation in the
township, as defined in accordance with the provisions of the First
Class Township Code,264 to be used for publishing legal notices.
B. Designate at least once for each month of the calendar year a normal
day, place and time for regular meetings.
A. Committees shall consist of no more than two (2) members of the
Board.
B. Members shall be appointed by the President.
C. The President shall appoint at the reorganizational meeting or as soon
after the reorganizational meeting as practical members of the Board to
263. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
264. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ A252-5 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A252-7
A252:958
serve on the following standing committees where they shall serve
terms of two (2) years until the next reorganizational meeting:
(1) Administration.
(2) Planning and Zoning.
(3) Public Safety.
(4) Public Improvements.
(5) Parks and Recreation.
D. Ad hoc committees may be created, charged and assigned a fixed
termination date which may be extended, from time to time, by the
President or a majority of the Commissioners present at any meeting at
which the need for a committee becomes evident. Members of
committees shall serve until the committee is discharged.
§ A252-7 MEETING GUIDELINES § A252-7
A252:959

ARTICLE III
Meetings of the Board of Commissioners
§ A252-8. Parliamentary authority.
Robert's Rules of Order, newly revised, including small group rules, shall
govern the determination of matters of parliamentary procedure during
meetings of the Board.
§ A252-9. Quorum.
A quorum shall be three (3) Commissioners present at a meeting. No
business shall be transacted at a meeting without a quorum, but the
Commissioners at such a meeting may adjourn to another time.
§ A252-10. Presiding officer.
The President shall preside at all meetings of the Board. In the absence,
disability or disqualification of the President, the Vice President shall act
instead; if neither person is present, a Commissioner shall be elected
President Pro Tempore by a plurality of those present to preside at the
meeting only. The act of any person so designated shall be legal and binding.
§ A252-11. Notice.
Notice of all open public meetings of the Board, including committee
meetings and discussion sessions, shall be given by the publication of the
date, place and time of such meetings in the newspaper(s) of general
circulation designated by the Board and the posting of such notice at the
Township Office.
A. Notice of regular meetings shall be given by the publication and posting
of a schedule showing the date, place and time of all regular meetings
for the calendar year at least three (3) days prior to the time of the first
regular meeting.
B. Notice of all special meetings shall be given by publication and posting
of notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of the meeting,
except that such notice shall be waived when a special meeting is called
to deal with an actual emergency involving a clear and present danger
to life or property.
C. Notice of rescheduled meetings shall be given by publication and
posting of notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of the
meeting.
D. Notice of all recessed or reconvened meetings shall be given by posting
a notice of the place, date and time of meeting and sending copies of
such notice to interested parties.
E. Notice of all public meetings shall be given to any newspaper
circulating in Cumberland County or a radio or television station which
§ A252-8 MEETING GUIDELINES § A252-11
A252:961
§ A252-12. Regular meetings.
so requests. Notice of all public meetings shall be given to any
individual who so requests and who provides a stamped, addressed
envelope for such notification.
F. Notice of all regular and special meetings of the Board shall be given to
Commissioners by mail or telephone not later than twenty-four (24)
hours prior to the time of the meeting.
G. Notice of executive sessions, if not previously announced, shall be
provided in writing or by telephone to members of the Board at least
twenty-four (24) hours prior to the executive session.
A. Regular meetings of the Board shall be public and shall be held at least
once every month.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Secretary/Manager and the Board
President to prepare an agenda of the items of business to come before
the Board at any regular meeting. The agenda, together with all such
reports as can be completed, shall be provided each Commissioner at
least three (3) days before the meeting.
C. The order of business shall be as follows, unless altered by the
Chairperson or a majority of those present and voting:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Pledge of allegiance.
(3) Roll call.
(4) Speakers from the audience.
(5) Awarding of bids.
(6) Reports from:
(a) The Treasurer.
(b) The Police Chief.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer.
(d) The Fire Safety Officer.
(e) The Fire Company Liaison Officer.
(f) The Manager.
(g) The Engineer.
(h) The Solicitor.
(7) Planning and Zoning.
§ A252-11 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A252-12
A252:962
§ A252-13. Special meetings.
§ A252-14. Address by public.
A member of the public present at a meeting of the Board may address the
Board in accordance with the Board's rules.
§ A252-15. Voting.
§ A252-16. Minutes.
(8) Administration.
(9) Public improvements.
(10) Public safety.
(11) Parks and recreation.
(12) Other business.
(13) Adjournment.
A. Special meetings shall be public and may be called for special or
general purposes.
B. The President may call a special meeting at any time and shall call a
special meeting upon the presentation of requests, in writing, of two (2)
Commissioners. Upon the President's failure or refusal to call a special
meeting, such meeting may be called at any time by a majority of the
Commissioners.
C. The order of business shall be as follows unless altered by the
chairperson or a majority of those present and voting:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Roll call.
(3) Reading of notice of meeting.
(4) Transaction of business for which the meeting was called.
(5) Transaction of any other business.
(6) Adjournment.
A. All motions shall require for adoption a majority vote of those
Commissioners present and voting.
B. All votes shall be taken by roll call.
A. The Board shall cause to be made and retain as a permanent record of
the township minutes of all open meetings of the Board. Said minutes
shall be comprehensible and complete and shall show:
§ A252-12 MEETING GUIDELINES § A252-16
A252:963
§ A252-17. Adjournment.
The Board may at any time recess or adjourn to an adjourned meeting at
a specified date and place upon the affirmative vote of a majority of those
present. The adjourned meeting shall take up its business at the point in
the agenda where the motion to adjourn was acted upon. Notice of the
rescheduled meeting shall be given as provided in § A252-11.
§ A252-18. Executive session.
(1) The date, place and time of the meeting.
(2) The names of members present.
(3) The presiding officer.
(4) The substance of the discussion preceding the taking of all official
actions.
(5) Actions taken.
(6) Recorded votes and a record by individual members of all roll call
votes taken.
(7) The names of all citizens who appeared officially and the subject of
their testimony.
B. The Secretary shall provide each Commissioner with a copy of the
minutes of the last meeting no later than three (3) days before the next
regular meeting.
C. Tape recordings shall be made of each meeting of the Board as an
administrative aid and shall be destroyed when said purpose has been
served.
D. The minutes of Board meetings shall be approved at the next
succeeding meeting.
E. The approved minutes shall be signed by the Secretary of the Board.
A. The Board may hold an executive session, which is not an open meeting,
before, during or at the conclusion of an open meeting or at some other
time. The presiding officer shall announce the reason for holding the
executive session. The announcement can be made at the open meeting
prior to or after the executive session.
B. The Board may hold an executive session for discussion on any one (1)
or more purposes permitted under Section 8 of the Pennsylvania
Sunshine Act, Act No. 1986-84,265 and in accordance with the
procedures and limitations set forth therein. Those purposes may
include but are not limited to the following:
265. Editor's Note: 65 P.S. § 278.
§ A252-16 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A252-18
A252:964
§ A252-19. Discussion sessions.
§ A252-20. Committee meetings.
(1) Employment and employee issues.
(2) Conduct of collective bargaining.
(3) The purchase or lease of real estate.
(4) Consultation with an attorney or other professional advisor
regarding potential litigation or identifiable complaints which may
lead to litigation.
(5) Matters which must be conducted in private to protect a lawful
privilege or confidentiality.
C. Official actions based on discussions held in executive sessions shall be
taken at a public meeting.
A. The Board may meet as a committee of the whole in an open meeting to
discuss issues to be acted upon at a subsequent regular or special
meeting of the Board, except that no official action may be taken at the
discussion meeting. Public notice of such meetings shall be made.
B. A meeting of the committee of the whole, not regularly scheduled, may
be called at any time by the President. The President shall call such a
meeting when requested to do so by two (2) Commissioners. Public
notice of such meeting shall be made in accordance with § A252-11.
A. Committee meetings may be called at any time by the committee
chairperson with proper public notice.
B. A majority of the total membership of a committee shall constitute a
quorum. Where the committee is composed of two (2) persons, one (1)
person in attendance shall constitute a quorum.
C. Unless held as an executive session, committee meetings shall be open
to the public, other Board members and township officials and
employees.
D. The committee chairperson may invite employees, contractors or other
persons who may have special knowledge of the area under
investigation.
E. Board members who are not committee members but who attend
committee meetings may not vote on committee matters.
F. A regularly scheduled committee meeting may be canceled by posting a
notice of cancellation at the Township Office.
§ A252-18 MEETING GUIDELINES § A252-20
A252:965

ARTICLE IV
Public Participation in Meetings of the Board of Commissioners;
Official Township Boards and Commissions Meetings
§ A252-21. Purpose.
The Board recognizes the value to township governance of public comment
on township issues and the importance of involving members of the public
in its meetings and those of other township boards and commissions.
§ A252-22. Period for public participation to be provided.
In order to permit fair and orderly expression of such comment, the Board
or a committee thereof or a commission will provide a period for public
participation at their open meetings during which official action may be
taken.
§ A252-23. Duties of presiding officer at meeting.
The presiding officer at each such public meeting will follow the rules of the
Board for conduct of public meetings and in accordance with the rules set
forth in this policy on public participation.
§ A252-24. Rules for participation.
The presiding officer shall be guided by the following rules:
A. Public participation shall be permitted at the discretion of the presiding
officer on a given issue.
B. The Board or a committee thereof or a commission requires that public
participants be residents of the township or:
(1) Anyone having registered a legitimate interest in a contemplated
action of the Board or a committee thereof or a commission.
(2) Anyone representing a group in the community.
(3) Any representative of a firm eligible to bid on materials or services
solicited by the Board.
(4) Any employee of the township.
(5) The official representative of another municipality or council of
government.
C. All persons wishing to participate in such a public meeting shall sign
the book provided in the meeting room prior to the start of the meeting.
At the option of the presiding officer, other persons may be recognized
at the end of the meeting.
§ A252-21 MEETING GUIDELINES § A252-24
A252:967
D. Participants must be recognized by the presiding officer and must
preface their comments by an announcement of their name, address
and group affiliation, if appropriate.
(1) All participants shall come forward and speak into the microphone.
(2) Each statement by a participant shall be limited to no more than
five (5) minutes' duration.
(3) No participant may speak more than once on the same topic until
all others who wish to speak on that topic have been heard.
(4) All statements shall be directed to the presiding officer. No
participants may address or question the Board's or a committee's
or commission's members individually.
(5) The presiding officer may:
(a) Interrupt or terminate a participant's statement when the
statement is too lengthy, personally directed, abusive, obscene
or irrelevant.
(b) Request any individual to leave the meeting when that person
does not observe reasonable decorum.
(c) Request the assistance of law enforcement officers in the
removal of a disorderly person when that person's conduct
interferes with the orderly progress of the meeting.
(d) Call for a recess or an adjournment to another time when the
lack of public decorum so interferes with the orderly conduct
of the meeting as to warrant such action.
(e) Waive these rules with the approval of the Board.
E. The portion of the meeting during which the participation of the public
is invited shall be limited to thirty (30) minutes.
F. Electronic recording devices and cameras other than those used as
official recording devices will be permitted at public meetings as long
as they do not detract from the decorum of the meeting or interfere
with the deliberations of the Board or a committee thereof or a
commission.
G. No placards or banners will be permitted within the meeting room or on
township grounds without prior approval.
H. A copy of the meeting agenda will be attached to the bulletin board in
the meeting room.
§ A252-24 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A252-24
A252:968
ARTICLE V
Citizen Advisory Committees
§ A252-25. Purpose.
Citizen advisory committees are sometimes useful in keeping the Board
informed with regard to community opinion and in representing the
community in the study of specified township problems.
§ A252-26. Creation of new committees.
A. In creating a new advisory committee, the Board shall define the
committee assignment and shall:
(1) Appoint members who are interested and can make some special
contribution to the committee's function and who reside in the
township.
(2) Seek the widest range of community interest and background.
(3) Appoint the President and Secretary/Manager or other township
official as ex officio members of all advisory committees.
B. In charging a new advisory committee, the Board shall:
(1) Set a date for a preliminary and final report.
(2) Establish a budget, if necessary, but expenditures of township
funds by advisory committees shall be made only upon approval of
the Board.
C. Recommendations of all advisory committees shall not reduce the
responsibility of the Board, which shall be free to accept or reject the
recommendations as it sees fit. Meetings of an advisory committee are
not regular meetings of the Board and shall not be open to the public.
§ A252-25 MEETING GUIDELINES § A252-26
A252:969

ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ A252-27. Copy on file.
A copy of this chapter will be maintained at the Township Office and will be
available during regular business hours to the public upon request.
§ A252-27 MEETING GUIDELINES § A252-27
A252:971
Chapter A253
SMOKING
§ A253-1. Smoking prohibited in public areas.
The Board of Commissioners of Upper Allen Township hereby adopts a
policy of prohibiting smoking at all times in the public areas of the Township
Building at 100 Gettysburg Pike, which "public areas" are defined herein
and include, but are not limited to, the Commissioners' meeting room on
the upper level, the public meeting room on the lower level, the open office
area of the administrative office suite on the upper level and the open office
area of the police office suite on the lower level and access and lobby areas
of the upper and lower levels of the Township Building.
§ A253-2. Manager to provide notice of policy.
The Township Manager be and he/she hereby is authorized and directed
to promulgate this policy by publishing notice of it in all such public areas
of the Township Building and making all personnel of the township and
all persons involved in arranging and conducting public meetings in the
Township Building aware of the policy.
Chapter A254
PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY
§ A254-1. Adoption of policy.
§ A254-2. EXHIBIT A: Upper Allen Township Policy for
Implementing the Amended Right-to-Know Law.
Access to public records.
A. The Board of Commissioners declares and accepts, and it hereby does
approve, adopt and establish, the proposed Upper Allen Township
Policy for implementing the amended Right-to-Know Law (the
"Township's Right-to-Know Policy"), pursuant to Act-100 of 2002, as
attached hereto and marked as Exhibit A; and
B. The officers and appropriate officials of Upper Allen Township be and
they hereby are authorized and designated to take any and all further
action necessary or desirable to effect the implementation of the
Township's Right-to-Know Policy.
A. The purpose of this policy is to assure compliance with the Pennsylvania
Right-to-Know Law, 65 P.S. § 66.1 et seq., as amended, to provide access
to public records of Upper Allen Township (the "Township"), to preserve
the integrity of Township records, and to minimize the financial impact
to the residents of the Township regarding the resources utilized in the
§ A252-27 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A254-2
A253:972
receipt and process of public record requests and the retrieval and
copying of public records.
B. It is the policy of the Township to require the presence of a designated
employee when public records are examined and inspected and to
charge reasonable fees for duplication of public records of the
Township. The Board of Commissioners designates the Township
Manager as responsible for assuring compliance with the Pennsylvania
Right-to-Know Law, in accordance with the following guidelines:
(1) The Township Manager may designate certain employee(s) to
process public record requests.
(2) The Township is responsible for minimizing, where possible, the
financial impact to the Township regarding the resources utilized in
the receipt and processing of public record requests and the
retrieval and copying of public records.
(3) All requests for public records of the Township under this policy
shall be specific in identifying and describing each public record
requested. In no case shall the Township be required to create a
public record which does not exist or to compile, maintain, format
or organize a public record in a manner in which the Township does
not current compile, maintain, format or organize the public
record. All requests for public records shall be submitted in writing
and on a form provided by the Township, as attached hereto,
entitled "Public Record Review/Duplication Request."266
(4) The designated employee shall make a good faith effort to
determine whether each record requested is a public record.
(5) The Township Manager, or his designee, shall facilitate a
reasonable response to a request for the Township public records.
In no case is the Township expected to provide extraordinary staff
to respond to the request but will respond in a manner consistent
with the Township Manager's administrative responsibilities and
consistent with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Right-to-
Know Law.
(6) The designated employee shall respond to the request as promptly
as possible under the circumstance existing at the time of the
request, but not later than five business days from the date of
receipt of the written request. If the Township does not respond
within five business days of receipt thereof, the request is deemed
denied.
(7) The response provided by the Township shall consist of 1) approval
for access to the public record; 2) review of the request by the
designated employee; or 3) denial of access to the record
requested.
266. Editor's Note: Said form is available in Township offices.
§ A254-2 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY § A254-2
A254:973
(8) If access to the public record requested is approved, the public
record shall be available far access during the regular business
hours of the Township. The designated employee shall cooperate
fully with the requester, while also taking reasonable measures to
protect the Township's public records from the possibility of theft
and/or modification. The presence of a designated employee is
required when public records are examined and inspected.
(9) Fees for duplication of public records shall be as set forth in the
Township's General Fee Schedule as adopted from time to time by
the Board of Commissioners. The Township may in its discretion
waive fees.
(10) In the event the estimated cost of fulfilling a request submitted
under this policy is expected to exceed $100, the designated
employee(s) shall obtain prepayment of the estimated cost in
advance of fulfilling the request, to avoid unwarranted expense of
Township resources.
(11) If the request is being reviewed, the notice provided by the
Township shall be in writing and shall notify the requester that the
request for access is being reviewed, the reason for the review and
the expected response date, which shall be within 30 days of notice
of review. If the date a response is expected is not met within 30
days thereof, or if the Township does not respond within 30 days
thereof, the request shall be deemed denied. Review of the request
shall occur when the Township determines that one of the following
applies:
(a) The record requested contains information which is subject to
access as well as information which is not subject to access
that must be redacted prior to a grant of access. The redacted
information is deemed a denial as to that information;
(b) The record requires retrieval from a remote location;
(c) A timely response cannot be accomplished due to staffing
limitations;
(d) A legal review is necessary to determine whether the record
requested is a public record;
(e) The requester has failed to comply with the Township's policy
and procedure requirements regarding access to public
records;
(f) The requester refuses to pay the applicable fees as set forth in
Subsection B(9) and (10).
(12) If access to the record requested is denied, the notice provided by
the Township shall be in writing as indicated on the form attached
§ A254-2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § A254-2
A254:974
Disposition List
Chapter DL
hereto,267 entitled "Denial of Request to Review and/or Duplicate
Upper Allen Township Records," and shall include the following:
(a) A description of the records.
(b) The specific reason for the denial, including a citation of
supporting legal authority. If the denial is the result of a
determination that the record requested is not a public record,
the specific reason for the Township's determination that the
record is not a public record shall be included.
(c) The typed or printed name, title, business address, business
telephone number and signature of the Township Manager or
his designee on whose authority the denial has been issued.
(d) The date of the response.
(e) The procedure to appeal the denial of access under the Rightto-
Know Law.
(13) If the request is denied or deemed denied, the requester may file
exceptions with the Township's Board of Commissioners within 15
business days of the mailing date of the Township's notice of denial
or within 15 days of a deemed denial. The exception must:
(a) Indicate the date of the original request;
(b) Identify and describe the record(s) requested;
(c) State the grounds upon which the requester asserts the
record(s) is a public record; and
(d) Address any ground stated by the Township in its notice of
denial.
(14) The Board of Commissioners shall review the exceptions and may
conduct a hearing to assist in making a final determination. A final
determination will be made within 30 days of the mailing date of
exceptions, unless extended by agreement of the parties. If the
denial is upheld, the decision shall contain a written explanation of
the reason for denial and an explanation of the process for further
appeal.
(15) This policy shall be posted conspicuously at the Township.
(16) This policy shall take effect on 20 December 2002.
267. Editor's Note: Said form is on file in the Township offices.
§ A254-2 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY § A254-2
A254:975
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
474 6-17-1993 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
475 Street acceptance NCM
476 8-19-1993 Street acceptance NCM
477 9-16-1993 Street acceptance NCM
478 9-16-1993 Building construction, fire
prevention, mechanical
standards, plumbing and
property maintenance
amendments
Repealed by Ord. No.
548
479 10-21-1993 Authorization to
participate in investment
program
NCM
480 12-7-1993 Holding tanks Ch. 200, Art. VI
481 12-16-1993 Nonuniformed Employee
Pension Plan and Fund
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
568
482 12-16-1993 Appropriation NCM
483 12-16-1993 1994 budget, expenditures
and taxes
NCM
484 2-17-1994 Street acceptance NCM
485 4-21-1994 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
588
486 4-21-1994 Fire prevention
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
548
487 6-16-1994 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
588
488 6-16-1994 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 220
489 12-15-1994 Street acceptance NCM
490 12-15-1994 Appropriation NCM
491 12-15-1994 1995 budget, expenditures
and taxes
NCM
492 10-19-1995 Street acceptance NCM
493 12-21-1995 Appropriation NCM
§ A254-2 UPPER ALLEN CODE § DL-1
A254:976
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
494 12-21-1995 1996 budget, expenditures
and taxes
NCM
495 10-17-1996 Township Manager
amendment
Ch. 44
496 10-17-1996 Emergency Management
Agency
Ch. 22
497 11-21-1996 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 220; Ch. 245
(repealed by Ord. No.
588)
498 12-19-1996 Appropriation NCM
499 12-19-1996 1997 budget, expenditures
and taxes
NCM
500 1-7-1997 Bond NCM
501 2-20-1997 Treasurer/Tax Collector
amendment
Ch. 67, Art. II
502 5-15-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
503 12-18-1997 Street acceptance NCM
504 12-18-1997 1998 budget, expenditures
and taxes
NCM
505 12-18-1997 Appropriation NCM
506 12-18-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
507 2- -1998 Street vacation NCM
507 5-21-1998 Plumbing Repealed by Ord. No.
548
508 5-21-1998 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord. No.
548
509 5-21-1998 Fire prevention Repealed by Ord. No.
548
510 5-21-1998 CABO One- and Two-
Family Dwelling Code
Superseded by Ord.
No. 548
511 5-21-1998 BOCA National Building
Code
Repealed by Ord. No.
548
512 5-21-1998 Mechanical standards Repealed by Ord. No.
548
513 7-7-1998 Bond NCM
514 9-17-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY § DL-1
A254:977
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
515 9-17-1998 Electrical standards Repealed by Ord. No.
548
516 10-15-1998 Authorization to enter
agreement
NCM
517 12-17-1998 Industrial pretreatment
program
Ch. 200, Art. IV
518 12-17-1998 Industrial pretreatment
program amendment
Ch. 200, Art. IV
519 12-17-1998 1999 budget, expenditures
and taxes
NCM
520 12-17-1998 Appropriation NCM
521 Street vacation NCM
522 1-12-1999 Street acceptance NCM
523 4-15-1999 Smoke detectors repealer Ch. 204, repealer
only
524 4-15-1999 Street acceptance NCM
525 4-15-1999 Tax certifications Ch. 223, Art. VII
526 5-27-1999 Street acceptance NCM
527 4-15-1999 Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights
Ch. 223, Art. VIII
528 6-17-1999 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
588
529 8-19-1999 Building Code and One
and Two Family Dwelling
Code amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
548
530 9-16-1999 Attorneys' fees for
municipal claims
Ch. 133, Art. I
531 10-21-1999 Fire-damaged property
amendment
Ch. 136, Art. I
532 11-18-1999 Street acceptance NCM
533 12-16-1999 Appropriation NCM
534 12-16-1999 2000 budget, expenditures
and taxes
NCM
535 12-30-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
536 1-20-2000 Street acceptance NCM
537 2-17-2000 Street acceptance NCM
538 3-7-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § DL-1
A254:978
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
539 7-20-2000 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
548
540 11-16-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
541 12-21-2000 Appropriation NCM
542 12-21-2000 2001 budget, expenditures
and taxes
NCM
543 1-18-2001 Police pension fund
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
567
544 2-15-2001 Street acceptance NCM
545 3-6-2001 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
546 4-10-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
547 4-19-2001 Sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. II
548 7-21-2001 Code enforcement Repealed by Ord. No.
584 (with exception
of property
maintenance)
549 7-10-2001 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
550 9-20-2001 Street acceptance NCM
551 9-20-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
552 11-15-2001 Street acceptance NCM
553 12-11-2001 Public safety radio system
amplifiers
Ch. 192
554 12-11-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
555 12-20-2001 Appropriation NCM
556 12-20-2001 2002 budget, expenditures
and taxes
NCM
557 12-20-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
558 1-7-2002 Fire Marshal/Fire
Prevention Officer
Ch. 26
559 1-17-2002 Street acceptance NCM
560 4-18-2002 Park and Recreation Board
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
793
§ DL-1 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY § DL-1
A254:979
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
561 11-12-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
562 11-21-2002 Street acceptance NCM
563 11-21-2003 Bond NCM
564 12-19-2002 Street acceptance NCM
565 12-19-2002 Appropriation NCM
566 12-19-2002 2003 budget, expenditures
and taxes
NCM
567 12-19-2002 Police pension plan Ch. 55, Art. II
568 12-19-2002 Nonuniformed employees
pension plan
Ch. 55, Art. III
569 2-20-2003 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 55, Art. II
570 3-11-2003 Grievance procedure
amendment
Ch. A251
571 3-20-2003 Joint recreation agreement NCM
572 4-8-2003 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 220
573 7-17-2003 Police pension plan
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
576
574 9-18-2003 Code enforcement
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
584
575 11-20-2003 Nonuniformed employees
pension plan amendment
NCM
576 11-20-2003 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM
577 11-20-2003 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM
578 11-20-2003 Sewer and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 200
579 12-9-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
580 12-9-2003 Street acceptance NCM
581 12-9-2003 Street acceptance NCM
582 12-18-2003 Appropriation NCM
583 12-18-2003 2004 budget, expenditures
and taxes; fire hydrant tax
amendment
NCM; Ch. 233, Art.
IV
§ DL-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § DL-1
A254:980
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
584 5-10-2004 Uniform construction
codes
Ch. 112
585 6-7-2004 Property maintenance Ch. 189
586 10-11-2004 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
587 11-18-2004 Appropriation NCM
588 12-16-2004 Zoning Repealed by Ord. No.
771
589 SALDO amendments Ch. 220
590 12-27-2004 Taxation: emergency and
municipal services tax
Repealed by Ord. No.
645
591 12-27-2004 Appropriations NCM
592 12-27-2004 2005 budget NCM
593 1-10-2005 Street adoption NCM
594 5-19-2005 Street condemnation NCM
595 6-7-2005 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 205
596 6-7-2005 Sewers: grinder pumps Ch. 200, Art. VII
597 6-16-2005 Open burning; recycling Ch. 105; Ch. 210
598 6-16-2005 Taxation: emergency and
municipal services tax
Ch. 223,
599 7-11-2005 Sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 200
600 7-21-2005 Right-of-way
condemnation
NCM
601 9-6-2005 Sewers amendment Ch. 200
602 9-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
603 11-17-2005 Street acceptance NCM
604 12-15-2005 Street acceptance NCM
605 12-15-2005 Sewage disposal systems,
on-lot
Ch. 199
606 12-15-2005 2006 Budget NCM
607 12-15-2005 2006 tax rate Ch. 223
Res. No.
772
12-15-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A250
608 1-19-2006 Cable franchise agreement NCM
§ DL-1 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY § DL-1
A254:981
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
609 1-19-2006 Park and Recreation Board
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
793
610 4-10-2006 Taxation amendment Ch. 223, Arts. I and V
611 5-8-2006 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 220
612 5-8-2006 Stormwater management Superseded by Ord.
No. 689
613 5-8-2006 Street acceptance NCM
614 5-8-2006 Street acceptance NCM
615 5-18-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
616 5-18-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
617 5-18-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
618 10-9-2006 Easement NCM
619 10-9-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
620 10-9-2006 Nonuniformed employee
plan amendment
NCM
621 10-9-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
622 10-9-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
623 Number not used
624 11-6-2006 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement for
participation in
Cumberland County Land
Partnerships grant
program
NCM
625 11-16-2006 Street acceptance NCM
626 11-16-2006 Street acceptance NCM
627 11-16-2006 Street acceptance NCM
628 12-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
629 12-21-2006 Budget NCM
630 12-21-2006 Budget NCM
§ DL-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § DL-1
A254:982
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
631 12-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
Res. No.
790
12-21-2006 Fees amendment Ch. A250
632 2-7-2007 Street acceptance NCM
633 2-7-2007 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM
634 2-7-2007 Nonuniformed pension
plan amendment
NCM
635 3-7-2007 Sewers: industrial
pretreatment standards
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. IV
636 4-18-2007 UCC amendment Ch. 112
637 4-18-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
644
638 6-6-2007 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
639 6-20-2007 Reservation of sanitary
sewer capacity fee
Repealed by Ord. No.
651
640 7-2-2007 Intergovernmental
agreement for operations
of Mechanicsburg
Municipal Swimming Pool
Ch. 175, Art. II
641 7-18-2007 Animals amendment Ch. 88
642 7-18-2007 Special fire police for
mutual aid
Ch. 73
643 8-1-2007 Taxation: tax certifications
amendment
Ch. 223, Art. VII
644 9-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
Res. No.
810
9-19-2007 Sewer tapping fees
amendment
Ch. A250
645 10-3-2007 Taxation: local services tax Ch. 223, Art. V
646 10-17-2007 On-lot sewer disposal
system management
amendment
Ch. 199
647 11-20-2007 Street acceptance in
Whitney Ridge
NCM
§ DL-1 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY § DL-1
A254:983
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
648 12-19-2007 Street acceptance in
Canterbury Estates
NCM
649 12-19-2007 2008 budget; fire hydrant
tax amendment; local
services tax amendment
NCM (budget); Ch.
223, Arts. IV and V
650 12-19-2007 Appropriations NCM
651 2-6-2008 Reservation of sanitary
sewer capacity; fees
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. V; Ch.
A250
652 2-20-2008 Sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. II
653 5-7-2008 Sewer use and rentals
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. III
654 6-4-2008 Sewer use and rentals
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. III,
footnote only
655 7-2-2008 On-lot sewage disposal
systems amendment
Ch. 199
656 10-1-2008 Cable franchise agreement NCM
657 10-15-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Res. No.
842
12-17-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A250
658 12-17-2008 2009 budget and levy of
various taxes
NCM
659 Budget NCM
660 1-7-2009 Street acceptance NCM
661 1-21-2009 Police Pension Plan and
Fund
See Ch. 55, Art. II
662 1-21-2009 Employees Pension Plan
and Fund
See Ch. 55, Art. III
663 1-21-2009 Taxation: collection of
delinquent taxes
Ch. 223, Art. IX
664 6-17-2009 Zoning amendment (flood
damage prevention)
Repealed by Ord. No.
771
665 7-15-2009 General obligation note NCM
666 12-16-2009 Street acceptance NCM
667 12-16-2009 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
668 12-16-2009 2010 budget and levy of
various taxes
NCM
§ DL-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § DL-1
A254:984
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
669 12-16-2009 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
857
12-16-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A250
670 1-20-2010 Street acceptance NCM
Res. No.
863
2-3-2010 Fees amendment Ch. A250
671 2-17-2010 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
672 2-17-2010 Health and sanitation
repealer
Ch. 151, reference
only
673 2-17-2010 Bond NCM
674 5-5-2010 Control of dogs and other
animals amendment
Ch. 88, Art. I
675 5-5-2010 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
676 6-2-2010 Parks and recreation: rules
and regulations
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
794
677 7-7-2010 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 83
678 8-18-2010 Sidewalk, curb and
driveway construction
Ch. 217, Art. II
679 8-18-2010 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. II
680 8-18-2010 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. II
681 11-3-2010 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
682 12-15-2010 Taxation: local economic
revitalization tax
assistance
Ch. 223, Art. X
683 12-15-2010 Industrial pretreatment
program amendment
Ch. 200
684 12-15-2010 2011 budget; fire hydrant
tax amendment
NCM (budget); Ch.
223, Art. IV
685 12-15-2010 Appropriation NCM
686 12-15-2010 Taxation: earned income
tax amendment
Ch. 223, Art. I
Res. No.
877
12-15-2010 Fees amendment Ch. A250
§ DL-1 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY § DL-1
A254:985
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
687 1-5-2011 Street acceptance NCM
688 3-2-2011 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
689 3-16-2011 Stormwater management Ch. 214
690 4-20-2011 Bond NCM
691 8-17-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
692 9-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
693 9-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
694 9-21-2011 Parks and recreation: rules
and regulations
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
794
695 12-21-2011 2012 budget; fire hydrant
tax amendment
NCM (budget); Ch.
223, Art. IV
696 12-21-2011 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
891
12-21-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A250
697 2-15-2012 Street acceptance NCM
698 3-21-2012 Bond NCM
699 4-18-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
700 7-18-2012 Local economic
revitalization tax
assistance amendment
Ch. 223, Art. X
701 12-19-2012 2013 budget and levy of
various taxes
NCM
702 12-19-2012 Appropriation NCM
703 12-19-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Res. No.
899
12-19-2012 Fees amendment Ch. A250
704 2-20-2013 Stormwater management
amendment; subdivision
and land development
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 214; Ch. 220; Ch.
245 (repealed by
Ord. No. 771)
705 4-3-2013 Tax certifications
amendment
Ch. 223, Art. VII
§ DL-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § DL-1
A254:986
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
706 4-3-2013 Salaries and
compensation: Treasurer/
Tax Collector amendment
Ch. 67, Art. II
707 4-3-2013 Public safety radio system
amplifiers amendment
Ch. 192
708 4-3-2013 Fire Marshal/Fire
Prevention Officer
amendment
Ch. 26
709 4-17-2013 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 220
710 5-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
711 9-4-2013 Street vacation NCM
712 12-4-2013 Transportation
Development District
NCM
713 12-4-2013 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. II
714 12-18-2013 Transportation
Development District
NCM
715 12-18-2013 2014 budget and levy of
various taxes
NCM
716 12-18-2013 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
914
12-18-2013 Fees amendment Ch. A250
717 3-5-2014 Street acceptance NCM
718 3-19-2014 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 200
719 5-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
720 6-18-2014 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
721 7-16-2014 Storm sewers: illegal
discharges and illicit
connections
Ch. 197, Art. I
722 7-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
723 Street acceptance NCM
724 9-17-2014 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 205
§ DL-1 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY § DL-1
A254:987
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
725 9-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
726 11-5-2014 Street acceptance NCM
727 12-17-2014 Street acceptance NCM
728 12-17-2014 2015 budget and levy of
various taxes
NCM
729 12-17-2014 Appropriation NCM
730 12-17-2014 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. II
Res. No.
923
12-17-2014 Fees amendment Ch. A250
731 1-7-2015 Nonuniformed Employee
Pension Plan and Fund
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. III
732 2-4-2015 Street acceptance NCM
733 2-18-2015 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
734 2-18-2015 Nonuniformed Employee
Pension Plan and Fund
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. III
735 2-18-2015 Nonuniformed Employee
Pension Plan and Fund
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. III
736 3-4-2015 Bond NCM
737 5-20-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 189
738 5-20-2015 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
739 5-20-2015 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 220
740 6-3-2015 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. II
741 7-15-2015 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 200
742 7-15-2015 Control of animals
amendment
Ch. 88, Art. I
743 7-15-2015 Public safety radio system
amplifiers amendment
Ch. 192
§ DL-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § DL-1
A254:988
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
744 9-16-2015 Public safety radio system
amplifiers amendment
Ch. 192
745 10-7-2015 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
746 10-21-2015 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
747 12-16-2015 Street acceptance NCM
748 12-16-2015 Appropriation NCM
749 12-16-2015 2016 budget and levy of
various taxes
NCM
Res. No.
943
12-16-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A250
750 1-20-2016 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
771
751 4-20-2016 Street acceptance NCM
752 5-18-2016 Bond NCM
753 9-7-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
street openings and
excavations
Ch. 217, Art. I
754 10-19-2016 Street acceptance NCM
755 12-21-2016 2017 budget and levy of
various taxes
NCM
756 12-21-2016 Appropriation NCM
757 12-21-2016 Taxation: tax certifications
amendment
Ch. 223, Art. VII
758 12-21-2016 Salaries and
compensation: Treasurer/
Tax Collector amendment
Ch. 67, Art. II
759 1-4-2017 Street acceptance NCM
760 1-18-2017 Street acceptance NCM
761 1-18-2017 Street acceptance NCM
762 1-18-2017 Storm sewers: illegal
discharges and illicit
connections amendment;
stormwater management
amendment; subdivision
and land development
amendment
Ch. 213, Art. I; Ch.
214; Ch. 220
§ DL-1 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY § DL-1
A254:989
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
763 2-1-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
764 4-19-2017 Bond NCM
765 5-3-2017 Street acceptance NCM
766 8-16-2017 Hotels, motels and inns:
guest register
Ch. 157, Art. I
767 8-16-2017 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 200
768 9-6-2017 Appropriation NCM
769 10-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 233
770 12-20-2017 Public safety radio system
amplifiers
Ch. 192
771 12-20-2017 Zoning Ch. 245
772 12-20-2017 2018 budget and levy of
various taxes
NCM
773 12-20-2017 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
977
12-20-2017 Fees amendment Ch. A250
774 1-2-2018 Street acceptance NCM
775 1-17-2018 Street acceptance NCM
776 2-7-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 245
777 4-4-2018 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal Amendment
Ch. 200
778 4-4-2018 Police Pension Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. II
Res. No.
986
6-6-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A250
779 5-15-2018 Taxation: Volunteer
Service Credit for
Qualifying Volunteers
Serving the Upper Allen
Township Fire Department
Ch. 223, Art. XI
780 8-15-2018 Bicycles Repealer Ch. 92, reference
only
781 12-19-2018 2019 Budget and Levy of
Various Taxes
NCM
782 12-19-2018 2019 Budget and Levy of
Various Taxes
NCM
§ DL-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § DL-1
A254:990
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
995
12-19-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A250
783 4-3-2019 Street acceptance NCM
784 4-3-2019 Street acceptance NCM
785 4-3-2019 Street acceptance NCM
Res. No.
1005
4-3-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. A250
786 6-19-2019 Streets and Sidewalks:
Street Openings and
Excavations Amendment
Ch. 217, Art. I
Res. No.
1006
6-19-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. A250
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
787 7-17-2019 Street Acceptance NCM 38
788 10-2-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 245 38
Res. No.
1010
10-16-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. A250 38
789 11-6-2019 Subdivision and
Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 220 38
790 12-18-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Sidewalk, Curb
and Driveway
Construction
Amendment
Ch. 217, Art.
II
38
791 12-18-2019 2020 Budget and
Levy of Various
Taxes
NCM 38
792 12-18-2019 Appropriation NCM 38
Res. No.
1014
12-18-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. A250 38
793 2-5-2020 Park and
Recreation Board
Ch. 51 39
794 2-5-2020 Parks and
Recreation: Rules
and Regulations
Ch. 175, Art.
I
39
§ DL-1 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS POLICY § DL-1
A254:991
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
795 4-15-2020 2020 Budget
Amendment
NCM 39
796 7-15-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 233 39
§ DL-1 UPPER ALLEN CODE § DL-1
A254:992