




TOWNSHIP OF UPPER YODER
CAMBRIA COUNTY PENNSYLVANIA


ORDINANCE NO.	r{?09

AN	ORDINANCE REQUIRING ALL PERSONS, PARTNERSHIPS, BUSINESSES, AND CORPORATIONS		TO OBTAIN A BUILDING PERMIT FOR ANY CONSTRUCTION OR DEVELOPMENT;		PROVIDING FOR THE ISSUANCE OF SUCH BUILDING PERMITS; SETTING FORTH CERTAIN MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT	WITHIN AREAS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF UPPER YODER WHICH ARE SUBJECT TO FLOODING; AND ESTABLISHING PENALTIES FOR ANY  PERSONS WHO FAIL, OR REFUSE TO COMPLY WITH, THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS ORDINANCE.


BE	IT ENACTED an d ORDAINED by the Township of Upper Yoder, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted an d ordained by the authority of the same as follow s :

ARTICLE	I.	GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1.00 - Intent

The intent of this Ordinance is to:

A.	Promote the genera l health, welfare and safety of the community .

B.	Encourage the utilization of appropr iate construction practices in
order to pr event or minimize f lood damage in the future.

C . Minimize danger to public  health by  protecting water  supply and
natural  d rainage.

 
D.	Reduce	financial	burdens	imposed	on
 
the	community,	its
 
governmental units, and	its d evelopment in areas subject
 
residents,	by
to flooding.
 
preventing excessive
 

E.	Comply with federal and state floodplain management	requirements .

Section	I.OJ	- Applicability

A.	It shal l be unl awful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construc ­ tion or development anywhe re w ithin the Township unless a Building Permit has been obtained from the Building Permit Officer.

B.	A Building Permit shall	not	be	required	for	minor	repairs to
existing buildi ngs or structures.
 


Section 1.02 - Abrogation and Greater Restrictions

This Ordinance supersedes any  other conflicting provision which may be in effect in identified floodplain areas . However, any other ordinance provisions	shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If  there  is  any conflict between any of the provisions of this Ordinance, the more restrictive shall apply.

Section  1 .03 - Severability

If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or  phrase of this Ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.

Section  1 .04 - Warning and Disclaimer of Liability

The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions  of this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural cause, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain area, or that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.

This Ordinance shall not cr eate liability on the part of the Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative d ecision lawfully made thereunder.



ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION

Section 2.00 - Building Permits Required

Building Permits shall be required before  any construction  or d evelop­ m ent is undertak en within any area of the Township.

Section 2.01 - Issuance of Building Permit

 
A.	The	Building after		it	has
 
Permit	Officer	shall issue a Building Permit only
been	determined	that	the	proposed	work	to b e
 
undertaken will	be in	conformance with	the requirements of this
and all other applicable codes and ordinances.

B.	Prior to the issuance of any Building Permit,	the Building P e rmit Officer shall	review th e	app l ication for	permit to determine	if
 

all other necessary government permits required by State and Federal laws have been obtained , such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); the U.
S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. 1344.   No Permit shall
be issued until this determination has been made.

C.	No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse until all  adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by the Borough, and until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the Department of Environmental Resources , Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management.

In addition, the Federal Insurance Administrator and Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs, Bureau of Community Planning, shall be notified by the Township prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.

Section 2 .02 - Application Procedures and Requirements

 
A.	Application for such a building permit shall be to the Building Permit Officer on forms supplied Such application shall contain the following:
 

made, in writing,
by the Township.
 

I.	Name and address of applicant.

2 .	Name	and	address	of	owner	of land on which proposed
construction is to occur .

3.	Name and address of contractor

4 .	Site location.

5.	Listing of other permits required.

6.	Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost.

 
7 . A plan of the site showing  the of	the proposed construction buildings or structures .
 
exact	size and location as well as any existing
 

B.	If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially	within any identified floodplain area, applicants for Building Permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient		detail and clarity to enable the Building Permit Officer to determine that:

I.	All such proposals are consistent within the need to minimize flood damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
 

 
2.	All utilities electrical and to minimize or
 

and facilities, such as  sewer  gas, water systems are located and constructed eliminate flood damage; and
 

 
3 .	Adequate drainage is provided
to flood hazards.
 

so as	to reduce exposure
 

Applicants	shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information (e.g., any or all of the technical information contained in Section 5.01) as may be required by the Building Permit officer to make the above determination:

I.   A completed Building Permit Application Form.

 
2 .	A plan of the a	scale	of (100) feet or
 
entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at one (I) inch being equal to one hundred less, showing the following:
 

a.	North arrow, scale and date;

b.	Topographic contour lines, if available;

 
c .	All property and	lot sions, and	the size acres or square feet;
 

lines	including dimen­
of the site expressed	in
 

d.	The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements, including		the location of any existing or proposed	subdivision and land development;

e.	The	location	of all	existing streets, drives
	and	other accessways; and

f.	The location of any existing bodies  of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including direction and  elocities.

 
3.	.	Plans of all proposed improvements,	drawn following:
 
buildings,	structures	and other at	suitable		scale	showing	the
 

a.	The propos ed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929;

 
b •	The elevation of flood;
 
the	one	hundred	(JOO year
 

c.	If	available,	information	concerning	flood
 

depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other  factors associated with a one hundred (100) year flood; and

 
d.	Detailed	information	concerning
floodproofing measures.
 
any proposed
 

4.	The following data and documentation:

a.	Documentation,	certified	by	a	registered
	professional	engineer	or	architect	to show
that  the  cumulative  effect  of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District, when combined	with all other existing and an­ ticipated development, will  not  increase the
elevation	of	the one hundred	(100) year flood
more than	one	foot at any point.

b.	A document, certified by a registered professional		engineer or architect, which states	that the proposed construction or development		has been adequately designed to withstand	the pressures, velocities, impact and	uplift forces associated within the one hundred	(100) year flood.

Such statement shall include a des c ription of the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been incorporated  into the design of the structure and/or the development.

c.	Detailed information needed to determin e compliance with Section 4.02 F., Storage, and Section	4.03, Development Which May Endanger Human Life, including:

 
(i)	the amount, location and any dangerous		materials ces which	are intended produced,		stored	or maintained	on site.
 

purpose of or substan­ to be used, otherwise
 

(ii) a description of the safeguards incorporated	into the design of the proposed	structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in Section 4.03 during	a one hundred (100) year flood.

d.	The appropriate component of the Department of Environm ental Resources'	"Planning Module for
 

Land Development".

e .  Where any excavation of grading is proposed, a pl an meeting the requirements of the Depart­ ment of Environmental Resources, to implement and	maintain erosion and sedimentation control.

Section 2.03 - Review of Application by Others

A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Building Permit Officer to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g. planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.) for review and comment.

Section 2.04 - Changes

After the issuance of a Building Permit by the Building Permit Officer, no changes of any  kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application	without the written consent or approval of the Building Permit Officer. Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the application to Building Permit Officer for consideration .

Section 2.05 - Placards

In addition to the Building Permit, the Building Permit Officer shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the Building Permit, the date of its issuance and be signed by the Building Permit Officer.

Section 2.06 - Start of Construction

Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin within six (6) months and shall be completed within twelve (1 2) months after the date of issuance of the building permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Building Permit Officer.	Construction and/or development shall be considered to have started with the preparation  of land, land clearing, grading, erection of temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface footings,		or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes, or electrical or other service lines from the street.

Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Building Permit Officer to approve such a request.

Section 207 - Inspection and Revocation
 

A.	During the construction period, the  Building  Permit  Officer or other authorized  official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information provided	on the permit application and with  all  applicable municipal	laws and ordinances. He shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.

B.	In the discharge of his duties, the Building Permit Officer shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or development		in the identified flood-prone area, upon presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable · hour to enforce the provisions	of this Ordinance.

C.	In the event the Building Permit Officer discovers that the work does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and	ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation	by any applicant, the Building Permit Officer shall		revoke the Building Permit and  report such fact to the Board for whatever action it considers necessary.

 
D.	A record of all such inspections and violations shall be maintained.
 
of this Ordinance
 

Section 2.08 - Fees

Applications	for a Building Permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality based upon the estimated cost  of the proposed construction as determined by the  Building Permit Officer at the following rates:

 
Estimated Cost
$	0.00 to $200.00
$201 .00 to $1,000.00
Each additional $1,000.00 or part
thereof beyond	the first $1,000.00
 
Fee
$0"-:-oo
To be determined To be determined
 
Section 2.09 - Enforcement

A.	Notices

Whenever the Building Permit Officer or other authorized municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this Ordinance or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Building Permit Officer shall give notice of such  alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall (a) be in writing; (b) include a statement of the reasons  for its issuance;
(c) allow a reasonable time not  to exceed a period of (30) days for the performance of any act it requires; (d) be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served  upon such  owner or agent when a copy thereof has
 

been served with such notice by any other method authorized or required	by the laws of this State; (e) contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

B . Penalties

Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this Ordinance or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order of direction of the Building Permit Officer or any other authorized employee of the municipality shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to Township of not less than Twenty-Five ($25.00) Dollars, nor more than Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars, plus costs of prosecution. In default of such payment, such person shall be imprisoned in county prison for a period not to exceed ten (JO) days . Each day during which any violation of this Ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved including an  action in equity for the proper enforcement of this Ordinance.  The imposition of a fine or penalt y for any violation of, or noncom­ pliance with, this Ordinance shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and noncomplian­ ces within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed,  enlarged, altered or relocated, in noncompliance with this Ordinance may be declared by the Board  to  be a public nuisance and abatable as such .

Section 2. JO - Appeals

A.	Any person aggrieved by an action or  decision  of  the Building Permit Officer  concerning the administration of the provisions of this Ordinance may appeal to  the  Board.  Such  appeal  must be filed, in writing, within thirty (30) days after the decision or action of the Building Permit Officer.

B.	Upon receipt of such appeal the Board shall set a time and place, within not less than ten (JO) nor more than thirty (30) days, for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the  time and place at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.

C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board may seek relief therefrom	by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this Commonwealth including the Pennsylvania Flood  Plain Management Act.
 


ARTICLE III.  IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS

Section 3.00 - Identification

The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of Upper Yoder Township which are subject to the one hundred (100) year flood, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) which accompanies the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared by the Borough by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), dated November 19, 1976, or the most recent revision thereof.

Section 3.01 - Description of Floodplain Areas/Districts

 
The identified	floodplain specific areas/districts:
 
area	shall	consist	of	the	following two
 

A . The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which one hundred	(100) year flood elevations have been provided in the FIS.

B. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an  A Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no one hundred (100) year flood elevations have been provided . For these	areas, elevation and floodway information from other Federal, State or other acceptable source shall be used when available.	Where other acceptable information is not available, the elevation shall be determined by using the elevation  of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.

In lieu of the above, the municipality may  require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineer­ ing techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstra­ ted qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.

Section 3.02 - Changes in Identification of Area

The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administra­ tion (FIA).

Section 3.03 - Boundary Disputes
 

Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the Township Planning Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.





ARTICLE IV. GENERAL TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS

Section 4.00 - General

A.	In the identified floodplain area, the development and/or use of any land shall be permitted provided that the development and/or use complies with the restrictions and  requirements of this and all	other applicable codes and ordinances in force in the municipality.

B.	Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall be permitted that would cause any increase in the  one hundred (100) year flood elevation.

C.	Within any AE Area/District,  no new  construction or development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated  that  the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing	and anticipated development, will not increase  the elevation of  the one  hundred (100) year flood more than one (I) foot at any point.

D.	Within any identified	floodplain	area,	no	new	construction or development shall	be located	within the area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the		top-of-bank of	any watercourse,	unless a permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Resources, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management.

E.	Within any identified floodplain area, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of any new or substantially improved residential structure shall be one and one-half (1-1/2) feet or more above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.

F.	Within any identified floodplain area, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of any new or substantially improved nonresidential	structure shall be one and one-half (1-1/2) feet or more above the one hundred (JOO) year flood elevation or be floodproofed up to that height.

Any	nonresidential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest floor (including basement) which is not elevated to at least one and one-half (1-1/2) feet above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation, shall be floodproofed in a  completely or essentially dry manner in accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards contained in  the  publication  entitled "Flood-Proofing

IO
 

Regulations" published b y the U. S. A rmy Corp s of Engineers (June 1972), or w ith some other e quiv a l ent standard. All pl ans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied b y a statement	certified  b y a regis t ered  profe ss iona l  enginee r or a rchitect which states that the proposed desi gn and methods of construction	are in conformance with the a bove referenced standards.

 
G. En c losed	areas
prohibit e d .
 
below	th e	lowest floor (including ba sement) are
 

Section 4.01 - Special Requirem ent for the AE Area/District

Within any AE Area/District, no new construction or dev e lo pment shall be allowed		unl ess it is d emo nstrated that the cumulative effect of the propos ed  d evelopment,  when  combin ed  with  all  other  existing  and an ti cipat ed deve lopment, will not increase the elevation of the one hundred	(100) year flood more than one (I) foot at any p o int.

Section 4.02 - Design and Construction Standards

The following minimum standards shall  apply  for  all  cons t ruction and
developm ent proposed within any identified floodplain area:

A.	Fill

If f ill is used, it shall:

I.	Extend laterally	at least	fifteen (15) feet beyond the
bu ilding line f rom a ll points;

 
2 .	Consist of soil or sm al l rock m ateria l s only
Landfill s sh a ll not b e permitted;
 
- San it ary
 

 
3 .	Be compa c t ed
resistance to
 
to provide	th e necessary perm eability and eros ion, scouring, or set tlin g;
 

4.	Be no s t eepe r th an one (I) vertical to two (2) h orizon­ tal, fee t unl ess sub st antiate d data, justi fying steep er slopes a re submitted to , and ap pro ved by the Building Permit Officer; and

 
5.	Be used	to th e	extent to	whi ch it
affect ad jacent properties.
 
does not adversely
 

B.	Drainage Facilit ies

Storm dr ainage facilit ies shall b e des igned to convey the flow of storm water runo ff in  a safe and efficient manne r. The system shall insure prop er d rainage along s tr ee ts, and provide positive drainage away  from buildings.  The system shall a l so b e designed to prevent the disch arge  of excess  runoff onto  a d jacent pro p er-

I I
 

ties.

C.	Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems

I.	All new or replacement  water  and  sanitary  sewer facilities and systems shall be located, designed and constructed	to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters.

2.	Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into flood waters.

3.	No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all State and local regulations for such systems.	If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamina­ tion from it, during a flood.

D.	Other Utilities.

All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and con­ structed to minimi e the chance of impairment during a flood.

E.	Streets

The finished elevation of all	new streets shall be no more than one (I) foot below the Regulatory Flood Elevation.

F.	Storage

All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal  or plant life, and not listed in Section 4.03 - Development Which May Endanger Human Life, shall be stored at or above the Regulatory Flood Elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.

G.	Placement of Buildings and Structures

All buildings and structures shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water.

H.	Anchoring

I.	All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance	within accepted engineering  practices  to prevent	flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
 

2.	All air ducts, large pipes, sto rage t ank s and oh er similar objects or  comp onen t s  located  below  the Regula tory Flood Elevation shall b e securely anc h ored or affixed	to prevent flotation .

I.	Floo r s , Walls and Ceiling s

I.	Wood	flooring	used	a t	or	below th e Regulatory Flood
	Elevation shall b e in st a lled	to	accommodate	a lateral
expansion of the floor ing, perpendicul ar to the flooring
gra in w ithout causing structura l damage t o the bui lding .

2	.  Plywood u sed a t or below the  Regulatory Flood Elevation sh a ll b e of a "mar ine" or "wate r-resi stant" variety.

3	. Walls and ceilings at or b e low t he Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be d esigne d and const ructed of materials th a t are water-resistant and wi ll withstand inundation.

 
4	.	Windows,	doors	and	o th er	components	a t Reg ul atory Flood Elev a tion sh a ll	b e	ma d e oth er water-resistant  material.
 
o r below the
of	metal o r
 

J.	P aints and Adhesives

I.	Paints or o ther finish es used at or below the Regulatory Flood Eleva tion sh all be of "marine " or water-resistant qu ality .

 
2.	. A dhesives u sed Elevat ion shall variety.
 
at	or
b e	of	a
 
below	the
"marine "
 
Regulatory	F lood
or water-resistant
 

3 .	A ll	wooden	comp onents	(doors,	trim,	cabinets,  etc.) shall be f ini sh ed	w ith	a	"marine"	or  water-resistant paint or other finish ing m ate rial.

K . Electrica l Components

 
I.	Electrical distribution
(3)	feet	above	the
elevat ion .
 
panels shall one	hundred
 
be at least three
(100)	year	flood
 

2 .  Separate  e l ectrica l  circuits  shal l serve lower levels
and shal l b e dropped	from above.

L.	Equipment

Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning an d ventilat ing units, and othe r mechanica l or utility e quipment or apparatus shal l not be located below th e Reg ulatory Flood Elevation.
 

M.	Fuel Supply Systems

All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water infi l tration occurs.

Section 4 .03 - Development Which May Endanger Human Life

A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Management Act,	and the
 
regulations	adopted	by	the required by the Act, any new which:
 
Department	of Community Affairs as
or substantially	improved structure
 

will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or,

will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other com­ parable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or

 
will	involve	the	production,	storage amount of radioactive substances;
 
or	use of any
 

shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous to human life:

I .	Acetone
2.	Ammonia
3.	Benzene
4.	Calcium carbide
5.	Carbon disulfide
6.	Celluloid
7.	Chlorine
8.	Hydrochloric	acid
9.	Hydrocyanic	acid JO.	Magnesium
I I. Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
12.	Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
13.	Phosphorus
14.	Potassium
15.	Sodium
1 6.  Sulphur and  sulphur products
17.	Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides)
18.	Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances
are not otherwise regulated.

b.	Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any	new or
 

 
substantially	improved	structure
Subsection A. above, shall be:
 
of	the	kind	described	1.n
 

I.	Elevated	or designed and constructed to remain complete ­
	ly	dry	up	to	at	least one and one -half (1 -1/2) feet
above the one hundred	(100) year flood and,

 
2 . Designed to prevent activity during the flood .
 
pollution course	of
 
from	the	structure or
a one hundred	(100) year
 

Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing contained in the publica­ tion "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (u. S . Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.

Section 4.04 - Special Requirements for Manufactured	Homes

A.	Within any identified floodplain area, all  manufactured homes and any additions thereto shall b e prohibited within the area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.

 
B.	Where	permitted	within	any	identified	floodplain
manufactured homes and additions thereto shall be:
 
area,	all
 

I.	Anchored to resist flotation, co ll apse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors in accordance with the American National Standards as specified in the Standard for the Installa­ tion	of Mobile Homes Including Mobile Horne Park Requirements	(NFPA No. 50 1A- 1 974 ANSI A ll 9.3-1 975) as amended	for Mobile Homes in Hurricane Zones or other appropriate standards such as th e fol lowing:

a.	Over-the-top ties shall be provided	at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured	home, with	two	(2)	additional	ties	per	side at intermediate	locations	for		units fifty (50) feet or more in length, and one (I) additional tie per	side for	units less		than fifty (50) feet in length.

b.	Frame ties shall be provided at each corner o f the manufactured home, with five (5) addition­ al ties per s ide at intermediate l ocations for units fifty   (50) feet  or more in length, and four (4)   additional ties  per  side  for units less than fifty (50) feet in length.
 

c.	All components of the  anchoring system shall be	capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds.

2.	Elevated	in accordance with the following requirements:

a.	The	stands	or	lots	shall	be	elevated	on
	compacted fill,	or	on	pilings	so	that the
lowest floor	of the manufactured home will be
one and one-half (1-1/2)	feet	or	more above
the	elevation	of	the one hundred (100) year
flood.

b.	Adequate	surface drainage is provided.

c.	Adequate	access for a hauler is provided.

d.	Where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large enough to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten (10) feet apart; reinforcement shall be provided for pilings that will extend for	six (6) feet or more above the ground level.

 
C.	An evacuation plan  indicating  alternate escape	route shall be filed with  the officials for manufactured home parks.
 
vehicular	access and appropriate		Township
 



ARTICLE V.  ACTIVITIES REQUIRING SPECIAL PERMITS

Section 5.00 - General

 
In accordance with the	administrative Department	of	Community	Affairs		to Plain Management		Act,	the		following within any	identified floodplain	area issued by the Township.
 
regulations promulgated by the implement the Pennsylvania Flood activities shall be prohibited unless a Special Permit has been
 

A.	The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:

1.	Hospitals
2.	Nursing homes
3.	Jails or prisons

 
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new home	park or manufactured home subdivision, or improvement to an existing manufactured home  park or
 
manufactured substantial manufactured
 

home subdivision.

Section 5.01 - Application Requirements for Special Permits

 
Applicants	for	Special
following items:
 
Permits	shall	provide	five (5) copies of the
 

 
A. A written request including tion Form.
 
a completed	Building Permit Applica-
 

B . A small	scale map showing the vicinity	in which the proposed	site
is located.

 
C.	A plan of the entire site, clearly and one	(I)	inch	being	equal	to	one showing the following:
 
legibly drawn at a scale of
hundred	(JOO) feet or less,
 

I.	North arrow, scale and date;

2.	Topography based	upon	the	National	Geodetic Vertical
	Datum of 1929, showing	existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two (2) feet;

3.	All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed	in acres or square feet;

4.	The	location	of	all	existing	streets, drives, other
	accessways and	parking areas,	with information concern ­
	ing	widths,	pavement	types	and	construction,	and
elevations;

5.	The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, buildings, structures and other public or private	facilities, including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and man made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity or development;

6.	The location of the floodplain boundary line, informa­ tion and  spot  elevations  concerning  the  one hundred (100) year  flood elevations  and information concerning the flow of water including direction and velocities;

 
7 .	The	location	of	all
utilities and any other
 
proposed	buildings, improvements; and
 
structures,
 

 
8 .	Any other	information which necessary for adequate review
 
the municipality	considers of the application.
 

 
D.	Plans of all proposed ments,	clearly	and following:
 

buildings,	structures	and	other improve­
legibly	drawn at suitable scale showing the
 


 
I.	Sufficiently detailed architectural or drawings, including floor plans, sections building elevations, as appropriate;
 
engineering and exterior
 

 
2 .	For any proposed building,	the elevation floor	(including	basement)	and,	as elevation of any other floor;
 
of the lowest required,	the
 

3.	Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the one hundred (JOO) year flood;

4.	Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproof­
ing measures;

S.	Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other accessways and parking areas, showing all rights­ of-way and pavement widths;

 
6 .	Profile	drawings	for vehicular accessways, grades; and
 
all proposed streets, drives and
including	existing	and proposed
 

7.	Plans and	profiles of	all proposed	sanitary	and storm
	sewer	systems,	water	supply	systems,	and	any other
utilities and facilities.

E.	The following data and documentation:

 
I.	Certification	from		the which the activity	or existing	separate	and applicant or the client
 
applicant	that		the site upon development	is		proposed	is an single	parcel,	owned	by	the
he represents;
 

2.	Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect	or landscape architect that the proposed construction has been ad quately designed to protect against damage from the one hundred (JOO) year flood;

3.	A	statement,	certified	by	a	registered professional
	engineer,	architect,	landscape	architect	or	other
	qualified person	which contains	a complete and accurate
description of the nature  and extent  of pollution that
might	possibly occur from the development during the course of a one hundred (100) year flood, including a statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on human life;

 
4 .	A	statement	certified
 
by	a	registered	professional
 
engineer,	architect
contains a	complete
 
or
and
 
landscape	architect	which
accurate	description	of the
 

 
effects	the	proposed	devel opmen t	will	have hundred	(JOO) year flood elevations and flows;
 
on	one
 

5.	A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,	architect or landscape architect which contains a complete and accurate description  of the kinds	and amounts of any loose buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site below the one hundred (JOO) year flood elevation and the effects		such materials and debris may have on one hundred		(JOO) year flood elevations and flows;

6.	The appropriate	component of the Department of Environ­
mental Resources "Planning Module for Land Dev e lopment";

7.	Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting	the requirements of the Department of Environ ­ mental Resources to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;

8.	Any other	applicable permits	such as,	but	not limited
	to, a permit for any act ivity	regulated by	the Depart­
ment of Environmental Resources under Section 302 of Act
J978-J66; and

9.	An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a one hundred (100) year flood.

Section 5.02 - Application Review Procedures

Upun receipt of an application for a Special Permit by	the Township, the
following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article II:

A.	Within three (3) working  days following  receipt of the ap plica­ tion, a complete copy of the application and all accomp any ing documentation	shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission
 
by registered or certified mail for its tions. Copies ol the applir;ition shall Township Planning Commission and Township comment.
 
review and recomrnenda­ also be forwarded to the Engineer   for review and
 

B.	If an application is received that is incompl ete , the Township shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the application is deficient.

c . If the Township decides to disapprove an application it shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disap­ proval.

 
D.  If	the	Township	approves
notification, together	with
 
an application, it shall file written
the	application	and	al l pertinent
 

 
information, with the Department of registered or certified mail, within five the date of approval.
 
Community	Affairs,	by
(5) working	days a fter
 

E . Before issuing the Special Permit, the Township shall allow the Department of Community Affairs thirty (30) days, after receipt of the notific a tion by the Department, to review the application and decision made by the Township.

F. If the Township does not receive any communication from the Department of Community Affairs during the thirty (30) day review period, it may issue a Special Permit to the applicant .

 
G. If the Department of Community Affairs should decide an application, it shall notify the Township and the writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and shall not issue the Special Permit.
 
to disapprove applicant, in the Township
 

Section 5.03 - Special Technical Requirements

A.	In addition to the requirements of Article IV of this Ordinance, the	following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed		development requiring a Special Permit. If there is any conflict betw een any of th e following requireme nts and those in Article	IV of this Ordinance or in any other code, ordinance or regulation, th e more restrictive provision sh all apply.

B.	No application for a  Special Permit  sh a ll h e  approved unl ess it can be d e termin ed that the structure or activity will b e located, constructed and maintained in a manner which will:

 
I.	Fully protect		the		health public	and	any	occupants minimum, all new structures and constructe d so that:
 
and	safety of  the general of	the  structure.   At a sh all be  d esigne d, located
 

a . The structure will  survive  inundation  by water s of th e one hundred (100) year flood without	any lat eral movement or d am age to either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment		or contents below the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.

b.		The lowest floor elevation will be at least one	and one-half (1-1/2) fee t above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.

c.	The	occupants	of	the	structure	can remain
	inside for an indefinite	period	of time and be
	safely evacuated at any	time	during	the one
hundr ed (100) year flood.
 

2.	Prevent any  significant  possibility  of  pollution, increased flood levels or flows, or debris endangering li fe and property.

All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstr ated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical method s  used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc ., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough t chnical review by the Township and the Depart­ ment of Community Affairs.




ARTICLE VI.  EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS

Section 6.00 - Existing Structures

The provisions of this Ordinance do not require any changes or improve ­ ments to be m a de to lawfully existing struc tures . However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of Section
6.01 shall app ly.

Section 6.01 - Imnrovements

The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified f loodplain area:

A.	No expansion or enlargement  of  an existing structure shal l b e allowed within any floodway area that would cause  any increase in the elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood.

B.	No expansion or enlargeme nt of an exist ing structure shall be allowe d within any AE area that would, together w ith all o th er ex ist ing and anticipated development, increase the one hundred (JOO) year flood elevation more than one (I) foot at any point.

C.	Any modific ation, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to an exist ing structure, to an extent  or amount of fifty percent (50%) or more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial	improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.



ARTICLE VII.  VARIANCES

Section 7.00 - General

If compliance with any of the requirements of this  Ordinance would result in an exceptiona l hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Township may, upon request, grant relief  from the strict

2 I
 

application of the requirements.

Section 7.01 - Variance Procedures and Conditions

Request for	variances shall be considered by the Township in accordance
with the procedures contained in Section 2. I I and the following:

A.	No variance shall be granted for  any construction, development, use	or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.

B.	No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or activity within any AE area that would, together with all other	existing and anticipated development, increase the one hundred (100) year flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any point.

 
c . Except for a possible modification of foot freeboard requirement involved, for any of the other requirements development	regulated   by  Special
 

the one and one-half	(1-1/2) no variance	shall be granted pertaining	specifically	to Permit	(Article	V)		or		to
 
Development Which May Endanger Human
 
Life (Section 4.03).
 

 
D.	If granted, a variance shall involve necessary	to provide relief.
 
only the	least modification
 

E.	In	granting	any	variance,	the	Township		shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and	safeguards	it	considers	necessary	in
order to	protect the	public health,	safety and	welfare, and to
achieve the objectives	of this Ordinance.	
 

F.	Whenever a variance	is	granted, applicant in writing		that:
 

the	Township	shall	notify the
 

 
I.	The	granting
premium rates
 
of	the	variance may result for flood insurance.
 
in increased
 

2 .	Such	variances	may	increase	the	risks	to	life and
property.

 
G.	In	reviewing	any	request	for	a	variance,
consider, at a minimum, the following:
 
the Township shall
 

I.	That there is good and sufficient cause.

 
2 .	That failure	to	grant	the	variance
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
 
would	result in
 

3.	That the granting of the variance will (i) result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional	threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expenses; (ii) nor create nuisances, cause fraud
 

on, or	victimize the public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.

H . A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.

 
Notwithstanding	any	of	the designed and constructed so as one hundred	(100)   year flood.
 
above,	however,	all structures shall be to have the	capability of	resisting the
 



ARTICLE VII. DEFINITIONS

Section 8.00 - General

 
Unless	specifically	defined Ordinance shall be interpreted reasonable application.
 
below, so as
 
words	and	phrases	used in this to give		this Ordinanr.e	its	ost
 

Section 8.01 - Specific Definitions

 
A.	Accessory use	or structure	- a with: and of a nature customarily the principal use or structure.
 
use or structure on the same lot
incidental And	subordinate to,
 

 
B.	Building		a	combination	of		materials structure	having	walls	and		a		roof .
 
to	form Included
 
a	permanent shall	be all
 
manufactured homes and trailers to be used
 
for human habitation.
 

C.	Construction the  construction,  reconstruction,  renovation, repair,	extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building		or structure, including the placement of manufactured homes.

D.	Development - any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,	including but not  limited to buildings or other struc­ tures, the placement of manufactured homes.  streets  and other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations and the subdivision of land.

E.	Flood - a temporary inundation of normally dry land areas .

F . Floodplain area - a relatively flat or low land area which l..S subject	to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area  subject to the	unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.

G.	Floodproofing - means any combination of	structural and nonstruc-
 

tural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate  or  improved  real propert y, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

 
H.	Floodway - the designated area of	a floodplain and discharge flood waters of a given magnitude. of this Ordinance, the floodway shall be capable a flood of the one hundred	(100)year  magnitude.
 
required to carry For the purposes of accommodating
 

I. Manufactured Home a transportable,  single-family  dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office, or place of assembly, contained in one or more sections, built on a permanent chasis, which arrives at a site complete and ready  for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation.	The term includes park trailers, trav e l trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.

J.	Manufactured Home Park - a parcel of land under single ownership, which has been planned and improved  for the  Placement of  two or more manufactured homes for non-transient use.

K.	Minor repair - the replacement of existing work with equivalent materials	for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but	not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer,  drainage, drain  leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or
similar	piping,	electric	wiring	or	mechanical	or	other work
affecting public health or	general	safety.		

L. One hundred  year flood   a flood that, on the average, is likely to oc cur once every one hundred (100) years (i.e., that has one percent	(1%) change of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).

 
M.	Regulatory	flood elevation - elevation plus	a freeboard 1/2)   feet.
 
the	one	hundred	(100)	year flood safet y factor of one and one-half (I-
 

N.	Special Permit a special approval which is  required  for hospitals, nursing homes, jails and new  manufactured home parks and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development	is located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
 

attached to	the gcound	including, but	not limited to buildings,
sheds, manufactured	homes and other similar items.

P. Subdivision - the division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing  lot lines for the purposes, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten (IO) acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or residential dwellings, shall be exempted.

Q.	Substantial Improvement - any			repair, reconstruction	or improve­ ment of		a  structure,	the cost		of which	equals or exceeds fifty percent	(50%)	of the	market value	of the	structure either, (a) before	the	improvement	or		repair		is	started,	or		(b) if the structure has been damaged,	and		is	being	restored,	before the damage occurred.



 
All ordinances	and parts	of ordinances of this Ordinance be	and the	same are same affect this Ordinance.
 
in conflict with the provisions hereby repealed	insofar as the
 

ORDAINED and ENACTED this	day of		19 8 9.




UPPER YODER TOWNSHIP
 



ATTEST:





Secretary
 


UPPER YODER TOWNSHIP CAMBRIA COUNTY PENNSYLVANIA

ORDINANCE NO. 220

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE UPPER YODER TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1979 BY CHANGING CERTAIN SECTIONS UNDER PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS: RULES AND DEFINATIONS; AMENDING A SECTION TO PROVISIONS GOVERNING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS; AMENDING AND ADDING SECTIONS TO SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS; CHANGING A SECTION UNDER COMMUNITY UNIT PLAN  AND MULTIPLE DWELLING PLANS; AMEDING A SECTION UNDER SIGNS; ADDING SECTIONS TO ADMINISTRATION; CHANGING A SECTION UNDER ZONING OFFICER; CHANGING AND ADDING TO ZONING HEARING BOARD; CHANGING SECTIONS UNDER ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; AND CHANGING AND ADDING TO AMENDMENTS.
 



TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE I – PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS	PAGE

Section 101
Enacting Clause		2
Section 102
Short Title		2
Section 103
Validity and conflict		2
Section 104
Purpose and Community	Objectives	2
Section 105
Filing		3
Section 106
Effective Date		3
Section 107
Conditional Use		3

ARTICLE II – RULES AND DEFINITIONS

Section 201
Rules	3
Section 202
Definitions	4

ARTICLE III – ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS

Section 301	Establishment of Districts and Zoning
Ordinance Map 	11
Section 302	Interpretation of District Boundaries 	12
ARTICLE IV – GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 401
Conformance and Permits		12
Section 402
General Restrictions		12
Section 403
Yards		12
Section 404
Substandard Dwellings		13
Section 405
Public Utility Lines		13
Section 406
Lots Not Meeting Lot Area	Requirements	13
Section 407
Uses Requiring Site Plan Approval	13
Section 408
Mobile Homes	14

ARTICLE V – PROVISIONS GOVERNING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section 501
R-1	One-Family	Residential	District	14
Section 502
R-2	One-Family	Residential	District	17
Section 503
R-3	One-Family	Residential	District	19
Section 504
R-4	One-Family	Residential	District	20
Section 505
R-5	Multiple Family Residential District	20
Section 506
R-6	Multiple Family Residential District	23

ARTICLE VI – PROVISIONS GOVERNING COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS

Section 601
C-1	General Business District	24
Section 602
C-2	Planned Shopping District	25
Section 603
C-3	Research-Office District	28
 


ARTICLE VII – PROVISIONS GOVERNING THE MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS

 
Section 701	M-1 Manufacturing District 	30
ARTICLE VIII – PROVISIONS GOVERNING FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICTS
GENERAL PROVISIONS 	31
Section 801.00 Statement of Intent 	32
Section 801.01 Applicability 	32
Section 801.02 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 	32
Section 801.03 Severability 	32
Section 801.04 Municipal Liability 	32
ADMINISTRATION 	32
Section 802.00 Special Building Permits Required 	33
Section 802.01 Issuance of Special Building Permit 	33
Section 802.02 Application Procedures 	33
Section 802.03 Other Permit Issuance Requirements 	34
Section 802.04 Review by County Conservation District 	34
Section 802.05 Review of Application by Others 	35
Section 802.06 Changes 	35
Section 802.07 Placards 	35
Section 802.08 Start of Construction 	35
Section 802.09 Inspection and Revocation 	35
Section 802.10 Fees 	35
Section 802.11 Enforcement 	36
Section 802.12 Appeals 	37
DESIGNATION OF FLOOD-PRONE AREA(S) 	37
Section 803.00 Identification 	38
Section 803.01 Determination of the Regulatory Flood
Elevation 	38
Section 803.02 Boundary Disputes 	38
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 	38
Section 804.00 General 	38
Section 804.01 Design and Construction Standards 	39
Section 804.02 Special Requirements for Mobile Homes 	41
Section 805.00 Existing Structures in Identified Flood-Prone
Areas 	42
Section 806.00 Variances 	43
Section 807.00 General Definitions 	44
Section 807.01 Specific Definitions 	44
ARTICLE IX – PROVISIONS GOVERNING CONSERVANCY DISTRICTS
Section 901	“S” Conservancy District 	46
 
ARTICLE X- SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS

Section 1001
Additional Height, Area, Yard and Fence	
	Regulations	47
Section 1002
Slope Area Restrictions	49
Section 1003
Mobile Home Trailer Park Restrictions	50
Section 1004
Private, Community or Club Swimming Pools	53
Section 1005
Satellite Television Antennas	54

ARTICLE XI – OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS

Section 1101
General Provisions	55
Section 1102
Design and Maintenance	56
Section 1103
Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements	58
Section 1104
Location of Parking Areas	60
Section 1105
Additional Regulations – Parking	61
Section 1106
Design, Maintenance and Schedule of Off-Street	
	Loading Space	63

ARTICLE XII – COMMUNITY UNIT PLANS AND MULTIPLE DWELLING PLANS

Section 1201	Community Unit Plan 	64
Section 1202	Multiple Dwelling (Two or More Multiple Family
Dwelling) Plan 	68
ARTICLE XIII – SIGNS





Section 1304	Additional and General Regulations	72

ARTICLE XIV – NON-CONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS

Section 1401
Continuance	73
Section 1402
Discontinuance of Use	73
Section 1403
Alterations	73
Section 1404
Provision for Reconstruction	74
Section 1405
Construction in Progress	74
Section 1406
Historical Landmarks	74
Section 1407
Extensions and Enlargements	74

ARTICLE XV – ADMINISTRATION

Section 1501
Building Permit	74
Section 1502
Certificate of Occupancy	75
Section 1503
Fees, Permits and Certificates	76
Section 1504
Governing Body Functions	77
Section 1505
Criteria for Conditional Uses	77
 



ARTICLE XVI – ZONING OFFICER

Section 1601
Appointment, Removal	and	Compensation	78
Section 1602
Administration			78
Section 1603
Enforcement			78

ARTICLE XVII – ZONING HEARING BOARD

Section 1701
Creation, Appointment	and	Organization	79
Section 1702
Powers and Duties			80
Section 1703
Procedure			82
Section 1704
Zoning, Hearing Board	Jurisdiction	86
Section 1705
Mediation Option		86

ARTICLE XVIII- ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES

Section 1801	Enforcement 	87
Section 1802	Violations and Penalties 	88
ARTICLE XIX – AMENDMENTS








Section 1906	Perimeter Posting on Map Change	90

ARTICLE XX – REPEALER

Section 2001	Repealing Clause 	90
ARTICLE XXIIIIV - AMENDMENT LISTINGS
Ordinance No. 252 	93
 


ARTICLE I – PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

Section 101 – Enacting Clause – BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Upper Yoder, County of Cambria and State of Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of the same that the Upper Yoder Township Zoning Ordinance of 1979 adopted and enacted December 6, 1979, and thereafter amended, shall be consolidated and amended as follows:

Section 102 – Short Title – This ordinance shall be known as the Upper Yoder Township Zoning Ordinance, and the map referred to herein and made a part of this ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance Map.

Section 103 – Validity and Conflict – Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a while nor any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. Where a provision of this ordinance is found to be in conflict with a provision of any building or housing code, or with any applicable health regulations, or with any other ordinance of Upper Yoder Township existing on the effective date of this ordinance, or in any regulation issued under the authority of such code or ordinance, the provision which established the higher standard for the protection of health, safety and welfare shall prevail.

Section 104 – Purpose and Community Objectives – The purpose of this zoning ordinance shall be designed:

1.	To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following:
The  public  health,  safety,  morals,  and  the  general  welfare;
coordinated and practical community development and proper density of
population; emergency management preparedness and operations; airports, and national defense facilities; the provisions of adequate light and air; access to incident solar energy; policy protection; vehicle parking and loading space; transportation; water; sewerage; schools; recreational facilities; public grounds; the provision of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial use, and other public requirements; as well as preservation of the natural, scenic and historic values in the environment and preservation of forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.

2.	To prevent one or more of the following:	overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.

3.	To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering topography, soil type and classification, and present use.

4.	To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential
 
housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings, and a reasonable range of multi-family dwellings in various arrangements, mobile homes and mobile home parks, provided, however, that this ordinance shall not be deemed invalid for the failure to provide for any other specific dwelling type and to conserve prime residential areas.

5.	To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including population and employment growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.

Section 105 – Filing – This ordinance, including the Zoning Ordinance Map, together with any succeeding amendments thereto, shall be on file and may be viewed by and interested party in the Upper Yoder Township Offices.

Section 106 – Effective Date – The effective date of this ordinance shall be five days after its adoption by the Board of Supervisors.

Section 107 – Conditional Use	– Any land	use which	is not specifically permitted in a particular zoning district may be permitted in such district if approved by the governing body of the municipality. Provision for conditional uses to be allowed or denied by the governing body of the municipality must be made pursuant to public notice and hearing and recommendations by the municipal planning commission and pursuant to express standards and criteria set forth in this ordinance. In allowing a conditional use, the governing body may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this ordinance.




ARTICLE II – RULES AND DEFINITIONS

SECTION 201 – Rules – The following rules of construction shall apply to this ordinance:

A.	The particular shall control the general.

B.	In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption of illustration, the text shall control.

C.	The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
The word “may” is permissive.

D.	Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
 






E.	The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for”, designed for”, “intended for”, “maintained for”, and/or “occupied for”.

Section 202 – Definitions –

ACCESSORY BUILDING OR ACCESSORY USE – A building or use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use and located on the same lot with such principal building or use.	An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following:

-Children’s playhouse, garden house, or private greenhouse.
-Civil defense shelter serving not more than 2 families.
-Garage, shed, or building for domestic storage.
-Incinerator incidental to residential use.
-Storage of merchandise normally carried to stock on the same log with any commercial use unless such storage is excluded by the district regulations.
-Non-paying guest house or rooms for non-paying guests with an accessory building provided such facilities are used for the occasional housing of guest of occupants of the principal building and not for permanent occupancy by others as housekeeping units.
-Servants’ quarters or servants’ house.
-Off-street motor vehicle parking area; loading and
unloading facility.
-Home occupation
-Fence; sign

ALLEY – A service way at least 15 feet wide, providing a secondary public means of access to abutting properties.

ALTERATIONS – As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one location to another, or any change in use from that of one zoning district classification to another.

ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL – Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.

APARTMENT – A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is used as a single housekeeping unit, and which contains complete kitchen, bath and toilet facilities, permanently installed.
 
APARTMENT HOTEL – A building consisting of guest rooms, suites of rooms, or dwelling units which are occupied more or less permanently wherein the occupants are furnished so-called hotel services, including dining room and maid service.

APARMENT HOUSE – A building used by 3 or more families living independently of each other and containing dwelling units.

AREA, BUILDING – The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, steps, garages and other accessory buildings.

AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR – Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damage motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting of vehicles.

AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR – Incidental repairs; replacements of parts; motor services to automobiles; state inspection, but not including any operation specified under AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR above.

BASEMENT – a story partly underground, but having at least one-half of its height about the average level of the adjoining ground.	A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is 5 feet or more or if the basement is used for business or dwelling purposes.

BILLBOARD – Structure, building wall, or other outdoor surface used to display lettered, pictorial, sculptured, or other matter which directs the attention to any product, announcement, commodity, or service offered only elsewhere than on the premises or as a minor and incidental service on the premises.

BOARD – The Zoning Hearing Board of Upper Yoder Township.

BUFFER AREA – A strip of land which is planted and maintained in shrubs, bushes, trees, grass or other landscaping material and within which no structure is permitted except a wall or fence.

BUILDING – A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the shelter of persons, animals, chattels, or property.		When separated by walls which are common with the walls of adjoining dwellings, each portion of such structure shall be considered a separate building.	It shall include any overhang, projection or roof extending beyond a wall or support.	Sun parlors and covered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include walks, steps or terraces.

BUILDING LINE – The line of that face of the building nearest the front line of the lot.	This face includes sun parlors and covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, and extended roof lines, but does not include walks, steps or terraces.
 
BUILDING HEIGHT – The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eave and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.

CELLAR – A portion of a building having one-half or more of its height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.	In a dwelling, a cellar may not contain the principal living quarters.

COVERAGE – That percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.

DISTRICT, ZONING – A section of Upper Yoder Township for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, and intensity of use of buildings and land and open spaces about buildings are herein established.

DWELLING – A building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters for one or more families.

DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY – A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.

DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY – A building designed for or occupied exclusively by 2 families living independently of each other, with separate dwelling unit entrances.

DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY – A dwelling or group of dwellings on one plot or lot containing separate living units or dwelling units for 3 or more families, but which may have joint services or facilities or both.

DWELLING, GROUP – A group or 2 or more one-family, two-family or multiple- family dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having a yard in common.

DWELLING, MULTI-STORY	MULTIPLE FAMILY – A multiple-family dwelling of more than 3 stories, unless further restricted in district regulations herein.

DWELLING, ROW – A multiple-family dwelling divided by party walls into distinct and non-communicating units, each dwelling unit of which has direct access to the outdoors.

FAMILY – One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or 3 unrelated persons living as a household in a dwelling unit.	May also include domestic servants and gratuitous guests.

FLOOR AREA – The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, or from the centerline of common walls separating buildings.	For purposes of determining dwelling standards, the garage and basement areas shall not be included.	For purposes of determining parking and loading space requirements for the several zoning districts herein, the “floor area” of a building or buildings shall include: basement space, penthouses, attic space
 
providing structure headroom of 7-1/2 feet or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches, accessory uses other than accessory off-street parking, lobbies, and hallways.




For determination of parking and loading space requirements, the following areas shall not be included: cellar space, elevator shafts and stairwells, floor space for mechanical equipment as necessary to service the needs of the building, uncovered steps, terraces, breezeways, open spaces unroofed unless specifically required in the parking regulations herein, and fitting and dressing rooms.

FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.) – The total floor area of the buildings or buildings on a lot divided by the area of such lot, or in the case of group dwellings or multiple dwelling plan, by the net site area.

GARAGE, PRIVATE – An accessory buildings, housing only motor driven vehicles, the property of and for the use of the occupants of the lot on which the private garage is located.

GARAGE, PUBLIC – Any garage other than a private garage, available to the public, and which is used for storage, parking, repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting, or equipping of motor-driven vehicles.

GOVERNING BODY – The elected Board of Supervisors for the municipality of Upper Yoder Township.

HEIGHT – See BUILDING HEIGHT herein.

HOME OCCUPATION – An accessory use of a service character customarily conducted within a dwelling by the residents, which is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change the character thereof or have any exterior evidence of such secondary use other than a small nameplate, and in connection therewith there is not involved the keeping of or exhibition of stock in trade.

The office of a physician, surgeon, dentist, architect, or other professional person each with not more than one paid assistant shall be deemed to be a Home Occupation.	Instructions in violin, piano or other individual musical instruments limited to a single person at a time shall be deemed a Home Occupation.	The occupations of dressmaker, watchmaker, milliner, seamstress, or other persons who offer skilled services to clients, and are not professionally engaged in the purchase or sale of economic goods, and who have not more than one paid assistant shall be deemed to be Home Occupations.

Dancing instruction, band instrument instruction in groups, barber shops, beauty shops, tea rooms, tourist homes, real estate offices, convalescent homes, mortuary establishments and stores, trades, or business of any kind not herein about listed shall not be deemed to be Home Occupations.
 
HOSPITAL – The term “hospital” shall include sanitarium, sanitorium, preventorium, clinic, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, and any place for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments, and shall be deemed to be limited to such places.


HOTEL – A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from rooms is made from an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours, and which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a boarding house, lodging house, or rooming house.

HOTEL, MOTOR – A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the transient public for compensation and in which egress and ingress to and from rooms may be made either through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all times or directly from the exterior.

INSTITUTIONAL HOUSE – A public or private benevolent establishment devoted to the shelter, maintenance, or education and care of minor children; homeless, aged or infirm persons; or members of a religious community.

LOADING SPACE – A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith providing for the standing, loading or unloading of vehicles.

LOT – A parcel, tract or area of land accessible by means of a public street.	It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or plot which is recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or it may include parts of or a combination of such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one parcel.

LOT, CORNER – A lot at the junction of two or more intersecting streets and having a frontage on two or more such streets.

LOT, DEPTH OF – The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line, measured midway between the side lot lines.

LOT, INTERIOR – A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.

LOT LINE, FRONT – In the case of an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street.	In the case of a corner lot, the line separating the narrowest frontage of the lot from the street.

LOT, THROUGH – A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.

LOT, WIDTH – The dimension of a lot, measured between the side lot lines on the building line.

MOBILEHOME – A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
 
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.

MOBILEHOME LOT – A parcel of land in a Mobile Home Park improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home which may be leased or owned by the mobile home occupant.

MOBILEHOME PARK – A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have been designed and improved to contain 2 or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.

MODULAR HOME – A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy contained in 2 or more units and designed for use with a permanent foundation.

MOTEL – See HOTEL, MOTOR.

NON-CONFORMING USE – A building or use of land lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance that does not completely conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is located.

NURSERY SCHOOL – A school designed to provide daytime care or instruction for 2 or more children of pre-school age.

PARKING LOT – Any lot, parcel or yard used in whole or in part for the storage or parking of 2 or more vehicles where such usage is not incidental to or in conjunction with a one-family or two-family dwelling.

PARKING SPACE – An off-street space available for the parking of 1 motor vehicle and having an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto and having direct access to a street or alley.

PLANNIG COMMISSION – The Planning Commission of Upper Yoder Township, which shall have conferred and imposed upon it all the powers of the Zoning Commission.

PORTABLE SIGN – Shall be construed to mean any free-standing sign of temporary nature which would be easily transferable and transportable and removable and which is not permanently affixed to the earth by anchor or other means and which would be less than 7 feet about grade.

PUBLIC HEARING – A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

PUBLIC MEETING - A forum held pursuant to notice under the provisions of Act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the “Sunshine Act”.
 

PUBLIC NOTICE – Notice published once each week for 2 successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.	Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing.	The first publication shall not
be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than 7 days from the date of the hearing.	In the alternative, published information stating the time and place of hearing and the nature or the matter to be considered in the form and manner as the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania may from time to time require.

RIDING ACADEMY – Any establishment where horses are kept for riding, driving, stabling for compensation, or incidental to the operation of any club, association, ranch or similar establishment.

SATELLITE TELEVISION ANTENNA – An apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter relay located in geostationary orbit.

SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY – A business that provides home-type washing, drying or ironing machines, or dry-cleaning machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.

SERVICE STATION – A building(s), premises, or portions thereof which are used, arranged, designed or intended to be used for the retail sale of gasoline or other fuel for motor vehicles, boats, or aircraft, as well as for minor automobile repair, including state inspection.

SIGN – Any surface, fabric or device bearing letter, pictorial, sculptured or other matter designed to convey information visually and exposed to public view; any structure designed to carry the above visual information; any structure or device designed or installed principally to direct or attract attention, except traffic signs or devices.

STABLE, PRIVATE – Any accessory building in which horses are kept or used for riding, driving, stabling for private use, and not for hire or sale.

STORY – That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.

STREET – A public or private way other than an alley which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.

STRUCTURE – Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on or in the ground attachment to something having location on or in the ground.

USE – The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it may be occupied or maintained.	The
 


term PERMITTED USE or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any non-conforming use.

YARD – A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.

YARD, FRONT – A yard extending across the full width of the lot, unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts and similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the lot line and the building line.

YARD, REAR – A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear or the principal building and the rear lot line, unoccupied by other than accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30% of the space, and steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts and similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot line and the rear of such buildings.

YARD, SIDE – A yard between the principal building and the side lot line, extending from the front year, or from the front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard.	The width of the required side yard is measured horizontally and at 90% with the side lot line, from the nearest part of the principal building.




ARTICLE III – ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS

SECTION 301 – Establishment of Districts and the Zoning Ordinance Map.

A.	The Township of Upper Yoder is hereby classified and divided into 12 Districts designated as follows:

R-1 DISTRICT      R-1 One Family Residential District R-2 DISTRICT      R-2 One Family Residential District R-3 DISTRICT      R-3 One Family Residential District R-4 DISTRICT        R-4 One Family Residential District
R-5 DISTRICT	R-5 Multi-Family Residential District R-6 DISTRICT	R-6 Multi-Family Residential District
C-1 DISTRICT	C-1 General Business District C-2 DISTRICT	C-2 Planned Shopping District C-3 DISTRICT	C-3 Research-Office District M-1 DISTRICT	M-1 Manufacturing District
FP	DISTRICT	FP	Flood Plain District
S	DISTRICT	S	Conservancy District




B.	That certain tract bounded by Goucher Street on the North, Lyme
 
Timber Co. on the South, Carriage Hills Apartments on the East and lands of Harry Mowery and Mr. Gas on the West, more specifically shown on the Zoning Ordinance Map of the Township of Upper Yoder, shall be rezoned from “R-5” Multi-Family Residential District to “C-2” Planned Shopping District.

SECTION 302 – Interpretation of District Boundaries –

A.	Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, street lines, highway right-of-way lines, or streams, such centerlines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

B.	Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

C.	Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately Follow or are parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways, or the rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed to be parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Ordinance Map.

D.	Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad, such boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of such railroad.

E.	Where the boundary of a district follows a stream or other body of water abutting another municipality, the boundary shall be deemed to be the limits of jurisdiction of the Township, unless otherwise indicated.


ARTICLE IV – GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 401 – Conformance and Permits – No building or land shall, after effective date of this ordinance, except for existing non-conforming uses, be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, and then only after applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by all laws and ordinances.

SECTION 402 – General Restrictions – No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height, to accommodate or house a greater number of families, to occupy a greater percentage of lot area, or to have a narrower or smaller rear yard, side yard, or front yard than is herein specified for the district in which the building is located.

SECTION 403 – Yards – No part of a yard or other open space about any building required for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard or open space, similarly required for another building.
 



SECTION 404 – Substandard Dwellings – No structure shall be used or occupied as a dwelling if such structure is in need of such major structural repairs as to render it unsafe or unsanitary, or if the premises do not have connection with the municipal sewer system or alternative sanitary sewage facilities approved by the local public health authorities having jurisdiction.

SECTION 405 – Public Utility Lines – For the transportation, distribution and control of water, gas, electricity, oil, steam, telegraph and telephone communications, and their supporting members other than buildings, and railroads shall not be required to be located on a zoning lot nor be held to reduce yard dimensions for other buildings on a lot.

SECTION 406 – Lots Not Meeting Lot Area Requirements – Nothing in the district regulations shall be held to prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling upon a lot whose size is inadequate to meet the lot area regulations set for the district, provided such lot on the effective date of this ordinance was held under separate ownership from the adjoining lots or is a lot in a recorded plan which complies with all district regulations, except lot area requirements or is a lot in a subdivision plan approved under the Upper Yoder Township subdivision regulations.

SECTION 407 – Uses Requiring Site Plan Approval – Building permits issued for any use other than a single-family residential dwelling in R-5, R-6, C, M, FP or S District shall require site plan approval by the Upper Yoder Township Planning Commission.	The site plan shall be submitted to the Commission oat least 10 days prior to the regularly scheduled or special meeting at which it is to be reviewed.	In addition to conforming to any specific requirements set forth in this ordinance, the Planning Commission may recommend changes in the site plan which are deemed necessary to promote orderly development of the area.	In addition to specific requirements of the district regulations, the site plan, drawn to accurate scale, will indicate the following:

-Location of the lot or lots with respect to adjacent streets and property owners
-Critical dimensions of setback yard area, paving, driveways,
parking area, landscape areas and other prominent features
-Traffic circulation within the site
-Location of vehicular access to the site
-The height and bulk of structures
-Location and size of signs, walls and fence to be constructed
on the site
-Provisions for storm drainage including the drainage flow,
catch basins size and location of any storm sewers and dis-
charge points from the site
-Connections to all public utilities serving the site
 
In considering any plan hereunder, the Planning Commission will endeavor  to assure safety and convenience of traffic movement, harmonious and beneficial relationship of buildings and uses on the site as well as to contiguous properties, and overall development in a manner not detrimental to the public at large.	The Planning Commission shall report its findings and report its findings and recommendations to the Zoning Officer within 48 hours following the review meeting.

SECTION 408 – Mobile Homes – Mobile homes, home trailers, or auto trailers shall be permitted in the R-6 district only.	All mobile homes must be permanently affixed to a foundation so as to prevent tipping due to high winds or flash flooding, and comply with all other requirements of Section 506.


ARTICLE V – PROVISIONS GOVERNING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

SECTION 501 – R-1 One Family Residential District – Within the R-1 One Family Residential District the following regulations apply:

A.	Permitted Uses

One-Family Detached Dwelling occupied by one single-family unit.
Public school or private school having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in a public school, including religious
instruction in parochial schools Church and similar place of worship
Convent, monastery, rectory, or parish house to be occupied by not
more than 10 persons
Community Unit Plan – Development as specified in Section 1201
hereof
Public recreation (Township, County or State) areas including
municipal parks
Commercial recreation development may be permitted as a special exception when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board.

(a)	The principal considerations upon which a special exception may be granted shall include the protection of the zoning district for residential uses and the enjoyment and conservation of natural features.

(b)	Development in recreation areas shall be limited to the minimum required for public and private enjoyment, health, maintenance and protection of natural features.

(c)	Permitted recreation uses are:

Ski slopes and tows Toboggan slopes and tows Swimming
Field and court game areas
Ice-skating
 
Horseback riding Golf
Archery Picnic Areas
Restaurant in conjunction with recreational facilities
Overnight guest and staff facilities for persons
using the recreation facilities
Maintenance structures for equipment incidental to
the permitted uses

Country club and clubhouses for civic and fraternal organizations may be Permitted as a special exception when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. Considerations and criteria for granting of special exceptions shall be incidental to those for commercial recreation development.

Accessory Uses: Customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses and including:

Private Garage
Fence or ornamental wall not over 5 feet in height
(rear yard only)
Fence or ornamental wall not over 2 feet in height (front yard only)
Cultivation of plants (non-commercial only)
Private swimming pool appurtenant to a dwelling.
Parking of boats, boat trailers and house trailers not
used as dwellings on the premises
Children’s playhouse, garden house, private (non-commercial) greenhouse
A garage, shed or building for domestic storage, dog kennel (non-commercial) or similar domestic pet housing
Incinerators incidental to residential use
Public recreation area or country club, on the same lot, when meeting the yard depth and width requirements of the district for principal
buildings
Swimming pools or the property on which they are located must be adequately
fenced to prevent free access of small children and meet all
applicable health and sanitary requirements.

B.	Non-Permitted Uses – Surface Mining, Commercial and Industrial Establishments, and Associated Deep Mining Facilities.

C.	Height – The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected or altered shall be as follows:
One-family detached dwelling – 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories  Church or similar place of worship – 45 feet for the principal
building and 75 feet for steeples or towers.

Accessory building – 20 feet
 

Any other permitted building – 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories

D.	Lot Area – The minimum lot area for every building hereafter erected or altered shall be as follows:

One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory, or parish house – a minimum of 43,560 square feet and a width at the building line of 150 feet.

Church or similar place of worship	- 1-1/2 acres and a width at the building line of not less than 200 feet.

Public or private school –
Elementary School:	10 acres plus 1 acre for every 100 students
at design capacity

Junior High School:	20 acres plus 1 acre for every 100 students at design capacity

High School:	35 acres plus 1 acre for every 100 students at design capacity

No other building or us shall be erected or maintained on a lot having an area less than 25 acres.

E.	Yard Areas – No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement:

Front yard -	not less than 75 feet
Side yard -	on each side, not less than 20
feet.	The combined total of the side yards for interior lots shall be not less than 60 feet and the combined total of side yards for corner lots shall be not less than
80 feet, with the side yard from the
street being at least 50 feet.	The side yard on each of a lot of record which is less than 150 feet wide at the building line shall be 20% of the width of the lot but shall be not less than 20 feet.	For a  church or similar place of worship, not less than 40 feet on each side of the principal building.
Rear yard -	not less than 50 feet or 20% of
depth of lot, whichever is greater, but it need not exceed 90 feet.

F.	Percentage of Lot Coverage – All buildings, including accessory uses,
 
shall cover not more than 20% of the area of the lot.

G.	Dwelling Standards – Every one-story dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a floor area of not less than 1,400 square feet. Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected or altered shall have a total floor area of not less tan 1,800 square feet.

H.	Off-Street Parking Facilities – Shall be provided as required or permitted under Article XI.

SECTION 502 – R-2 One-Family Residential District – Within the R-2 One- Family Residential District, the following regulations apply:

A.	Permitted Uses

One Family detached dwellings  Church and similar places of worship
Public, non-commercial, recreation areas
Public schools or private schools having a curriculum similar to
that of a public school, including parochial schools Municipal buildings and necessary public facility buildings and
structures
Farm or truck garden operating not under 5 acres
Temporary structures for construction purposes not exceeding 1 year duration
Private swimming pool appurtenant to a one-family dwelling and on the same lot when meeting the yard depth and width requirements of the district for principal buildings, and when the swimming pool or property on which it is located is adequately fenced to prevent access of small children and meets all applicable health and sanitary requirements.

Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses and including:

Private garage
Fence or ornamental wall not over 5 feet in
height (rear yard only)
Fence or ornamental wall not over 2 feet in height (front yard only)
Cultivation of plants
Private swimming pools appurtenant to a dwelling
Swimming pools or the property on which they are located must be adequately fenced to prevent free access of mall children and meet all applicable health and sanitary requirements
Parking of boats, boat trailers and house trailers not
used as dwellings on the premises
Children’s playhouse, garden house, private (non-commercial) greenhouse
A garage, shed or building for domestic storage, dog kennel
(non-commercial) or similar domestic pet housing
 
Incinerators incidental to residential use

B.	Non-Permitted Use – Surface Mining and Associated Deep Mining Facilities, and Commercial and Industrial Establishments.

C.	Height – As permitted or required in the R-1 District.

D.	Lot Area – The minimum lot are for every building hereafter erected or altered shall be as follows:

One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory or
parish house – 20,000 square feet and a width at the building line of
not less than 100 feet (18,000 square foot area if public water or sewer or both are available).

Church or similar place or worship – as required in the R-1 District Public or private school – as required in the R-1 District
E.	Yard Areas – No building or structure shall be erected or altered unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargements:

Front yard -	not less than 50 feet
Side yard -	on each side, not less than 20
feet. The combined total of side yards for interior lots shall be not less than forty 40 feet and the combined total for side yards for corner lots shall be not less than
70 feet with the side yard from the
street being at least 50 feet.	The
side yard on each side of the lot of record which is less than 100 feet wide at the building line shall be 20% of the width of lot but shall be not less than 12 feet.	For a church or similar place of worship, not less than 40 feet on each side of the principal building.
Rear yard -	not less than 35 feet or 20% of the
depth of the lot, whichever is
larger, but it need not exceed 60 feet.

F.	Percentage of Lot Coverage – All buildings, including accessory uses, shall cover not more than 25% of the area of the lot.

G.	Dwelling Standards – Every one-story dwelling, including modular

homes, hereafter erected or altered shall have a floor area of not
 
less than 1,200 square feet.	Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected or altered shall have a total minimum floor area of 1,600 square feet.

H.	Off-Street Parking Facilities – Shall be provided as required or Permitted under Article XI.

SECTION 503 – R-3 One-Family Residential District – Within the R-3 One- Family Residential District, the following regulations apply:

A.	Permitted Uses – Any use and accessory use permitted in the R-2 District; and hospital, sanitarium or rest home, library, museum or Related civic use.

B.	Non-Permitted Use – As required in R-2 District, stabling of horses and other riding animals.

C.	Height – As permitted or required in the R-1 District.

D.	Lot Area – The minimum lot are for every building hereafter erected or altered shall be as follows:

One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory or parish House – 20,000 square feet and a width at the building line of not less than 100 feet (18,000 square foot area if public water or sewer or both are available).

Church or similar place of worship – as required in the R-1 District Public or private school – as required in the R-1 District
E.	Yard Areas – No building or structure shall be erected or altered
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with building, structure or enlargements:

Front yard -	not less than 35 feet.
Side yard -	on each side, not less than 10
feet. The combined total for side
yards for interior lots shall be not less than 20 feet and the combined total for side yards for corner lots shall not be less than 45 feet with the side yard from the street being at least 35 feet.	The side yard on each side of a lot of record which is less than 60 feet in width shall have a width of 15% of the width of the lot but shall be not less than
6 feet.	For a church or similar place of worship, not less than 40 feet on each side of a principal building.
 
Rear yard -	not less than 35 feet or 20% of the
depth of the lot, whichever is larger.

F.	Percentage of Lot Coverage – All buildings, including accessory uses, Shall cover not more than 30% of the area of the lot.

G.	Dwelling Standards – Every one-story dwelling hereafter erected or Altered shall have a floor area of not less than 1,200 square feet. Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected or altered shall have a total floor area of not less than 1,600 square feet.

H.	Off-Street Parking Facilities – Shall be provided as required or Permitted under Article XI.

SECTION 504 – R-4 One-Family Residential District – Within the R-4 One- Family Residential District, the following regulations apply:

A.	Permitted Uses – Any use and accessory use permitted in the R-3 District, and community unit plan development when permitted by the zoning	hearing	board	as	a	special	exception	under	Section	1201 hereof, except that the tract of land for such plan shall comprise an area of not less than 10 acres (in lieu of the 20-acre requirement set	forth	under	Section		1201	for		R-1	One-Family		Residential Districts).

B.	Non-Permitted Uses – Surface Mining and Associated Deep Mining Facilities, Stabling of Horses and other riding animals.

C.	Height – As permitted or required in the R-3 District.

D.	Lot Area – As permitted or required in the R-3 District.

E.	Yard Areas – As permitted or required in the R-3 District

F.	Percentage of Lot Coverage – All buildings, including accessory uses, shall cover not more than 30% of the area of the lot.

G.	Dwelling Standards – Every one-story dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a floor area of not less than 1,200 square feet. Every dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected or altered shall have a total floor area of not less than 1,600 square feet. Each dwelling hereafter erected shall nave a garage attached to or integrated with the dwelling.

H.	Off-Street Parking Facilities	–	Shall	be	provided	as	required	or permitted under Article XI.

SECTION 505 – R-5 Multiple Family Residential District – Within the R-5 Multiple Family Residential District, the following regulations shall apply:


A.	Permitted Uses –
 

Any use and accessory use permitted in the R-4 District Two family dwelling
Multiple family dwellings and apartments as specified in Section
1202 hereof
Multiple dwelling plans as specified in Section 1202 hereof
Row dwelling with not more than 6 dwelling units in one structure
Fraternity or sorority, excepting those the chief activity of Which is a service customarily carried on as a business
Conversion apartments for family occupancy Efficiency apartments

B.	Non-Permitted Uses – As required in the R-4 District.

C.	Height – As permitted in the R-1 District, except the multiple- family dwellings shall be restricted by lot coverage.

D.	Lot Area – The minimum lot area for every building hereafter erected or altered shall be as follows:

One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory or parish house – 8,700 square feet and a width at the building line of not less than 60 feet.

Two-family dwelling – 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit and a width At the building line of not less than 60 feet.

Multiple-family dwelling – not less than 1,350 square feet per dwelling unit or apartment and a width at the building line of not less than 150 feet. The minimum size of lot for multiple-family dwelling is 2 acres.

Row dwelling – not les than 2,700 square feet per dwelling unit and a width at the building line of not less than 75 feet for a row dwelling containing 3 or more dwelling units under one ownership.  If a row dwelling is arranged, designed intended to be sold or owned in separate ownership between party walls, the minimum width of lot beyond centerlines of party walls shall be 16 feet, and the 75 foot minimum width of total site frontage shall apply for the entire structure. Minimum size of lot for row dwelling structure:
one-quarter acre (10,890 square feet).

Church and similar place of worship – as required in the R-1 District.

Public or private school – as required in the R-1 District

E.	Yard Areas – No building or structure shall be hereafter erected
 
or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement:

Front yard -	not less than 35 feet, except for
multiple-family dwelling, which
shall provide and maintain a front yard, side yard and rear yard of horizontal dimension not less than the height of the building or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
Side yard -	for one-family detached dwelling,
two-family dwelling, and row
dwelling, not less than 10 feet on each of 2 sides for an interior lot and not less than 40 feet combined total of side yards for a corner lot, with the side yard from the street being at least 30 feet.

Church and similar place of worship – not less than 40 feet on each side of the principal building.

Rear yard -	not less than 30 feet.

F.	Percentage of Lot Coverage – All buildings, including accessory uses, shall cover not more than 35 percent of the area of the lot except multi-family dwellings which may cover 40% of the lot.

G.	Dwelling Standards – Every one-story dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a floor area of not less than 700 square feet. Every two-story dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a total floor area of not less than 1,400 square feet.	Every multi- family dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a floor area of not less than 700 square feet for each dwelling unit.

H.	Off-Street Parking Facilities – Shall be provided as required or permitted under Article XI.

I.	Special Regulations for conversion and Efficiency Apartments:

a.	Each conversion apartment must provide a minimum of not less than 400 square feet of habitable living area.

b.	Each living unit contains not less than 1 private bathroom
and 3 habitable rooms, at least one of which shall be a bedroom.

c.	Separate and private sanitary facilities, cooing and dining accommodations shall be provided for each living unit.

d.	Fire and safety provisions must be adequate to meet local standards.
 
Efficiency apartments may be permitted for single occupancy which contain floor area other than specified in Item (a) above, when authorized as a special exception; provided that the intent of Items (b), (c), and (d) above are achieved.	Adequacy of compliance shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board prior to granting of a special exception.

SECTION 506 – R-6 Multiple Family Residential District – Within the R-6 Multiple Family Residential District, the following regulations shall apply:

A.	Permitted Uses – Any use and accessory use permitted in the R-5 District, mobile homes and mobile home parks.

B.	Non-Permitted Uses – As required in the R-5 District.

C.	Height – As permitted or required in the R-5 District.

D.	Lot Area – The minimum lot area for every building hereafter erected or altered shall be as follows:

One-family detached dwelling, mobile home, convent, monastery, rectory or parish house – 8,700 square feet and a width at the building line of not less than 60 feet.

Two-family dwelling – 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit and a width at the building line of not less than 60 feet.

Multiple-family dwelling – not less than 1,350 square feet per dwelling unit or apartment and a width at the building line of not less than 150 feet. The minimum size of lot for multiple-family dwelling is 2 acres.

Row dwelling – not less than 2,700 square feet per dwelling unit and a width at the building line of not less than 75 feet for a row dwelling containing 3 or more dwelling units under one ownership. If a row dwelling is arranged, designed or intended to be sold or owned in separate ownership between party walls, the minimum width of lot between centerlines of party walls shall be 16 feet, and the 75 foot minimum width of total site frontage shall apply for the entire structure. Minimum size of lot for row dwelling structure:
one-quarter acre (10,890 square feet).

Church or similar place of worship – as required in the R-1 District. Public or private school – as required in the R-1 District.
E.	Yard Areas – As permitted or required in the R-5 District.
 
F.	Percentage of Lot Coverage – As permitted or required in the R-5 District.

G.	Dwelling Standards – Every one-story dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a floor area of not less than 700 square feet. Every two-story dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a total floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet.	Every multi- family dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a floor area of not less than 800 square feet for each dwelling unit.

H.	Off-Street Facilities – Shall be provided as required or permitted under Article XI.

I.	Special Regulations for Conversion and Efficiency Apartments – As permitted or required in R-5 District.

J.	Special Regulations for Mobile Home Trailer Parks – As permitted or required in Article X, Section 1003.



ARTICLE VI – PROVISIONS GOVERNING COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS

SECTION 601 – C-1 General Business District – Within the C-1 General Business District, the following regulations shall apply:

A.	Permitted Uses –

Art, book, school supply, and stationery store
Bakery shop, including the baking and processing of food products when prepared for retail use on the premises only.
Bank or financial institution (non-drive-in)
Barber shop, beauty shop or similar personal service
Camera and photographic store Candy or ice cream store Delicatessen
Dry cleaning outlet – no on-site cleaning permitted Drugstore
Florist shop
Food stores Gift store Hardware store Hobby store Meat market Newsstand
Offices, business and professional including medical clinic
Restaurants – non-drive-in Undertaking and embalming
Similar type commercial uses not specifically listed when authorized
as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board after receipt  and review of recommendations of the Planning Commission.	Special exceptions shall be based upon compatability and similarity to other
 
uses as listed herein and shall not be prejudicial to the health or public safety of the community.

All activities permitted in the C-1 District shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building.

B.	Height – The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected, altered or enlarged shall be 2 stories or 35 feet.

C.	Lot Area	–	The	minimum	lot	area	for	every	building	hereafter erected or altered shall contain a minimum of 4,800 square feet.

D.	Yard Areas – No building shall be hereafter erected, altered or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement.

Front yard -	Not less than 50 feet.
Side yard -	Not less than 15 feet. Where
abutting an R District there shall
be provided in addition to the 15 feet a buffer area of not less than
8 feet.
Rear yard -	Not less than 20 feet.	Where
abutting an R District there shall be provided in addition to the rear
year requirement, a buffer area of not less than 10 feet.

E.	Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities – Shall be provided as required or permitted under Article XI.

SECTION 602 – C-2 Planned Shopping District	–	Within	the	C-2	Planned Shopping District, the following regulations shall apply:

A.	Permitted Uses – Upon grant of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board that all requirements are met:

Any use permitted in the C-1 District
Auto accessory store, automobile land truck sales and indi- dental service
Bank, financial institution, savings and loan association, drive-in or main office
Department store
Dry good store, haberdashery, wearing apparel store
Electrical appliances store, sales, service, repair, but exclud-
ing appliance assembly or manufacture Food, fruit or vegetable store
Furniture store, upholstery when conducted as a secondary opera-
tion to the sale of furniture and furnishings  Furrier, conducted as a retail operation for trade on the
premises only
Garden supplies, seed store, nursery
 
Hotel, motor hotel, club or restaurant Household appliance store, sales and service
Interior decorating business, including upholstering and making of draperies, slip covers and similar articles when conducted as part of the retail operations and secondary to the main use
Liquor store, beer distributor Paint, wallpaper sales
Photographer studio, art gallery, including the developing of firm when conducted as part of the retail business on the
premises
Professional and business offices, including medical clinic
Restaurant, tea room, café where consumption of food and bever-
age is within a building Shoe store
Service station, public garage, or other vehicle services,
provided no repair work is performed outdoors; provided all pumps, underground storage tanks, lubricating and other devices are located not less than 25 feet from any street right-of-way; provided all fuel, oil or similar substances
are stored inside or underground and similar articles are stored within a building
Sporting goods store
Tavern licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages Theater, indoor
Typewriter, office equipment sales and service
Variety store
Similar type retail, service or commercial use not specifically
listed herein when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board
after receipt and review of recommendations from the Planning Commission

B.	Height – No requirement

C.	Yard Areas – No buildings shall be hereafter erected, altered or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement:

Front yard -	Not less than 50 feet
Side yard -	Not less than 75 feet.	Where abutting  an R District, there shall be provided within the side yard requirement a buffer area of not less than 10 feet
Rear yard -	Same as side yard requirements.

D.	Percentage of Lot Coverage – Buildings, including accessory uses, Shall cover not more than 40% of the total lot area.

E.	Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities – Shall be provided as Required or permitted under Article XI.

F.	Conditions of Use –
 
1.	All activities, except for accessory uses, shall be conducted Within a completely enclosed building.
2.	No C-2 District shall comprise an area of less than 5 acres.
3.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a special exception for occupancy of a tract or for the construction of a building or
structure in a Planned Shopping District or lot therein in accordance with the provisions and procedure of this ordinance only upon an affirmative finding that the following requirements have been met by the owner, owners, developer, developers, or petitioner for the tract or lot proposed for commercial development.

a.	Traffic Study

(1)	To include a comparative analysis of present capacity of street(s)adjacent to the proposed business with potential capacity and volumes generated by the proposed development, together with necessary points of access to off-street parking and loading.	Traffic data available in the Upper Yoder Comprehensive Plan may be utilized providing that such data is deemed current by the Planning Commission.
(2)	To include a circulation plan for all streets in
the vicinity existing and proposed, which will show the
recommendations for controlling, signalizing, channelizing, storing, warning and directing traffic.

b.	Landscape Development Plan

(1)	To include a plan of landscape development which shall, among other considerations, consist of an area of at least
5 feet in width parallel to both sides of all streets, with the exception of approved entrances, to be planted and maintained with trees, shrubbery or other landscape material or ornamental fence or wall to serve as a visual screen for the parking areas and loading or servicing areas.
(2)	A buffer area of suitable landscaping maintained at a height of 8 feet by 10 feet in width wherever the district abuts an R District.
(3)	The location, arrangement, size and effect of all outdoor
advertising	or	other	signs	and	lighting	proposed	to	be erected.

c.	Architectural controls
 
Architectural plans of the building or buildings and structures proposed to be constructed shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board.	The Board’s approval will be based on the
Architectural Plans creating a unified design which
will be in character and proper relationship to the surrounding area.

G.	Other  Approvals	–	Any	other	authority	approval	required,	when applicable, such as Department of Environmental Resources, PennDOT and similar organizations shall be obtained before applying for a building or occupancy permit.

SECTION 603 – C-3 Research-Office District – Within the Research-Office District the following regulations apply:

A.	Permitted Uses – Upon grant of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board that all requirements herein are met:

General offices for business and industry laboratory for research and development, professional offices and relate activities.
Similar type research-office use not specifically listed herein when authorized by special exception of the Zoning Hearing Board after receipt and review of recommendations from the Planning Commission. Such authorized uses may include limited light manufacturing provided all activities are conducted indoors.

B.	Height – No requirement.

C.	Lot Coverage – Not to exceed 40% of the lot area.

D.	Building Line – No buildings shall be hereafter erected, altered or enlarged closer than 50 feet to any public right-of-way.	When abutting an R District, no building shall be closer than 75 feet
of which 10 feet will be maintained as a landscaped buffer.

E.	Condition of Use –

1.	All activities except for accessory uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
2.	No C-3 District shall comprise an area of less than 1 acre.
3.	The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a special exception for
occupancy of a tract or construction of a building in a Research- Office District or lot therein in accordance with the provisions Procedure of this ordinance and upon an affirmative finding that following requirements have been met by owner, owners, developer,
 
developers, or petitioners for the tract or lot proposed for commercial development.

(a)	Traffic Study

(1)	To include a comparative analysis of present capacity of street(s) adjacent to the proposed business with potential capacity and volumes generated by the proposed development, together with necessary points of access to off-street parking and loading.	Traffic data available in the Upper Yoder Comprehensive Plan may be utilized providing that such data is deemed current.
(2)	To include a circulation plan for all streets in the
vicinity, existing and proposed, which will show
the recommendations for controlling, signalizing, channelizing, storing, warning and directing traffic.

(b)	Landscape Development Plan

(1)	To include a plan of landscape development
which shall consist of, among other considerations,
an area of at least 5 feet in width along all streets and vehicular access ways, with the exception of approved entrances, to be planted and maintained with trees, shrubbery, or other landscape material or ornamental fence or wall to serve as a visual screen for the parking areas and loading or servicing areas.
(2)	A buffer area consisting of suitable landscaping maintained wherever the proposed business abuts an R District.
(3)	The location, arrangement, size and effect of
all on-site outdoor advertising, announcements
or other signs and lighting proposed to be erected.

F.	Limitation of Use – Any light manufacturing use must be one which creates a minimum amount of nuisance outside the plant; is conducted entirely within enclosed buildings, does not use the open area around such buildings for storage of raw materials or manufactured products unless screened from public view or for any other industrial purpose other than transporting goods between buildings; and which is not noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of smoke, dust, fumes, gas, odors, noises or vibrations beyond the confines of the building.

G.	Other Approvals – Any other authority approval required, when Applicable, such as Department of Environmental Resources, PennDOT
 
and similar organizations shall be obtained before applying for a building or occupancy permit.

H.	Architectural Controls – Architectural plans of the building or buildings and structures proposed to be constructed shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board.	The Zoning Hearing Board approval will be based on the architectural plans creating
a unified design which will be in character and proper relationship to the surrounding areas.

I.	Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities – Shall be provided as Required or permitted under Article XI.




ARTICLE VII – PROVISIONS GOVERNING THE MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS

SECTION 701 – M-1 Manufacturing District – Within the Manufacturing District, the following regulations apply:

A.	Permitted Uses – Upon grant of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board that all requirements herein are met:

A manufacturing use is one which creates a minimum amount of nuisance outside the plant; is conducted entirely within enclosed buildings, does not use the open area around such buildings for storage of raw materials or manufactured products unless screened from public view or for any other purpose other than transporting goods between buildings; and which is not noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of smoke, dust, fumes, gas, odors, noises or vibrations beyond the confines of the building.

Automobile repair, major Bakery
Bottling work
Building materials yard or establishment
Cabinet making establishments and carpenter shops
Clothing factory
Dairy
Dry-cleaning plant
Dyeing plant Feed yard
Laundry Machine Shop
Milk distribution station
Optical good factory Paper box factory Pencil factory
Printing, publication and engraving plant Research and development organization Sheet metal shop
 
Steel fabrication Storage firm Trucking terminal Welding shop Wholesale business
Any other compatible type manufacturing use
Accessory use or building customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses and as regulated by this ordinance.

B.	Height – The maximum height of building hereafter erected or altered shall be as follows:

Three stories or 40 feet.

C.	Yard Areas – No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement:

Front yard – not less than 50 feet.
Side or rear yard – On each side, not less than 15 feet.	When abutting a street, not less than 50 feet.	For a lot which abuts upon an R District, there shall be provided a yard equal to one-half the front yard required in the abutting R District, plus a buffer area of not less than
15 feet.

Railroad siding frontage – No yards are required for those Portions of lots which abut railroad sidings.

D.	Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities – Off-street parking and loading facilities will be provided as required under Article XI herein.

E.	Planting Areas – Landscape development in an area of at least 5 feet in width along all streets shall be planted and maintained with trees and shrubbery to serve as a screen for parking and storage areas.	Ornamental fence or wall may be used in lieu of landscaping.

A planting screen, consisting of suitable shrubbery maintained at an 8 foot height by 8 foot width, shall be planted within a buffer area which shall be required when the M-1 District abuts an R District.


ARTICLE VIII – PROVISIONS GOVERNING FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICTS

GENERAL PROVISIONS – The following incorporates Upper Yoder Township Ordinance No. 209 enacted October 18, 1989, to comply with Section 19103(k) of the National Flood Insurance Program.
 
SECTION 801.00 – Statement of Intent – The intent of this ordinance is to:

A.	Promote	the	general	health,	welfare	and	safety	of	the	community;

B.	Encourage the utilization or appropriate construction practices to minimize flood damage in the future;

C.	Minimize damage to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage;

D.	Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.

SECTION 801.01 – Applicability

A.	It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business, or corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within flood-prone areas of the Township unless an approved Special Building Permit has been obtained from
the Building Official.

B.	A building permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures, provided that no structural changes or modifications are involved.

SECTION 801.02 – Abrogation and Greater Restrictions – This ordinance supersedes any provisions currently in effect in flood-prone areas. However, any underlying ordinances shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are most restrictive.

SECTION 801.03 – Severability – If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.

SECTION 801.04 – Municipal Liability – The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes in the identified flood-prone area.	Larger floods may occur on rare occasions.	Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris.	This ordinance does not imply that areas outside any identified flood-prone area, or that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.	This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
 
ADMINISTRATION

SECTION 802.00 – Special Building Permits Required – A special building permit shall be required before any proposed construction or development is undertaken within any identified flood-prone area of the Township.	Such special building permit shall be in addition to the usual Building Permit required under the Upper Yoder Township Zoning Ordinance as amended, with said special building permit and usual building permit to be issued simultaneously by the Building Official.

SECTION 802.01 – Issuance of Special Building Permit – The Building Official shall issue a special building permit only after it has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this ordinance.

SECTION 802.02 – Application Procedures

A.	Application for such a special building permit shall be made, in writing, to the Building Official on forms supplied by the Township.

B.	Such application shall contain the following basic information:

1.	Name and address of applicant.
2.	Name and address of owner or land on which proposed construction is to occur.
3.	Name and address of contractor.
4.	Site location.
5.	Proposed lowest floor and basement elevations in relation to mean sea
level.
6.	Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost.
7.	A	plan	of	the	site	showing	the	exact	size	and	location	of	the
proposed	construction	as	well	as	any	existing	buildings	or
structures.

C.	Such application shall also be accompanied by the following plans and documents:

1.	A plan which accurately delineates the area which is subject to flooding, the location of the proposed construction, the location of any other flood-prone development or structures, and the location of any existing or proposed stream improvements or protective works.	Included shall be all plans for proposed subdivision and land development in order to assure that:

(a)	All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b)	All utilities and facilities, such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems are located,
elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(c)	Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce
 
exposure to flood hazards.

2.	Such plan shall also include existing and proposed contours; information concerning 100 year flood elevations, and other applicable information such as uplift forces, associated with the 100 year flood; size of structures, location and elevations of streets; water supply and sanitary sewage facilities; soil types; and floodproofing measures.

3.	A document certified by a registered professional engineer  or architect that the proposed construction has been adequately designed against flood damage and that the plans for the development of the site adhere to the restrictions cited in Section 804 of this ordinance.	Such statement shall
include a description of the type and extent of floodproofing
measures which have been incorporated into the design of the structure.

SECTION 802.03 – Other Permit Issuance Requirements

A.	Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream or any watercourse, etc., within the municipality, a permit shall be obtained from	the	Department	of	Environmental	Resources,	Dams	and	Encroachment Division, as specified in the Water Obstruction Act of 1913, as amended. Further, notification of the proposal shall be given to all affected adjacent municipalities.	Copies of such notifications shall be forwarded to both the Federal Insurance Administration and the Department of Community Affairs.

Under	no	circumstances	shall	any	use,	activity	and/or	development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system.

B.	Prior to the issuance of any special building permit, the Building Official shall review the application for permit to determine if all other necessary governmental permits such as those required by State
and Federal Laws have been obtained, including those required by Act 527,
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, and the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. 1334.	No permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.

SECTION 802.04 – Review by County Conservation District – A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in any identified flood-prone area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Building Official to the County Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a special building permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the Building Official for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
 
SECTION 802.05 – Review of Application by Others – A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in ay identified flood-prone area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Building Official to any other appropriate agencies and or individuals (such as the Township Planning Commission) for review and comment.

SECTION 802.06 – Changes – After the issuance of a special building permit by the Building Official, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the Building Official.

SECTION 802.07 – Placards – In addition to the special building permit, the Building Official shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the special building permit, the date of its issuance and be signed by the Building Official.

SECTION 802.08 – Start of Construction – Work on the proposed construction shall begin within 6 months after the date of issuance of the special building permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Building Official. Construction shall be considered to have started with the first placement of permanent construction of the site, such as the pouring of slabs or footing any work beyond the state of excavation. For a structure without a basement or poured footings, the start of construction includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its pilings or foundation, or the affixing of any prefabricated structure or mobile home to its permanent site. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations, erection of temporary forms, the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes, or electrical or other service lines from the street.

SECTION 802.09 – Inspection and Revocation – During the construction period, the Building Official or other authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit application and with all applicable Township laws and ordinances, or if there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Building Official shall revoke the building permit and report such fact to the Supervisors of Upper Yoder Township for whatever action they consider necessary.

SECTION 802.10 – Fees – Application for a special building permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the Township, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the Building Official at the following rates:

Estimated Cost	Fees
$	0.00	to $ 200.00	$0.00
 

$ 201.00	to $1,000.00	$5.00
Each additional $1,000.00	or	
thereof beyond the first	$1,000.00	$1.00

Such fees shall be in addition to the fees charged under the Upper Yoder Township Zoning Ordinance and shall be used to defray the additional costs in issuing special building permits in flood-prone areas and in inspecting the work to assure compliance with the ordinance.

SECTION 802.11 – Enforcement

A.	NOTICES – Whenever the Building Official determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this ordinance, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, such authority shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided.	Such notice shall (a) be in writing; (b) include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; (c) allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; (d) be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws of this State; (e) contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or any part thereof, and with the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

B.	HEARINGS – Any person affected by notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this ordinance, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Supervisors of Upper Yoder Township provided that such person shall file with the Township Secretary a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefore within 10 days after the notice was served.	The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and the suspension.	Upon receipt of such petition, the Township Secretary shall set a time and place for such hearing and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof.	At such hearing the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such
notice shall be modified or withdrawn.	The hearing shall be commenced not later than 30 days after the date on which the petition was filed; provided that upon application of the petitioner, the Township Secretary may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such 30 day period when, in his judgment, the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reason for such postponement.

C.	FINDINGS AND ORDER – After such hearing, the Supervisors of Upper Yoder Township shall make findings as to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance and regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an order,
 
in writing, sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice which shall be served as provided in sub-section A of this Section.

D.	RECORD OF HEARING – The proceedings at such a hearing, including the findings and decision of the Supervisors of Upper Yoder Township, together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto shall be entered as a matter of public record in the Township records but no transcript of the proceedings shall be required unless the petitioner advances the costs required for taking and transcribing the transcript.

E.	PENALTIES – Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this ordinance or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order or direction of the Building Official or of the Supervisors shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of no less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00, plus costs of prosecution.	In a default of such payment, such person shall be imprisoned in county prison for a period not to exceed 10 days.	Each day during which any violation of this ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.	In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this ordinance.	The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation or, non-compliance with, this ordinance shall not excuse the violation or non-compliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations and non-compliances within a reasonable
time.	Any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in non-compliance with this ordinance may be declared by the Supervisors of Upper Yoder Township to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.

SECTION 802.12 – Appeals

A.	Any person aggrieved by an action or decision of the Building Official, or by any of the requirements of this ordinance, may appeal to the Supervisors of Upper Yoder Township.	Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision or action of the Building Official.	Upon receipt of such appeal, the Supervisors shall set a time and place, within not less than 10 nor more than 30 days for the purpose of hearing the appeal.	Notice of the time and place of the hearing of the appeal shall be given to all parties, at which time they may appear and be heard.

B.	Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Supervisors may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this Commonwealth.

DESIGNATION OF FLOOD-PRONE AREA(S)
 
SECTION 803.00 – Identification – The “Flood-prone Area(s)” shall be any area(s) of the Township of Upper Yoder which are identified as being flood- prone on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map as issued by the Federal Insurance Administration date January 24, 1975, or any date subsequent thereto.

SECTION 803.01 – Determination of the Regulatory Flood Elevation	–	For purposes of this ordinance, the regulatory flood elevation, i.e. the 100 year flood elevation, plus a freeboard safety factor of 1-1/2 feet shall be used to determine the 100 year flood elevation, the elevation at a given point of the boundary of the identified flood-prone area(s) which is nearest the construction site in question will be used. In helping to make this necessary elevation determination other sources of data where available shall be used, such as:

A.	Corps of Engineers – Flood Plain Information Reports.

B.	U.S. Geological Survey – Flood Prone Quadrangles.

C.	U.S.D.A., Soil Conservation Service – County Soil Surveys (Alluvial Soils).

D.	Known Highwater Marks from Past Floods.

E.	Other Sources.


In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Township.

SECTION 803.02 – Boundary Disputes	–	Should	a	dispute	concerning	any district boundary arise, a determination shall be made by the Building Official and any party aggrieved by his decision may appeal to the Township Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.


SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS

SECTION 804.00 – General

A.	In the identified Flood-prone Area, the development and/or use of any land shall be permitted provided that the development and/or use adheres to the restrictions and requirements of all other applicable codes and ordinances in force in the municipality.

B.	Within any identified flood-prone area, the elevation of the lowest
 
floor (including basement) of any new or improved residential structures shall be at or above the regulatory flood elevation.

C.	Within any identified flood-prone area, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of non-residential structures shall be at or above the regulatory flood elevation or be flood-proofed up to that height. Any structure or part thereof which will not be completely or adequately elevated, shall be flood-proofed in accordance with the provisions of this article.	Additional information may be obtained from the publication entitled “Flood-proofing Regulations”	(U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972).

SECTION 804.01 – Design and Construction Standards – The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction proposed to be undertaken within any identified flood-prone area:

A.	Fill – If fill is used, it shall:

1.	Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points,

2.	Consist of soil	or small rock materials only.	Sanitary land
	fills shall not	be permitted.	

3.	Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling,

4.	Be no steeper than 1 vertical to 2 horizontal, unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and approved by the Township Building Official,

5.	Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.

B.	Placement of Buildings and Structures – All buildings and structures shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood waters.

C.	Anchoring

1.	All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

2.	All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks and other similar objects or components located at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be firmly anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
 
D.	Floors, Walls and Ceilings – Where located at or below the regulatory flood elevation:

1.	Wood flooring shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without incurring structural damage to the building.

2.	Plywood shall be a “marine” or “water-resistant” variety.

3.	Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed or materials that are water- resistant and will withstand inundation.

4.	Windows, floors and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.

E.	Electrical Systems and Components

1.	Electric water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating systems, and other electrical equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation and other electrical equipment or apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above the regulatory flood elevation.

2.	Electrical distribution panels shall be at least 3 feet above the level of the 100 Year Flood Elevation.

3.	Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.

F.	Plumbing

1.	Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.

2.	No part of any on-site sewage disposal systems shall be located within any identified flood-prone area(s).

3.	Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters.

4.	All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent  the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges
 
from the system into flood waters.	Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water infiltration occurs.

G.	Paints and Adhesives – When used at or below regulatory flood elevation:

1.	Paints or other finishes shall be of a “marine” or water-resistant quality.

2.	Adhesives shall be of a “marine” or water-resistant quality.

3.	All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall
be finished with a “marine” or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.

H.	Storage – No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or in times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be stored below the regulatory flood elevation.

I.	Drainage Facilities – Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The system shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings.	The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff into adjacent properties.

J.	Sanitary Sewer Facilities – All new replacement sanitary sewer facilities and private package sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems) shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into the flood waters.	In addition, they should be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and impairment.

K.	Water Facilities – All new or replacement water facilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system, and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.

L.	Streets – The finished elevation of proposed new streets shall be no more than 1 foot below the regulatory flood elevation.

M.	Utilities – All utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems being placed in flood-prone areas should be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the change
or impairment during a flood.

SECTION 804.02 – Special Requirements for Mobile Homes


A.	All mobile homes and any additions thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors in accordance with the American National
 
Standards Institute and National Fire Protection Association Standards  as specified in the Standard for the Installation of Mobile Homes including Mobile Home Park Requirements (NFPA No. 501A-1974 ANSI A119.3- 1975) as amended for Mobile Homes in Hurricane Zones or other Appropriate Standards such as the following:

1.	Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the 4 corners of the mobile home with 2 additional ties per side at intermediate locations for units 50 feet or more in length, and 1 additional tie per side for units less than 50 feet
in length.

2.	Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the mobile
home, with 5 additional ties per side at intermediate locations
for units 50 feet or more in length, and 4 additional ties per
side for units less than 50 feet in length.

3.	All components of the anchoring system shall be elevated of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.

B.	All mobile homes and any additions thereto shall also be elevated in accordance with the following requirements:

1.	The stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill, or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the regulatory flood elevation.

2.	Adequate surface drainage is provided.

3.	Adequate access for a hauler is provided.

4.	Where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large enough to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than 10 feet apart; reinforcement shall be provided for pilings that will extend for 6 feet or more above the ground level.


C.	An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall be filed with the appropriate Township Officials for mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions where appropriate.

SECTION 805.00 – Existing Structures in Identified Flood-Prone Areas

Structures existing in any identified flood-prone area prior to  the enactment of this ordinance, but which are not in compliance with these provisions, may continue to remain subject to the following:


1.	Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to an exiting structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or flood-proofed to the greatest
 
extent possible.

2.	Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.

SECTION 806.00 – Variances – If compliance with the elevation of flood- proofing requirements of this ordinance would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Township Supervisors may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirement. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township Supervisors in accordance with the procedures contained in Section 2.12 and the following procedures:

1.	If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.

2.	In granting any variance, the Township Supervisors shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve the objectives of this ordinance.

3.	Whenever a variance is granted, the Township Supervisors shall notify the applicant in writing that:

a.	The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.

b.	Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.

4.	In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township Supervisors shall consider, but not be limited to, the following:

a.	That there is good and sufficient cause.

b.	That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.

c.	That the granting of the variance will not result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expenses, create nuisances, causes fraud on, or victimization of the public, or conflict with any other applicable local or state ordinances and regulations.

5.	A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the Township.	In addition, a report of all variances

granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
 
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
100 year flood.

SECTION 807.00 – General Definitions – Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.

SECTION 807.01 – Specific Definitions –

A.	Accessory use or structure – a use of structure on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure.

B.	Building – a combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof.	Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.

C.	Building Official – The Township Supervisors shall appoint a Building Official to administer and enforce this ordinance.	The Building Official shall be removed with or without cause at the will of the Supervisors and shall be paid such fees as the Supervisors shall from time to time to determine by resolution.	At their discretion, the Supervisors may also appoint an Assistant Building Official who shall act in absence of the Building Official.	Unless specifically otherwise directed by resolution of the Supervisors, the Building Official and the Assistant Building Official shall also be the Zoning Officer and any Assistant Zoning Officer respectively under the Upper Yoder Township Zoning Ordinance,
as amended.

D.	Construction – the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure, including the placement of mobile homes.

E.	Development – any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the subdivision of land, the placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations.

F.	Flood – a temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.

G.	Floodproofing – means any combination of structural and non- structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.




H.	Flood-prone area – a relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
 
accumulation of surface waters from any source.

I.	Minor repair – the replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep; but not including any addition, change or modification in construction, existing facilities, or permanent fixtures or equipment.

J.	Mobile home – means a transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly, contained in one or more sections, built on a permanent chasis, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used
with or without a permanent foundation.	The term does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.

K.	Mobile home park – a parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for non-transient use.

L.	Obstruction – any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or flood-prone area, which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or collecting
debris carried by such water or is placed where the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life and property.

M.	One hundred year flood – a flood that, on the average is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1% chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).

N.	Person – any person, persons, partnership, business or corporation.

O.	Regulatory flood elevation – the 100 year flood elevation plus	a freeboard safety factor of 1-1/2 feet.

P.	Structure – anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground including, but not limited to, buildings, sheds, mobile homes and other similar items.

Q.	Subdivision – the division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the
 
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership
or building, or lot development; providing, however, that the division of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,  not involving any new street or easement of access, shall be exempted.



ARTICLE IX – PROVISIONS GOVERNING CONSERVANCY DISTRICTS


SECTION 901 – “S” Conservancy District – The “S” Conservancy District is intended to preserve the scenic and ecological values or the townships’ steep hillside lands, waterways, environmentally sensitive forest lands and soil types through the prohibition or restriction of commercial, industrial and most residential development.	The Conservancy District allows for low density “single-family” residential development, and the continuation of existing farming operations.

A.	Permitted Uses:

Scenic or natural preservation; Single Family detached; Farming;
Forestry;
Lodges or clubs for hunting, fishing, gunning or other similar recreational purposes;
Resort-type residential establishment when associated with
recreation or group-oriented activities on the premises; and Open Recreational Use when operated by a non-profit organization
(hiking trails, fishing and boating, picnicking camps).

By special exception

Surface Mining; and
Deep Mining Operations (provided all disturbed land is properly backfilled and/or returned to its original contours).

B.	Set backs:

Except for farming uses, no building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the minimum set backs are provided for:

Interior Lot:	Front – 50 feet
Rear	- 25 feet
Side	- 50 feet

Corner Lot:	Street sides – 50 feet
Interior	- 25 feet

C.	Height – As required in R-1
 

D.	Lot Area – The minimum lot area for every building hereafter erected or altered shall be as follows:

Residential Use – 2 acres and 200 feet at building line
Other permitted uses – 10 acres and width at building line of 300 feet

E.	Percentage of Lot Coverage – All buildings, including accessory uses, shall not cover more than 5% of the total lot area.

F.	Dwelling Standards – As required in R-1 for one-story and two-story structures.



G.	Off Street Parking – Shall be provided as under Article XI.

H.	Signs – Shall be as provided under Article XIII.


ARTICLE X – SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS

SECTION 1001 – Additional Height, Area, Yard and Fence Regulations – The district regulations set forth in this section qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance.

A. Additional Height Regulations – Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings may be increased in height by not more than 10 feet when the side and rear yards are increased over the yard requirements of the district in which they are located by not less than 10 feet, but they shall not exceed 3 stories in height.

Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers, or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers and spires, radio towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to be height above the limitations of the district but not to exceed 15 feet over such limitations.

B.	Additional Area Regulations – No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used
for dwelling purposes unless the main building on the lot is also being
used for dwelling purposes.

More than one industrial, commercial, multiple-family dwelling or institutional building may be erected upon a single lot or tract, but the yards and open spaces required around the boundaries of the
lot or tract shall not be encroached upon by such buildings, nor shall
there be any charge in the density of use requirements.
 

When more than one multiple-family dwelling building is erected upon a single lot or tract, the minimum distances between main buildings shall be the following:

a.	Front to front, 70 feet; front to rear, 60 feet;
b.	Side to side, ½ the height of the tallest building, but
not less than 20 feet;
c.	Front to side or rear to side, the height of the tallest
building but not less than 30 feet;
d.	Rear to rear, 50 feet.

C. Additional Yard and Fence Regulations – Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building may be built in a rear or side yard within
5 feet of the rear lot line.	An accessory building which is not a part of the main building shall not occupy more than 30% of the required yard. No accessory building or structure, except a fence or wall, may be located within a required buffer area.

Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for accessory building in the rear yard and except for the ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features projecting not more than 12 inches from the main building.	This requirement shall be prevent the construction of fences not exceeding 5 feet in height. No solid fences shall be erected except as hereinafter provided.	No fence shall exceed a maximum height of 5 feet, with a maximum paling width of 8 inches, and minimum spacing between palings of 3 inches.	All swimming pool gates shall be equipped with locking devices.

A solid free-standing fence may only be used to enclose a swimming pool, and shall not exceed a maximum height of 7 feet.	No fence of any type shall be permitted on that portion of a lot within 30 feet of the intersection of two or more streets.

Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers projecting in a yard not more than
4 feet, 6 inches, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues may be permitted by the Zoning Officer.	For the purpose of side yard requirements, a two-family dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying a single lot.

Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features which do not extend more than 3 feet above the floor level of the first (ground) story may project into a required side yard, provided these projections are a distance of at least 5 feet from the adjacent side lot lines.

When, on the effective date of this ordinance, 40% of a frontage is developed with two or more buildings, then the depth of the front yards heretofore established shall be adjusted to conform with the
average prevailing set backs.
 

In residential districts when 75% of the frontage of a block on both sides of the street between two intersecting streets or between an intersecting street and a cul-de-sac has been developed with main buildings and accessory buildings with side yards less than the required by the dwelling district in which said property is situated, then the side yard requirement for any main buildings or accessory buildings in said block may be by the average side yard of all parcels which are included in the block.

Fences, hedges or other structures or plantings of any nature shall not be located at street corners or as to interfere with vision clearance  at intersections across corner lots.	The height of such objects is restricted to 3 feet above the established street grade within a triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and equidistance from the point of intersection. This distance shall be 30 feet from the corner.

SECTION 1002 – Slope Area Restrictions – The regulations set forth in this section apply in all instances and to all Districts where appropriate, and supplement the District regulations which appear elsewhere in this ordinance.

A.	Slope Regulations Shall Apply When

1.	The average cross slope of that portion of the parcel to be developed exceeds 20%. “Development Portion”, for purposes of this article shall be interpreted to mean the building
area on which the structure is situated, plus all required yard areas, parking lots or other required land area in conjunction with any site development.

2.	The development of the property will unduly increase the danger of storm water, sewerage drainage, or other run-off and result in erosion or other damage to surrounding lands.

B.	Lot Areas –The lot or parcel shall contain a minimum area of 3 acres for residential uses and a minimum area of 10 acres for all other uses.

C.	Yard Areas and Set Backs – No buildings or structures shall be constructed or enlarged unless the following set-back lines and yards are established and maintained in connection with said buildings.



1.	There shall be established and maintained a set-back building line of not less than 100 feet for every structure from any public right-of-way.





2.	Side and rear yards of not less than 75 feet shall be maintained,
 
except that where a non-residential use abuts a residential district, yard widths of at least 100 feet shall be established and maintained.

3.	If it is determined by the Health Inspector of the Township or of the State Health Department that the above cited yard area and set-back requirements are not sufficient to properly and safely
accommodate onsite sewage disposal systems, the Board of Adjustment
shall require greater yard areas and set-back minimums as deemed necessary to meet the intent and purposes of this ordinance, prior
to the issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Officer.

D.	Planting Area


1.	A planting screen consisting of suitable shrubbery and trees maintained at an average height of at least 8 feet and a width or depth of at least 25 feet, shall be planted and maintained in the area between any building and the property line of a non-residential use which abuts a residence district.

2.	Where trees already exist within the screen area specified above, these trees shall remain undisturbed except that diseased or dead material may be removed.	Trees may be removed to provide access for utility lines across required planting screen; however, all care must be exercised not to disturb the larger, more desirable tree which are living.

3.	When any tree is removed, it shall be replaced by a seedling suitable to the environment.	All such replacement planting shall be in accordance with accepted conservation practices.

SECTION 1003 – Mobile Home Trailer Park Restrictions

A.	Use – Mobile Home Trailer Parks shall be permitted in an R-6 Residential District only.

B.	Lot Area – The minimum area for every trailer park hereafter developed shall be 5 acres.

C.	Plot Plan – Each application shall be accompanied by 3 copies of  a plot plan drawn at a scale of 1 inch equals 20 feet, prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer, showing limits and square footage of the proposed trailer park and location and size of driveways, parking areas, drying areas, playgrounds, service buildings, other
buildings, trailer lots, together with required setbacks from rights






of way and property lines.	All trailer lots shall be numbered in
 
sequence on the plot plan.

D.	Minimum Lot Area For Each Trailer – The minimum unit area for each trailer lot used or occupied by and under each trailer shall be as follows:

(a)	75% of the lots in any one trailer park shall be not less than 2,100 square feel in area.
(b)	25% of the lots in any one trailer park shall be not less than 1,800 square feet in area.
(c)	Density in any trailer park shall not exceed 10 units
per gross area.

E.	Minimum Width of Trailer Lots – The minimum width for each trailer lot shall be 30 feet.

F.	Minimum Distance Between Trailers – No trailer shall be placed within 15 feet of another; provided that with respect to trailers parked end-to-end, the distance between trailers so parked shall be not less than 10 feet.

G.	Setbacks – No trailer shall be placed a lesser distance from the trailer park boundary than the side yard width required in the zoning district which abuts each boundary line.	In no case shall
a trailer be parked less than 10 feet from the trailer park boundary.
All trailers shall be set forth from any public street the same distance as buildings are required to set back in the zoning district in which the trailer park is located.

H.	Markers – Every trailer lot shall be clearly defined on the ground by permanent markers.	There shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on each lot a number corresponding to the number
of each lot as shown on the plot plan.

I.	Driveways – The minimum lane or driveway on which an individual trailer lot fronts shall be 28 feet in width.	In cases where driveways
dead-end, there shall be constructed at each such dead-end a
cul-de-sac with a minimum turning radius of 38 feet.	All construction
material for such roads shall meet established township requirements. When an entrance to any trailer park is from a state highway, approval of said entrance from the State Highway Department must be secured before said development is approved.

J.	Water and Sewer Facilities – An adequate supply of water approved by the Health Department shall be furnished from a public water supply system or from a private water system conforming to all applicable laws, regulations, resolutions and ordinances, with supply faucets located
on each trailer lot.	In each trailer park, all waste water from a
faucet, toilet, tub, shower, sink, drain, washing machine, garbage disposal unit or laundry shall empty into an approved sewer system

installed in accordance with State and Township regulations.
 

K.	Service Buildings – Each trailer park shall provide service buildings to house the following facilities:

(a)	All service buildings shall be permanent structures complying with ordinance regulating the construction of buildings.

(b)	All service buildings shall be adequately lighted at all times of day and night, shall be well ventilated, shall
be constructed of such moisture-proof materials, including
painted woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and
washing and shall be maintained at a temperature of not less than 68 Fahrenheit during the period from October first to May first.

(c)	Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be located not closer than 20 feet from any trailer lot or further than 150 feet from any trailer lot serviced by such building.	Setback requirements from public streets
pertaining to trailers shall also apply to service buildings.
Walkways shall be provided from each service building to the
nearest driveway and shall be constructed and maintained to a minimum width of 3 feet in a manner and of materials suitable for all-weather use.

(d)	All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free
of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance or fire hazard.

L.	Sanitation Facilities – Each park shall provide toilets, baths or showers and other sanitation facilities which shall conform to the following requirements:

(a)	Each sex shall be provided with not less than 1 lavatory for each 5 trailer lots, and not less than 1 shower
or bath tub with individual dressing accommodations for each 10 trailer lots.	Each lavatory, shower or tub shall be provided with hot and cold water outlets.

(b)	Each toilet and each shower or tub with individual dressing accommodations shall be in a private compartment or stall.

(c)	The toilet and other sanitary facilities for males shall be either in separate buildings or shall be separated,





if in the same building, by a soundproof wall from those
 
provided for females.

M.	Storage Tanks – Gasoline, liquefied petroleum, gas or oil storage tanks shall be installed as to comply with all County, State and National Fire Prevention Code Regulations.

N.	Playgrounds – The purpose of this section is to provide for areas and facilities for recreational purposes appropriate to the needs of the occupants.	At least 50 square feet of playground space shall be provided and maintained for each trailer lot.	Each trailer park must provide not less than 1 playground, and no playground shall be less than 2,500 square feet in area.	Such areas shall be used exclusively for playground purposes.

O.	Additions to Trailers – No permanent or semi-permanent structure shall be affixed to any trailer as and addition to such trailer, nor shall any accessory structure be permitted on any trailer lot or in any trailer park except those accessory structures required by these regulations and an office structure.	The prohibition herein against any addition to accessory to a trailer shall not apply to a canopy or awning designed for use with a trailer.	The trailer lot coverage of a trailer shall not exceed 30% of the total trailer lot area.

P.	General Conditions – All procedures for development of a trailer park shall be the same as required for a Special Exception as specified in the Zoning Regulations.

SECTION 1004 – Private, Community or Club Swimming Pools

A.	Private Swimming Pool – Definition – A private swimming pool in the ground or prefabricated installation above the ground shall be any pool, lake or open tank not located within a completely enclosed building, containing or normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than 1-1/2 feet.

B.	Private Swimming Pools – Use and Location – The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is located, and their guests, and no fee shall be charged.

It shall not be located, including any structures adjacent thereto, closer than 15 feet to any property line of the property on which it is located.

The swimming pool shall be so walled or substantially fenced so as to prevent uncontrolled external access by children or other third
parties.	Said fence or wall shall be not less than 4 feet in height, maintained in good condition, contain locking devices, and shall be erected concurrently with construction of the pool or prior to an existing pool being filled with water.
A fence which is an integral part of the construction of the pool
 
must be attached thereto for other than the purpose of containing the contents of the pool.	Said fence shall exceed the height of the side wall of the above-ground pool by a minimum of 2 feet, but shall not exceed a maximum height of 7 feet from ground level.

A solid free-standing fence may only be used to enclose a swimming pool, and shall not exceed a maximum height of 7 feet.

Under no circumstances will the containing walls of an above- ground pool in and of themselves satisfy the requirement of a wall or fence.

Building permits shall be required for all swimming pools.	For purposes and application of this section, any swimming pool which was constructed prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be walled or fenced as hereinabove provided by the 1st day of
June, 1991.

C.	Community or Club Swimming Pools – A community or club swimming pool shall be any pool constructed by an association of property owners, or by a private club solely for use and enjoyment by members of the association or club and their families and guests of members, or any pool constructed for the use of three or more residences, whether such residences are permanent residences
(as in the case of an apartment building) or transient residences
(as in the case of a motel).	Community and club swimming pools shall comply with the following conditions and requirements:

1.	The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the areas used by bathers, shall not be closer than 100 feet
to any property line of the property on which it is located.

2.	The swimming pool and all of the area used by bathers shall be so walled or fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or adjacent properties.
The said fence or wall shall not be less than 6 feet in height, maintained in good condition and be erected prior to any filling of the pool with water.	The area surrounding the enclosure, except the parking spaces, shall be suitably landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs and trees, and maintained in good condition.

D.	Department of Environment Resources – All swimming pools shall Conform to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resource Standards.

SECTION 1005 – Satellite Television Antennas – No satellite television





conformance with the following regulations.
 

A.	Satellite Antenna Location – In any commercial, manufacturing or multi-family residential zone, satellite television antennas may be located within the buildable area on the lot or buildings
therein.	In a non-commercial or single family zone, subject to the
provisions contained herein, such antenna shall be located in  the rear yard of any lot.	If satellite signals cannot be clearly received from such rear yards, the antennas may be located on the side yard.	In either case, the placement of such antennas must conform to the set-back distance required of storage sheds.

In the even that satellite signals cannot be received by locating the satellite television antenna on the rear or side yard of the property, such antenna may be placed in the front yard or on the roof of the dwelling structures, provided that a special satellite use permit is obtained prior to such installation.	Such permit may then be issued upon a showing by the applicant that satellite signals are not receivable from any location on the property other than the location selected by the applicant.

A building permit is required for all satellite antennas.

B.	Antenna Size – In a non-commercial or single-family a zone, satellite television antennas shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter, and a ground-mounted satellite television antenna shall not exceed 20 feet in height, including any platform or structure upon which said antenna is mounted or affixed.

If satellite signals cannot be obtained from a satellite television antenna installed in compliance with the aforementioned height limitation, such antenna may be installed at a greater height, provided that a special satellite use permit is obtained prior to such installation.	Such permit shall be issued upon a showing by the applicant that installation at a height greater than 20 feet is necessary for the reception of satellite signals.

Except in a commercial, manufacturing or multi-family residential zone, satellite television antennas shall be located and designed to reasonably reduce visual impact from surrounding properties at street level and from public streets.	Satellite television antennas shall meet all manufacturers’ specifications, shall be of non-combustible and corrosive-resistant material, and shall be erected in a secure, wind-resistant manner.	Every satellite television antenna shall be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning.


ARTICLE XI – OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS

SECTION 1101 – General Provisions

A.	Procedure – An application for a building permit for a new or
 
enlarged building structure, or use, shall include therewith a plot plan drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any off- street parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.

B.	Extent of Control – The off-street parking and loading requirements of this ordinance apply as follows:

1.	All buildings and structures erected and all land uses initiated after the effective date of this ordinance shall provide necessary off-street parking or loading facilities as required hereinafter for the use thereof.

2.	When a building and structure erected or enlarged prior to and after the effect of this ordinance shall undergo a decrease in number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees or other unit of measurement specified hereinafter for required off-street parking or loading facilities, and when said decrease would result in a requirement for fewer total off-street parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this ordinance thereto, off-street parking and loading facilities may be decreased only when the facilities remaining would at least equal or exceed the off-street parking or loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this
ordinance to the entire building or structure as modified.

3.	When a building or structure undergoes any increase in number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of measurement specified hereinafter for required off-street parking or loading facilities, and further, when said increase would result in a requirement for additional total off-street parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this ordinance, parking and loading facilities shall be increased so that the facilities will at least equal or exceed the off-street parking or loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this ordinance to the entire building or structure as modified.

C.	Existing Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces – Accessory off- street parking and loading spaces in existence on the effective date of this ordinance may not be reduced in number unless already exceeding the requirements of this Article for equivalent new construction, in which event said spaces shall not be reduced below the number required herein for such equivalent new construction.
 
SECTION 1102 – Design and Maintenance

A.	Parking Space – Description – A required off-street parking space shall be an area of not less than 180 square feet nor less than 9 feet wide by 20 feet long measured perpendicularly to the sides of the parking space exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps,
columns or office or work areas, accessible from streets or alleys,
or from private driveways or aisles leading to streets or alleys, and to be used for the storage or parking of passenger automobiles
or commercial vehicles under 1-1/2 ton capacity.	Aisles between vehicular parking spaces shall be not less than 12 feet in width
when serving automobiles parked at a 45 degree angle in one direction,
nor less than 20 feet in width when serving automobiles parked perpendicularly for two-way aisle movement, and not less than 20 feet in width when serving automobiles parked perpendicularly for one-way aisle movement.

B.	Measurement of Space – When determination of the number of required off-street parking spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including ½ may be
disregarded, and fractions ½ shall be interpreted as 1 parking space.

C.	Access – Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such manner as will least interfere with the movement of traffic.	No driveway
or curb cut in any district shall exceed 25 feet in width for one- way movement or 32 feet in width for two-way movement.

D.	Signs – No signs shall be displayed in any parking area within any residential district, except such as may be necessary for the orderly use of the parking facilities.	All signs in other parking areas shall conform to Article XIII herein.

E.	Striping – All parking spaces shall be properly marked by durable paving in stripes a minimum of 4 inches wide and extending the length of the parking space.

F.	Required Setbacks – No parking spaces or portion thereof established on a lot shall be located within a required front yard except in C and M districts, where off-street parking areas may be installed and maintained, in the required front yard, provided such parking areas do not occupy the first 5 feet of front yard nearest the street or alley.

G.	Surfacing – All open off-street parking areas, except those accessory to single-family dwellings, shall be improved with a compacted base surfaced with all-weather dustless material of adequate thickness to support the weight of fully-loaded vehicles which customarily park or travel on it.
 
H.	Lighting – Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from all adjoining properties.

I.	Storm Water – Adequate storm water drainage facilities shall be installed in order to insure that storm water does not flow onto abutting property or abutting sidewalks in such a way or quantity that pedestrians using the	sidewalk would be detrimentally affected or inconvenienced. The Township Engineer shall approve all such facilities.

J.	Walls or Planting Strip – Wherever a parking lot abuts onto a public street, sidewalk or alley, a structurally sound wall or planting strip, approved	by the Township Engineer, shall be installed.  Adequate retaining walks and other walls along abutting properties shall also be constructed, subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.

SECTION 1103 – Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements

A.	One and two-family dwellings – Two parking spaces for each family dwelling unit.

B.	Three or more family dwellings – One parking space for each family dwelling unit, plus 1 visitor’s parking space for every 2 (or fraction thereof) dwelling units.

C.	Bowling alleys, recreation center, swimming pools, skating rinks, outdoor commercial recreation enterprise and other recreation and amusement facilities – One parking space for every 4 customers computed on the basis of maximum servicing capacity at any one time, plus 1 additional space for every 2 persons regularly employed during peak shift on the premises.

D.	Club houses and meeting places of veterans, business, civic, fraternal, labor and similar organizations – One parking space for every 50 square feet of aggregate floor area in the auditorium, assembly hall, and dining room of such building, plus
1 additional space for every 2 persons regularly employed during
peak shift on the premises.

E.	Dormitories, fraternity houses and sorority houses – One parking space for every 2 beds occupied at maximum capacity.	This requirement is in addition to the parking space requirements for educational establishments set forth elsewhere herein.

F. “Drive-In” Facilities – Five per 100 square feet floor space.

G.	Funeral homes and undertaking establishments – Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business, plus 1 parking space for every 2 persons regularly employed on the premises during peak shift and 1 space for every 6 seats in
 
the establishment.

H.	Hospital – One parking space for each 4 beds intended for patients, excluding bassinets, plus 1 per doctor, plus 1 per 2 employees on peak shift, plus 1 per hospital vehicle.

I.	Indoor Retail Businesses – Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business, plus 1 parking space for each 250 square feet of total area.

J.	Industrial plants and facilities – Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of such industrial use, maximum employment on the peak shift.

K.	Junior and Senior High Schools – One parking space for every 6 seats available at maximum capacity in the assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium of greatest capacity on the school grounds or campus.	If the school has no assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium, 1 parking space shall be provided for each person regularly employed at such school, plus
2	additional spaces for each classroom.

L.	Libraries, museums, post offices and similar establishments - Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the operation of such establishment, plus 1 parking space for each 250 square feet of total floor area.

M.	Medical and dental clinics – Three parking spaces for each doctor, plus 1 additional space for every 2 regular employees.

N.	Nursing homes – One parking space for every 2 bed occupied at maximum capacity.	This requirement is in addition to the parking space requirements for hospitals set forth herein.

O.	Offices – One parking space for every 500 square feet of office space.

P.	Outdoor retail businesses – Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business, plus 2 parking spaces for each person employed on the premises based on maximum seasonal employment, plus 1 parking space for every 500 feet of lot area used for business purposes.

Q.	Public and private elementary schools – One parking space for each person regularly employed at such school, plus 1 additional space for each classroom.

R.	Public garages – Indoor or outdoor parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business, plus
3	parking spaces for each person regularly employed on the premises.
 
S.	Repair shops, plumbing shops, electrical shops, roofing shops and other service establishments – Parking or storage for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business, plus 2 parking spaces for each person regularly employed on the premises.

T.	Restaurants, indoor, and other eating and drinking establishments –
One parking space for each table or booth, plus 1 parking space
for every 2 stools at bar or counter, plus 1 parking space for every 2 employees on peak shift.

U.	Service Stations – Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business, plus 1 parking space for each gas pump, 3 spaces for each grease rack or similar facility, and 1 space for every 2 persons employed on the premises at maximum employment on a single shift.

V.	Theaters, auditoriums, churches, stadiums and other places of Public assembly – One parking space for every 6 seats available at maximum capacity.

W.	Motels and hotels – One parking space for each sleeping room offered for tourist accommodation, plus 1 space for each dwelling unit on the premises, plus 1 additional space for every 2 persons regularly employed on the premises during peak shift.

X.	Transportation terminals – One parking space for every one 100 square feet of waiting room space, plus 1 additional space for every 2 persons regularly employed on the premises during peak shift.

Y.	Universities, colleges, academics and similar institutions of higher learning – One parking space for every 6 seats occupied at maximum capacity in the assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium of greatest capacity on the campus.	If the institution has no assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium, 1 parking space shall be provided for each person regularly employed at such institution, plus 5 additional spaces for each classroom.

Z.	Warehouses, freight terminals and trucking terminals – Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business, plus 1 parking space for every 2 persons regularly employed on the premises during peak shift.

SECTION 1104 – Location of Parking Areas – Off-street automobile parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, such distance shall be walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest entrance of the building that said parking area is required to serve.

A.	For one and two-family dwellings – on the same lot with the building they are required to serve.
 
B.	For three and four-family dwellings not over 2 stories in height, and row dwellings not over 1-1/2 stories in height – on the same lot of parcel of land as the building they are required to serve. For the purpose of this requirement, a group of such uses constructed and maintained under a single ownership or management shall be assumed to be on a single lot or parcel of land.

C.	For clubs, hospitals, sanitariums, orphanages, homes for the aged, convalescent homes, and for other similar uses – on the same lot or parcel of land as the main building or buildings being served, or upon properties contiguous to the lot upon which is located the building or buildings they are intended to serve.

D.	For multiple-family dwellings containing more than 4 dwelling units and all other uses – on the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to serve, or on a separate lot or
parcel of land not more than 300 feet from the nearest entrance to
the main use being served, provided the lot or parcel of land
selected for the parking facilities is located in a C or M
District.

E.	Notwithstanding Paragraphs A-D above, no parking area accessory to a C or M use shall be located in an R District, except as permitted in Section 1105D herein.

SECTION 1105 – Additional Regulations – Parking

A.	Use of Off-Street Parking Facilities – Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance with the requirements of this Article shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles, commercial vehicles of not more than 1 ton GVW owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such facilities are accessory, service vehicles, or by guests of said occupants.

B.	Joint Parking Facilities – Off-street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively in any zoning district in which separate off-street parking facilities for each constituent use are permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so located together are not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use of which normal hours of operation coincide, and not more than 300 feet from the contiguous to the lot on which the main building is located.

In any case, where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereto, assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and execution by the Township Solicitor, and shall be filed with the application for a building permit.
 
Not more than 50% of the parking spaces required for (a) theaters and places of amusement, and up to 100% of the parking spaces required for a church or school may be provided and used jointly by (b) banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed in (a); provided, however, that written agreement assuring the retention for such
purposes is properly drawn and executed by the Township Solicitor, and is filed with the application for a building permit.

C.	Control of Off-Site Facilities – When required accessory off- street parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal use is located, they shall be in the same possession, either by deed or long-term lease, as the property occupied by such principal use, and the owner shall be bound by the covenants of record filed in the office of the Township Secretary requiring the owner and his or her heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of off-street parking spaces during the existence of said principal use.

D.	Non-Residential Parking in Residential Districts – Accessory off- street parking facilities serving non-residential uses of property may be permitted in any R District when authorized as a Special Exception by the Zoning Hearing Board after review and study by the Planning Commission, subject to the following requirements in addition to all other relevant requirements of this Article.

1.	The parking lot shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with one or more non-residential establishments located in adjoining districts or in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions, and within 300 feet of the non-residential use which it is to serve.

2.	Said parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles.

3.	No commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be conducted on said parking lot.

4.	No sign of any kind other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use shall be maintained on said parking lot and shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.

5.	The parking lot may be open from 7:00 AM to 9:00 PM and shall be closed at all other times, provided, however, that when supervised by 1 or more full-time attendants, the parking lot may be kept open until 12:00 midnight.
 
6.	Each entrance to and form said parking lot shall be at least 35 feet distant from any adjacent property located in any residential district, except where ingress and egress to the parking lot is provided from a public alley or public way separating the residential areas from the proposed parking lot.	A buffer area of 15 feet minimum width shall be provided and maintained along all lot lines which are not street lines and which abut residential areas.

7.	In addition to the foregoing requirements, such parking lots shall conform to any further requirements and conditions as may be described by the Zoning Hearing Board for the protection of properties adjacent to and in the vicinity of the proposed parking lot.

SECTION 1106 – Design, Maintenance and Schedule of Off-Street Loading Space

A.	Design

1.	Loading Space – Description – An off-street loading space shall be a hard-surfaced area of land, open or enclosed, other than a street or public way, used principally for the standing loading or unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers so as to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. A required loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width, 14 feet in height and of adequate length to suit the specific use exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space, except as otherwise specifically dimensioned herein.

2.	Location – No permitted or required loading space shall be closer than 50 feet to any property in a residential district unless completely enclosed by building walls or an ornamental fence or wall, or any combination thereof not less than 6 feet in height.	No permitted or required loading space shall be located within 25 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any 2 streets. Loading space open to the sky may be located in any Required yards.

3.	Measurement of Spaces – When determination of the number of required off-street loading spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including ½ may be disregarded, and fractions over
½ shall be interpreted as 1 loading space.

4.	Surfacing – All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted base, surfaced with all- weather dustless material, of adequate thickness to
 
support the weight of a fully loaded vehicles.

B.	Additional Requirements – Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as herein indicated for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley.	Such space shall have access to a public alley or, if there is no alley, to a street.	Off-street loading and unloading space shall be in addition to and not considered as meeting a part of the requirements for off-street parking space. Off-street loading and unloading space shall not be used or designed, intended or constructed to be used in a manner to obstruct or interfere with the free use of any street, alley, or adjoining property.	The following off-street loading and unloading space requirements for specific requirements for specific uses shall be provided:

1.	Multi-story Multiple-family Dwelling – One off-street loading and unloading space of at least 10 feet in width for every 3,000 square feet of total floor area.

2.	Industrial Plants – One off-street loading and unloading space at least 12 feet by 50 feet for every 10,000 square feet of total floor area.

3.	Warehouse and Wholesale storage facilities – One off- street loading and unloading space at least 12 feet by
50 feet for every 7,500 square feet of total floor area.

4.	Freight terminals and trucking terminals – One off- street loading and unloading space at least 12 feet by
50 feet for every 5,000 square feet of total floor area.




ARTICLE XII – COMMUNITY UNIT PLANS AND MULTIPLE DWELLING PLANS

SECTION 1201 – Community Unit Plan

A.	The owner or owners of any tract of land in any districts zoned R-1 comprising an area of not less than 20 acres or in a district
zoned R-4 comprising an area of not less than 10 acres may request a special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board by submitting
a plan for the use and development of all such tract of land  for multiple use purposes as specified hereinafter.	Such development plan shall be referred to the Planning Commission to study and report.	The Planning Commission shall report the results of its study to the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days following receipt thereof.	If no such report has been filed
within this time period, the Zoning Hearing Board may assume that the Planning Commission has acted favorably, but in any event the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be advisory, and not obligatory, upon the Zoning Hearing Board.
 
B.	The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a special exception and approve the plan even though the use of land and the use and location of structures do not conform to all of the regulations contained in other sections of this ordinance.	Such development plan should not be approved except under the following conditions:

1.	That under said development plan, the property adjacent to the area included in said plan is property is safeguarded.

2.	The said plan is consistent with the intent and purpose of this report to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare.

3.	Permitted Uses:

One-family detached dwellings
Single-family attached units such as townhouses with a
maximum of 8 units per building
Multiple row dwellings and garden apartments with a maximum of 8 units per building
Multi-story apartments not to exceed 6 stories in
height
Community buildings which are for the social, cultural or recreational use of the residents of the development
Open space and recreation facilities developed and main- tained principally for use of residents of the development
Certain non-residential uses such as buildings for conven-
inence shopping and personal services, provided that such uses along with required parking occupy not more than
5% of the total land area of the development

In the event development of the entire project is proposed to be divided into several phases, the Township may require the construction of all or part of the open space-recreation facilities, community buildings or non- residential uses in the initial phase of the development.

4.	Density – The dwelling unit density shall conform to the following:

Single-family –- 3 units per acre Two-family –- 6 units per acre Row dwelling –- 8 units per acre
Multi-story dwellings –- 24 units per acre
For mixed types of structure the overall density may not exceed 12 units per acre

5.	Public Open Space Required – At least 250 square feet per family unit shall be set aside and maintained for outdoor recreation area and maintained by the owner of
 
the development, of which a 100 square foot unit be developed with recreational equipment and playground area.

6.	Setback Requirements and Minimum Distance Between Buildings

Setback:	The setback requirements for all buildings erected in a Community Unit Plan shall be as follows:

A minimum setback of 100 feet shall be observed around the entire perimeter of tract or lot used for the Community Unit Plan. Natural landscaping within the 100 foot setback should be retained if at all  possible.	No main or accessory building may be erected within the setback area.	However, outdoor recreation facilities and parking lots may be constructed in the area provided that they are a minimum of 40 feet from the perimeter lot lines.

A front yard setback of 35 feet shall be observed for all buildings erected adjacent to streets within the Community Unit Plan.

Minimum Distance Between Buildings:

When more than one multiple-family dwelling building is erected on a single site, lot or tract the minimum distance between buildings shall be as follows:

Front to front –- 70 feet; front to rear –- 60 feet Side to Side –- 1/2 the height of the tallest building but not less than 25 feet
Front to side or rear to side –- the height of the tallest building but not less than 35 feet

7.	Percentage of Lot Covered – Al buildings, including accessory buildings, shall cover not more than 40% of the area of the lot.

8.	Site Improvement Standards – The developer or owner of any Community Unit Plan shall be responsible for the engineering, construction, installation and maintenance of site improvements as follows:

(a)	Engineering Site Plan Required – An engineering site plan shall be prepared by a registered architect, professional engineer or surveyor and filed with the Township prior to the start of any construction of an approved Community
 
Unit Plan.	The site plan shall be drawn at 1”=50’ and shall indicate the exact location and dimensions of all buildings, streets, sidewalk, roads, parking areas, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, telephone lines, recreation areas, landscaping, walls, fences, right-of-way lines, property lines and any other features to be constructed or installed on the site.
A topographic map shall be prepared at a minimum scale of 1”=50’ with a minimum contour interval of 10 feet
and shall indicate all existing and final grades for the site; spot elevations shall be indicated for streets, storm and sanitary sewers, and other elevation features as deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township Engineer.


(b)	Perimeter Survey – A perimeter survey of the parcel to be developed as a Community Unit Plan
shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. Permanent concrete
markers, with a minimum standard of 6” x 6” x 30”
copper rod shall be installed on all corners
around the perimeter of the site.	The survey shall tie directly into adjoining property.


(c)	Street Paving – The engineering, construction, installation and maintenance of all streets within the Community Unit Plan shall be the sole responsibility of the developers and shall be in accord with minimum standards as
included in the Township Subdivision Regulations.


(d)	Street Signs and Street Lights – Street signs and street lights shall be installed and maintained by the developer as required and approved by the Township.


(e)	Water Lines and Fire Plugs – The installation of all water lines, including fire plugs, shall be in accord with requirements and specifications of the Water Authority or company servicing the Township.	Detailed engineering plans and specifications shall be
filed with both the Township and the Township’s
Water Authority or company.	Applicants
shall present evidence that residential  water supply is to be supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative
 
association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility.	An official written commitment from the applicable water supplier shall be acceptable evidence.

(f)	Sanitary Sewers – The installation of all sanitary sewers shall be in accord with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the Township Sewer Authority.

(g)	Storm Sewers – The installation of a storm sewer system shall be in accord with plans and specifications filed with and approved by the Township Engineer.

9.	Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities – Shall be provided as required or permitted under Section XI herein.	Assurance shall be required from the developer that the project will be used for the specified purposes and the Zoning Hearing Board may require a trust indenture restricting the area to such areas.

SECTION 1202 – Multiple Dwelling (Two or More Multiple Family Dwelling) Plan – The owner or owners of any 2 acre or larger tract of land zoned “R-5 Multiple-Family Dwelling District” or “R-6 Multiple Family Dwelling District” may request a special exception and submit to the Zoning Hearing Board a plan for the use and development of all of the Tract of land for multiple dwelling purposes (two or more multiple family dwellings) only, which shall governed by the following regulations and procedures:

A.	Permitted Uses – Buildings or premises shall be used only for multi-family dwellings and may include therein such service establishments as a restaurant, bar, barber shop, beauty shop and similar shops principally serving the tenants and provided that entrance to any such facilities be only from within the building or from the outside terrace adequately screened from public view; accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when located on the same lot and not involving the conduct of a business, including private garages constructed as part of the main building.

B.	Lot Requirements – There may be two or more main buildings upon a lot, and for the purpose of determining the yard requirements of subparagraph “C” hereof, the yard requirements shall be applied to the lot as a whole, the front thereof being that having the greatest frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved street, and each building upon said lot shall not be required to separately meet the front, side and rear yard requirements.	The minimum lot size shall be 2 acres.
 
C.	Yard Requirements

Front Yard – As set forth in the “R-5 Multiple-Family Dwelling District”, except that multi-story multiple-family dwellings shall provide yard of a distance not less than the building height.

Side Yard – As set forth in the “R-5 Multiple-Family Dwelling District”, except that multi-story multiple-family dwellings shall provide yard of a distance not less than the building height.

Rear Yard – As set forth in the “R-5 Multiple-Family Dwelling District”, except that multi-story multiple-family dwellings shall provide yard of a distance not less than the building height.

D.	Lot Coverage – Not in excess of 40% of the lot area.

E.	Intensity of Use and Floor Area Ratio – Every lot shall have a width at the building line of not less than 150 feet and shall have not less than 1,350 square feet per dwelling unit.

1.	One-Story Building – Not less than 6,000 square feet per family, and the “Floor Area Ratio” shall not exceed 1/3.

2.	Two-Story or Two and One-half Story Building – Not less than 4,000 square feet per family and the floor area ratio shall not exceed 2/3.

3.	Three-Story or Three and One-half Story Building – Not less than 2,700 square feet per family and the floor area ratio shall not exceed one.

4.	Four Stories and over – Not less than 1,350 square feet per family, and there shall be a maximum floor area ratio of one; except that where the building is set back from one or more of the required yard lines, the floor area of such building may be increased by one square foot of additional floor area for each square foot of area left open within the portion of the lot bounded by the required front, side and rear yards specified in Paragraph C.

F.	Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities – Shall be provided as required or permitted under Article XI herein.

G.	Procedure – Procedure shall be identical to that specified in Section 1201 for the Community Unit Plan.

H.	Recommendation of Planning Commission – The proposed multiple- family dwelling plan, together with the required statements and supplementary information, shall be studied by the Planning Commission and a report recommending approval or disapproval and the reasons therefore shall be made to the Zoning Hearing Board for
 
consideration.	Any report from the Planning Commission recommending any proposed multiple-family dwelling plan shall contain findings relating to the following specific conditions:

1.	Such multiple-family dwelling is laid out and developed as a unit in accordance with an integrated over-all design.

2.	The location and arrangement of building or buildings, parking areas, walks, lighting and appurtenant facilities are adjusted to the surrounding land uses, and any part of the site not used for buildings or other structures, or for parking, loading or accessways, are landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs.

3.	No signs or displays or advertising of merchandise for sale or services offered in the service shops are visible from	outside of the buildings or in the open area.

4.	Reasonable additional requirements as to landscaping, lighting, screening, accessways and building setbacks may be recommended by the Planning Commission for the protection of adjacent residential property.

5.	All yard requirements, area requirements and floor area ratio requirements are met by the plan.




ARTICLE XIII – SIGNS

SECTION 1301 – R District Signs – In R Districts, the following signs Shall be permitted and the following regulations shall apply:

A.	One identification sign for a multi-family dwelling or a home occupation.	When for multi-family dwelling, not to exceed 12 square feet; when for a home occupation, not to exceed 1-1/2 square feet.

B.	One bulletin board per street for church of similar place of worship, each not to exceed 30 square feet.

C.	Temporary unlighted real estate for sale or rent sign, not to exceed 12 square feet.

D.	Directional sign, not exceeding 1-1/2 square feet.

E.	In connection with a parking facility, directional signs not to exceed 8 square feet each.

F.	Traffic control signs installed and maintained by the
 
Municipality, County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any governmental authority.

G.	Billboards and Commercial signs, except for home occupations, are Specifically prohibited in any R District.

H.	All signs in any R District shall be non-flashing and non- animated; those not attached to a building shall be set back at least 15 feet from a lot or street line; and no sign shall project above the roof or be mounted on a building above the eave line of a roof.

SECTION 1302 – C-1 District Signs – In the C-1 District, the following signs shall be permitted and the following regulations shall apply:

A.	Any sign permitted in a R District.

B.	Business sign or identification sign, not to exceed 1 square foot for every 2 lineal feet of frontage occupied, but not to exceed
60 square feet for any one business.

C.	One business or identification sign for a group of three or more Businesses on one parcel or tract, not to exceed 120 square feet.

D.	Billboards are specifically prohibited in any C-1 District.

E.	All signs in any C-1 district shall be non-flashing and non- animated; if illuminated, they shall utilize reflected or refracted light in such manner as to not detrimentally affect any property in an R District.

F.	Signs not attached to a building shall be set back at least 5 feet from a lot or street line, or any required buffer area.	A free-standing sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height.	No sign mounted on a building shall project above the ridge line of a sloping roof nor above the eave line of a flat roof.	No portion
of a free-standing sign, or sign which projects from the wall of a
building shall be less than 7 feet above grade, except as
hereinafter provided.

G.	Portable sign shall be construed to mean any free-standing sign of temporary nature which would be easily transferable and transportable and removable and which is not permanently affixed to the earth by anchor or other means and which would be less than
7	feet above grade.	Upon application, a Building and Occupancy
Permit may be issued for no more than 30 consecutive days, provided that said portable sign shall be no larger than 4 feet by
8	feet per side. No vertical double stacking shall be permitted.
Furthermore, no more than two Building and Occupancy Permits for the installation and display of said portable sign shall be issued per calendar year, per business, per location.
 
SECTION 1303 – C-2, C-3 and M District Signs – In C-2, C-3 and M Districts, the following signs shall be permitted and the following Regulations shall apply:

A.	Any sign permitted in R and C-1 Districts.

B.	Business signs or identification sign, not to exceed 1 square foot for every 1 lineal foot of frontage occupied, but not to exceed
120 square feet for any one business.

C.	One business or identification sign per street for a group of three or more businesses on one parcel or land, not to exceed 240 square feet per sign.

D.	Signs attached to a building shall be set back at least 5 feet from a lot or street line, or any required buffer area.	A free- standing sign shall not exceed 40 feet in height.	No sign  mounted on a building shall project above the ridge line of a sloping roof nor above the eave line of a flat roof.	No portion of a free standing sign, or sign which projects from the wall of a building, shall be less than 7 feet above grade, except as hereinafter provided.

E.	All signs in any C-2, C-3 or M District shall be non-flashing and non-animated; if illuminated, they shall utilize reflected or refracted light in such manner as to not detrimentally affect any property in another zoning district.

F.	Billboard not to exceed 300 square feet may be permitted by the grant of a special exception by the Board of Adjustment provided that it shall be located so as to:

Not be located closer than 50 feet to a public right-of-way,
Not project above the ridge line of a sloping roof nor the eave line of a flat roof, if it is attached to a building,
If free standing, not exceed 20 feet in height,
Be on a parcel or lot not abutting or opposite a frontage in an R
District, unless the advertising face is not visible from the R
District,
Be no nearer than 300 feet to any R District if illuminated,
unless the advertising face is not visible from the R District,
Be no nearer than 300 feet to any church, school, park, playground
or recreational area owned and operated by a public authority,
Be no nearer than 400 feet to the centerline of any restricted or
limited access highway or the or the access ramps thereto, if the face
of the sign is visible therefrom.

SECTION 1304 – Additional and General Regulations

A.	Where a sign is permitted by any provision of this Article, it shall be construed to permit a double-faced sign.	Each face of a double-faced sign may equal the maximum size permitted for the
 
particular type of sign under this Article.

B.	A building permit and occupancy permit shall be required for any sign or billboard with an area in excess of 3 square feet.

C.	The requirements of this Article shall not be held to prohibit the erection of a marquee or canopy provided it bears no sign other than an identification sign which does not project above or below the marquee or canopy nor exceed 12 inches in vertical dimension.

D.	All signs shall be properly maintained.	In the event a sign becomes dilapidated or otherwise improperly maintained, it shall forthwith be renovated or removed.

E.	All signs shall be removed when circumstances leading to its erection no longer apply.

F.	Flags and insignia of government shall be permitted in any district except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion.




ARTICLE XIV – NON-CONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS











SECTION 1401 – Continuance – The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the effective date of this ordinance may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made, a non-conforming use of a building may be changed to another non- conforming use of the same or a more restricted classification. Whenever a non- conforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted one. Whenever the use of a building becomes non-conforming through a change in the zoning ordinance or district boundaries, such use may be continued and if no structural alterations are made, it may be changed to another non-conforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification.

SECTION 1402 – Discontinuance of Use – Whenever a non-conforming use of a building or structure, or part thereof, has been discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months, or for a continuous period of 18 months if the building was originally designed and constructed for a non-residential use, such discontinuance shall constitute an abandonment of such use, and the district.  Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a non-
 
conforming use for a period of 6 months shall constitute abandonment of such use, and any new use must be in conformity with the regulations of the District. However, if the Zoning Hearing Board determines the resumption of the discontinued use to be in harmony with the general intent of the ordinance, it may grant a special exception permitting the resumption of the discontinued use.

SECTION 1403 – Alterations – No existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located, except when required to do so by law, or permitted by special exception, shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district  in which such building or premises is located.

SECTION 1404 – Provision for Reconstruction – Any building or structure containing a non-conforming use which is damaged by fire, flood, wind or other act of God or man to the extent of 75% or more of its fair sales
value immediately prior to damage, shall not be repaired or reconstructed,
except in conformity with provisions of this ordinance.	In the event that
the Zoning Officer’s estimate of the extent of damage of fair sales value is not acceptable to the applicant for the building permit to repair or reconstruct such building or structure, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.

SECTION 1405 – Construction in Progress – No building or structure designed or intended to be utilize for a non-forming use shall be constructed or allowed unless construction is already underway at the time of the enactment or subsequent amendment of this ordinance and is being diligently prosecuted so that such building or structure will be completed within 18 months from the date of the enactment or subsequent amendment of this ordinance.	All outstanding building permits for construction which do not meet these requirements are hereby rendered null or void.

SECTION 1406 – Historical Landmarks – The provisions of this article shall not apply to any building or structure which is designated by the Zoning Hearing Board to be an “historical landmark”.

SECTION 1407 – Extensions and Enlargements – The Zoning Hearing Board may grant special exceptions permitting the reasonable extension of a non- conforming use or the reasonable enlargement or addition to a non-conforming building or structure, provided it would be in conformity with the standards hereinafter set forth for granting special exceptions.




ARTICLE XV – ADMINISTRATION

SECTION 1501 – Building Permit

A.	No building or structure shall be erected, added to, or structurally altered until a permit therefore has been issued by the Zoning
 
Officer.	No such building permit shall be issued if the activity
for which the permit is to be granted does not conform with any of the
provisions of this ordinance, except upon grant of a variance or special exception by the Board of Adjustment.

B.	There shall be submitted with all applications for building permits 2 copies of a site or plot plan drawn to scale showing actual dimensions of the lot, the exact size and location on the lot of the building and accessory buildings and such other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance.	Where a special exception is required, the site or plot plan, in addition to any specific regulations set forth in the district regulations, shall show the following:

The location of principal and accessory buildings Traffic circulation features within the site
The location of vehicular traffic onto the site The proposed height and size of structures
The provision for off-street parking and loading facilities The provision for open space
The landscaping, paving, fencing, walls and signs on the site

C.	Before a building permit will be issued, the building must be staked on the ground by a registered engineer or registered surveyor, and proof thereof furnished to the Zoning Officer, at the expense of the applicant.


SECTION 1502 – Certificate of Occupancy

A.	Certificates of Occupancy shall be required only for the following:

(a)	Residential and non-residential uses in any district
(b)	Multiple dwelling units in R Districts
(c)	Home occupation uses in any R District
(d)	Non-conforming in any district

B.	After completion of a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued and inspection has determined that all requirements of all codes and ordinances of the Township have been met, a certificate of occupancy whenever required shall be issued by the Zoning Officer, stating that the building and proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of the ordinance.

C.	No non-conforming use shall be maintained, renewed or changed without a certificate of occupancy having been secured from the Zoning Officer within 1 year from the effective date of this Ordinance.

D.	Whenever a certificate of occupancy is required, it shall be applied for at the same time as the application for a building
 
permit.	Said certificate will be issued within 10 days after the erection or alteration and inspection, if the building or use is found to be in accordance with all codes and ordinances.

There must be 2 inspections made of any building project; one when the foundation is completed and one when the building is approximately 75% completed.	Swimming pools and garages must also be inspected two times during the construction period.

E.	The Zoning Officer shall maintain a record of all certificates of occupancy.	Copies will be furnished upon request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.

F.	No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of, or repairs to any building shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of occupancy, whenever the same is required.

SECTION 1503 – Fees, Permits and Certificates (see amendment of May 9, 2001)

A.	The application fee and building permit fee for the erection, addition to or structural alteration of any garage, shed, fence or other small structure which is not used for residential purposes shall be $10.00 for the application, payable upon presentation of the application, and $10.00 for the building permit, payable on issuance.

B.	The application and building permit fees for the erection, addition to or structural alteration of any building or structure for residential use shall be as follows:

(a)	One-family dwelling: Application fee - $25.00
Building Permit fee - $1.00 per $1,000 of the estimated
cost of construction

(b)	Two-family dwelling: Application fee - $40.00
Building Permit fee - $1.00 per $1,000 of the estimated cost of construction

(c)	Multi-family dwelling: Application fee - $100.00
Building Permit fee - $10.00 for each dwelling unit plus
$2.00 for $1,000 of the estimated cost of construction

C.	The fees for the erection, addition to or structural alteration of any commercial building, church, school, barn and other large structure not used for residential purposes shall be an Application Fee of $150.00 and a Building Permit fee of $2.00 per
100 square foot of floor space.
 
D.	In determining the amount of building permit fees, the Zoning Officer shall determine the estimated cost of construction after review of the building plans and any other necessary data he may require from the applicant.

E.	A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for a certificate of occupancy when required for a building or structure in all R-Districts, C and
M District, or for a non-conforming use in any district, or for a home occupation use in any R District, or in a Flood Plain District, or
in a Conservancy District.

F.	A fee of $10.00 shall be charged for a building permit for a sign when required under Section 1304 B.

G.	Copies of an original building permit or certificate of occupancy can be obtained by payment of the sum of $2.00.

H.	The application fees shall be due and payable when the application is presented and the building permit and occupancy fee shall be due and payable when the building permit is issued. The fees shall be made payable to the Township and delivered to the Zoning Officer or the Township Treasurer. In the event that the building permit application is refused the building permit application fee is forfeited to the Township to cover the cost of review of the application.

I.	A building permit shall be valid for 1 year from the time of issuance and any renewal or extension of the same shall be paid for at the same rate as charged for the original building permit.

J.	If a building permit is not obtained prior to the commencement of the building project, the cost of the building permit shall be double the amount as determined in this Section, plus a fee of $100.00 to cover the cost of inspecting the building project.

SECTION 1504 – Governing Body Functions - The governing body shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudication in the following matters:

A.	Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this ordinance pursuant to Section 1505.

B.	Application for curative amendment to this ordinance pursuant to Section 1902.

C.	All petitions for amendments to this ordinance pursuant to the Procedures set forth in Section 1901.

D.	Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or municipal engineer in the administration of any provisions of this ordinance with reference to sedimentation and erosion control, and storm water management insofar as the same relate to applications for land development under Article XII (Community Unit Plans) of this
 
ordinance.

SECTION 1505 – Criteria for Conditional Uses – Conditional uses shall be permitted in C-1, C-2, C-3 and M-1 zoning districts, with the exception of specifically sated Non-Permitted Uses, as long as the governing body utilizes the following criteria in permitting such conditional uses. A conditional use may be permitted as long as it does not negatively impact on the following:


1.	Municipal infrastructure (water, sewer, streets, etc.)

2.	Regional housing needs and effectiveness of the proposal to provide affordable housing (if the proposal is residential)

3.	The physical suitability of the site for intensity of the use

4.	The site’s soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains,
natural resources and natural features and any adverse environmental
impact; and

5.	The preservation of agriculture and other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.

ARTICLE XVI – ZONING OFFICER

SECTION	1601	–	Appointment,	Removal	and	Compensation	–	For	the administration of this zoning ordinance a Zoning Officer, who shall not hold any elective office in the municipality, shall be pointed. The Zoning Officer shall meet qualifications established by the municipality and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the municipality a working knowledge of municipal zoning. The Zoning Officer shall administer the zoning ordinance in accordance with its literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to the zoning ordinance. The Zoning Officer may be authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of his/her employment.

The Zoning Officer shall be removed with or without cause at the will of the Supervisors. The Zoning Officer shall be paid such fees as the Supervisors shall from time to time determine by resolution. At their discretion, the Supervisors may also appoint an Assistant Zoning Officer who shall serve under the direction and control of the Zoning Officer.

SECTION 1602 – Administration

A.	All applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy shall be made to the Zoning Officer, accompanied by the required fee and lot plans, together with such other data as may be required by district regulations.

B.	Applications which require a special exception or variance from the
 
Zoning Hearing Board may, at the applicant’s option, be presented directly to the Zoning Hearing Board by a petition for the grant of a special exception or variance, with said petition to be considered as the equivalent of an appeal from an adverse decision of the Zoning Officer.

SECTION 1603 – Enforcement	–	The Zoning Officer shall have the duty of enforcing this ordinance as set forth in Section 1801 hereafter. Further, he shall make periodic inspections as may be necessary or desirable, and shall offer opinions and advice as to methods of compliance with the requirements of this ordinance whenever feasible.

ARTICLE XVII – ZONING HEARING BOARD

SECTION 1701 – Creation, Appointment and Organization

A.	A Zoning Hearing Board is hereby established. The Board shall consist of 3 members, all of whom shall be appointed by resolution of the Township Supervisors.	The term of office of the members of the Board shall be for 3 years, exception that the membership of the first Board shall consist of the present Zoning Hearing Board for the unexpired balance of their terms until the expiration of each term on the first day of January of the next 3 years.	Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of 3 years each.		Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only.	Members may be removed for cause by the Township Supervisors upon written charges and after public hearing.

B.	The Board shall elect it own chairman and vice-chairman, who shall serve for 1 year.	The Board shall adopt from time to time such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this ordinance.

C.	Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine.	The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses.	All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.	The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to  vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed  with the Township Secretary and shall be a public record.	At the Board’s discretion, it may employ a reporter to take testimony at hearings held before the Board.

D.	The members of the Board shall receive such compensation, not to exceed the amount permitted by law, for each meeting as shall be fixed by the Board of Supervisors.	No compensation shall be paid for any meeting at which only questions considered in a prior meeting are acted upon.	The compensation of Board Members shall be paid from the fees which are assessed under Article XV.

E.	The governing body shall appropriate funds for administration, for
 
enforcement and for actions to support or oppose, upon appeal to the courts, decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board.	The governing board shall also make provision in its budget and appropriate funds for the operation of the Zoning Hearing Board.

F.	The Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for and fix the compensation of legal counsel as the need arises.	The legal counsel shall be an attorney other than the municipal solicitor. The Board may also employ or contract for and fix the compensation of experts and other staff and may contract for services as it shall deem necessary.	The compensation of legal counsel, experts and staff and the sums expended for services shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for this use.

G.	The governing body may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
the administration of a zoning ordinance and with respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board.	Fees for these hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs, and necessary administration overheard connected with the hearing.	The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.

H.	The governing body may appoint by resolution at least but no more than 3 residents of the municipality to serve as alternate members of the Board.	The term of office of an alternate member shall be
3 years.	When seated pursuant to the provisions of this section,
an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings  and discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by law for Board members, including specifically the right to cast
a vote a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the
powers and duties set forth in this ordinance and as otherwise provided by law.		Alternates shall hold no other office in the municipality, including membership on the planning commission and zoning officer.	Any alternate may participate in any proceedings or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor be compensated unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to this section.

SECTION 1702 – Powers and Duties

A.	Powers Relative to Errors – To hear and decided appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirements, decisions or determination made by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance, including any order requiring an alleged violator to stop, cease and desist.

B.	Powers Relative to Variations – When it is alleged that the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant, the Board may grant a variance if the following conditions are found relevant in a given case:
 

1.	That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness or lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood


or district in which the property is located.

2.	That because of such physical circumstances or conditions there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.

3.	That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant.

4.	That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, not be detrimental to the public welfare.

5.	That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.

In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary.

C.	Powers Relative to Exceptions – Upon appeal, the Board shall be empowered to permit the following special exceptions, in addition to those otherwise specifically set forth in other parts of this ordinance.

To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot of record in single ownership;

To permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming building which  has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God or the public enemy to the extent of less than 75% of its fair market sales value when the Board finds some compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the non-conforming use;

To interpret the provisions of the zoning ordinance where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map fixing the several districts, which map is attached to and made a part of this ordinance;
 
To vary parking regulations of the zoning ordinance whenever the character or use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provisions of parking facilities or when such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or a convenience.





D.	Exercise of Powers – In exercising the above powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end
shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
is taken in considering all appeals to the zoning ordinance, the
Board shall, before making any finding in a specific case, first determine that the proposed change will not permit a nonpermitted use for the district and will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or increase the danger of fire, or materially diminish or impair established property values within  the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare of the Township.	Every change granted or denied by the Board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based on sworn testimony and evidence, specifying the reason for granting or denying the variance or special exception.	The decision of the Board shall be made a part or any building permit or occupancy certificate in which a variance or special exception is allowed.

E.	Condition – In arriving at its decision, the Board may impose reasonable conditions, restrictions or safeguards in the furtherance of the general intent of this ordinance, including requiring a bond to assure compliance with such conditions, restrictions or safeguards.

F.	Required Action – The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to allow any variance or special exception under this ordinance.

G.	Appeal from Action of the Board – Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board or any taxpayer or the Board of Supervisors may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas by petition duly verified, setting forth that such decision is arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law, and specifying the grounds relied upon.

SECTION 1703 – Procedure

A.	Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person or Township official
 
aggrieved or affected by any decision of the Zoning Officer.	Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after notice of a decision  or order is issued or within such other time as allowed under the Pennsylvania Municipal Planning Code by filing with the Zoning Officer and the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.	The Zoning Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from is taken.

B.	An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Officer certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal was filed with him that by reason of the
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.	In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application on notice to the Zoning Officer and due cause shown.

C.	The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give not less than 7 days public notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decided the same within 45 days after the hearing, or if such hearing is continued, within 45 days after such continued hearing.	Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.

D.	Upon receipt of an appeal or petition involving a variance or special exception and before conducting a hearing thereupon, the Board shall refer the matter to the Planning Commission for its recommendation, unless the Board decides that such reference is inappropriate. The Planning Commission shall report the result of its study to the Board within 30 days following its receipt of the appropriate documents. If no such report is filed with the Zoning Hearing Board, the Board shall assume that the Planning Commission has acted favorably; but in any event the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be advisory and not obligatory upon the Zoning Hearing Board.

E.	The Board may also hear all challenges to the validity of the Zoning ordinance or map under the provisions of Section 910 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code.	Any landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of an ordinance or map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the governing body with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided under Section 609.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.	The Board or the governing body shall, in such cases, comply with all requirements set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

F.	The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance
 
with the following requirements:

1.	Notice shall be given to the public, the applicant, the county planning agency, the zoning officer, such other persons as the governing body shall designate by ordinance and to any person who has made timely request for the same.
Hearing notices shall be given at such time and in such
manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the board.	The governing body
may establish reasonable fees, based on cost, to be paid by applicant and by persons requesting any notice not required by ordinance.

2.	The hearings shall be conducted by the board or the board may appoint any member as a hearing officer.	The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall
be made by the board, but the parties may accept the decision
or findings of the hearing officer as final.

3.	The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality or
any person who is entitled to notice under clause 1 without
special request, anyone who has made timely appearance
of record before the board and any other person permitted to appear by the board.

4.	The chairman or acting chairman of the board of the hearing officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.

5.	The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded an opportunity to respond
and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse
witnesses on all relevant issues.

6.	Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.

7.	The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a record of the proceedings, either stenographically or by sound recordings, and a transcript of the proceedings and copies of graphic or written materials received in evidence shall be made available to any party at cost.

8.	The board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other materials unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed shall not inspect the site or its surroundings
 
with any party or his representatives unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.









9.	The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the board or hearing officer.	Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact
and conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefore.	Conclusions based on any provisions of this act or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the
facts found.	If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer,
and there has been no stipulation that his decision or
findings are final, the board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days
and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations
thereon to the board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the board’s decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer.	Where the board fails to
render the decision within the period required by this subsection, or

10.	If the board fails to render its decision or findings within 45 days after the last hearing, or fails to hold a requested hearing within 60 days from the applicant’s request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.

11.	A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following date.	To all other persons who have filed their name and address with the board not later than the last day of the hearing, the board shall provide  by mail or otherwise brief notice of the decision or findings and
a statement of the place where the full decision or findings may be
examined.

12.	The board shall, in addition, follow all of the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

G.	The fee for filing appeals or petitions to the Board shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the governing body based upon the cost factors as contained in Article XVII. Section 1701- Creation,
 
Appointment, and Organization subparagraph G hereinabove.	The fee for filing appeals or petitions to the Board shall be $250.00 for Residential and $350.00 for commercial to cover the notice of public hearing and the other cost pertaining to the hearing.






SECTION 1704 – Zoning Hearing Board Jurisdiction – The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:

A.	Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those brought before the governing body pursuant to curative amendments.

B.	Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by and appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of this ordinance.

C.	Appeals from the determination of the zoning officer, including but not limited to the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefore, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to register any non-conforming use, structure or lot.

D.	Appeals from a determination by a municipal engineer or the zoning officer with reference to the administration of any flood plan or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within this zoning ordinance.

E.	Applications for variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance and flood hazard provisions within this ordinance, pursuant to Section 1702.

F.	Applications for special exceptions under this zoning ordinance or flood plain or flood hazard provisions within this ordinance, pursuant to Section 1702.

G.	Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with  the administration of any transfers of development rights or performance density provisions of this zoning ordinance.

H.	Appeals from the zoning officer’s determination under Section 916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

I.	Appeals form the determination of the zoning officer or municipal engineer in the administration of this ordinance or provision  thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and storm water management insofar as the same relate to development not involving Article XII applications (Community Unit Plans).

SECTION 1705 – Mediation Option
 

A.	Parties to proceedings authorized in this article may utilize mediation as an aid in completing such proceedings.	In proceedings before the zoning hearing board initiate mediation or participate as a mediating party.	Mediation shall supplement not replace those procedures in this





article once they have been formally initiated.	Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as expanding or limiting municipal police powers
or as modifying any principles of substantive law.

B.	Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary.	The appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate.	Any municipality offering the mediation option shall assure that in each case the mediating parties, assisted by the mediator when appropriate, shall develop terms and conditions for:

1.	Funding mediation.

2.	Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and demonstrated skills in mediation.

3.	Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.

4.	Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this ordinance, provided there is written consent by the mediating parties, and by an applicant or municipal decision-making body if either
is not a party to the mediation.

5.	Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to participate.

6.	Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all
of the mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.

7.	Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the parties, and become subject to review and approval by the appropriate decision-making body pursuant to the
authorized procedures set forth in the other sections of this ordinance.

C.	No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in any subsequent judicial or administration proceedings.



ARTICLE XVIII – ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
 
SECTION 1801 – Enforcement

A.	The Zoning Officer shall have the duty of enforcing this ordinance by the issuance of appropriate stop orders or cease and desist orders to violators, or by commencing summary proceedings against violators.	In addition, the Zoning Officer, with the approval of the Supervisors, may institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity.

B.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear appeals from the decision of the Zoning Officer as provided in Article XVII.	The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order of the Zoning Officer and may make its own appropriate stop order or cease and desist order as ought to be made.

C.	The Supervisors may, at their option, institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity or commence summary proceedings against violators in order to enforce this ordinance.

D.	The municipality shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending as enforcement notice to the owner or record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred and to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.	The notice shall state at least the following:

1.	The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the municipality intends to take action.

2.	The location of the property in violation.

3.	The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the ordinance.

4.	The date before which the steps for compliance must be  commenced and the date before which the steps must be completed.

5.	That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures as hereinabove set forth.

6.	That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.

SECTION 1802 – Violations and Penalties	–	Any	person	or	corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof before any district justice, pay a judgment of not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00 with costs for each separate violation; and in default of payment of the judgment and costs, the person convicted may be
 
subject to all applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. All judgments collected for said zoning violations shall be paid to the Township of Upper Yoder. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or non- compliance with this Ordinance shall not excuse the violation or non- compliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons or corporations shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and non-compliances within a reasonable time. Any structural building  constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in non-compliance may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.


ARTICLE XIX – AMENDMENTS

SECTION 1901 – Procedure – The governing body may, from time to time, on their own motion, or on petition, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal by ordinance the boundaries of districts or regulations or restrictions herein established.

A.	Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the governing body shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice.	In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the municipality at points deemed sufficient by the municipality along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens.	The affected tract or area shall be posted at least 1 week prior to the date of the hearing.

B.	In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the planning agency, the governing body shall submit each such amendment to the planning agency at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the planning agency an opportunity to submit recommendations.

C.	If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land preciously not affected by it, the governing body shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.

D.	If a county planning agency shall have been created for the county in which the municipality proposing the amendment is located, then at least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the local governing body, the municipality shall submit the proposed amendment to the county planning agency for recommendations.

E.	The municipality may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing proceedings authorized by this section.	In exercising such an option, the municipality and mediating parties shall meet the stipulations and follow the procedures set forth in Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
 
F.	Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the zoning ordinance shall be forwarded to the county planning agency.

SECTION 1902 – General	–	The	foregoing	provisions	as	to	amendments	and changes shall at all times be subject to the procedural requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

SECTION 1903 – County Review – All zoning ordinance amendments must be sent to the Cambria County Planning Commission 30 days prior to the public hearing for their review and comments.

SECTION 1904 – Enactment Advertisement – There must appear in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality of Upper Yoder Township an advertisement indicating the actual date of enactment of any adopted zoning amendments. Such advertisement shall appear in the newspaper no less than 7 or more than 60 days prior to enactment of said amendment by the municipality.

SECTION 1905 – Amendment Sent to County – Within 30 days after adoption of a zoning amendment, a certified copy must be sent to the Cambria County Planning Commission.

SECTION 1906 – Perimeter Posting on Map Change – When any amendment involves a change to the municipality’s zoning map, a notice must be conspicuously posted along the perimeter of the tract of land at least 1 week prior to the public hearing.


ARTICLE XX – REPEALER

SECTION 2001 – Repealing Clause –If any sentence, clause or section of this ordinance is for any reasons found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses or sections of this ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Upper Yoder Township that this ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentences, clauses or sections thereof not bee included herein.


In accordance with the recommendations of the Upper Yoder Township Planning Commission and Zoning Hearing Board, this ordinance, together with any amendments or supplements hereto, is intended to supersede the existing Upper Yoder Township Zoning Ordinance.

ENACTED this 6th day of September, 1990.

TOWNSHIP OF UPPER YODER CAMBRIA COUNTY

By:	 	
 












ATTEST:


Secretary
 

 
ARTICLE XXIIIIV – AMENDMENT LISTINGS




ORDINANCE NO. 252


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE UPPER YODER TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1979, AS AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NO. 220 ADDING A PROVISION TO ADMINISTRATION AND CHANGING AND AMENDING A SECTION UNDER ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES AND REPEALING INCONSISTENT PROVISIONS



BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Upper Yoder, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ordained and enacted as follows:



SECTION 1503 OF THE UPPER YODER TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE, AS AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NO.220 IS SUPPLEMENTED AND AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS:



J.	If a building permit is not obtained prior to the commencement of the building project, the cost of the building permit shall be double the amount as determined in this Section, plus a fee of $100.00 to cover the cost of inspecting the building project.



SECTION 1802 OF THE UPPER YODER TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE, AS AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NO.220, IS CHANGED AND AMENDED TO INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING:



Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof before any district justice, pay a judgment of not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00 plus costs of prosecution for each separate violation; and in default of payment of the judgment and costs, the person convicted may be subject to all applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate defense. All judgments collected for said zoning violation shall be paid to the Township of Upper Yoder. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or non-compliance with this Ordinance shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons or corporations shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliances within a reasonable time. Any structural building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or
 
relocated in non-compliance with this Ordinance may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.



ENACTED this 9th day of May, 2001.

TOWNSHIP OF UPPER YODER CAMBRIA COUNTY

By:	 	













ATTEST:


Secretary
 
TO\JNSBIP OF UPPER YODER CAMBRIA   COUNTY PENHSYLVANIA

ORDINANCE N0.	.:3/

Alf  ORDINANCE REQUIRING ALL PERSONS, PARTNERSBIPS, BUSINESSES AND COJU>ORATIONS, TO OBTAIN A PERMI.T FOR THE EXCAVATION, FILLING AND/OR GRADING OF LAND WITHIN THE Lll{J.TS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF UPPER YODER; PROVIDING FOR THE ISSUANCE OF SUCH PKRMlTS; AND FURTHER PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES FOR ANY PERSONS, PARTNERSHIPS, BUSINESSES AND CORPORATIONS WHO FAll. OR REFUSK IO COHYLY WITH THE REQUl.R.EMENTS OR PROVISIONS OF THIS ORDINANCE.

BE IT ORDAINED A.ND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Upper Yoder, Cambria County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same, as follows:
SEC'IION l : S'tATEMENI OF INTENT

It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, the excavation, filling and/or grading of any land or the const:ruction, erection or installation of any drainage dam, ditch, culvert, drain pipe, bridge or other structure or obstruction affecting
the drainage of any premises within the ToWTiship of Upper Yoder unless an approved permit has been obtained from the Township Building Officer.	Specifically
excluded from the provisions herein are the excavation, filling and/or grading of areas of less than 20,000 square feet or which maybe incurred for the maintance, restoration. replacement: or repair for existing underground ut:ility services, farming, gardening, lawn restoration or installation or landscaping, driveways, sidewalks, and retaining walls.
SECTlON 2:	DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:

A.	EARTH MATER.I.AL - any rock, nat:ural soil or any combination therof. B . EXCAVATION - the mechanical t·emoval of earth material.
C.	FILLING - the disposition of earth material .
o. GRADING - any excavation or filling or combination thereof.
E.	PERSON - any person, persons, partnership, business or corporation.
 


SECTION 3: APPLICATION PROCEDURES

Application for such a permit shall be made in writing to the Township Building Permit Officer on forms supplied by the Township.	Such application shall contain at least the fo lowing:
A . The Name and address of:

(I)	the applicant;

(2) the owner of the land on which the work will be performed; and,

(3) the contractor performing the work.

B.	An identification and description of the work to be covered by   the permit for which application is made.
c. A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done,

by    lotJ block, tract and house and street address, or similar description which will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work.
D. An estimate of the value of the proposed work.

E.	Such other imformation as reasonably may be required by   the Township

Building Permit Officer.

SECTION 4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT

The Township Building Permit Officer shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that the proposed work will be in conformance with all applicable Federal and State statutes, Township Ordinances including zoning and subdivision, Pennsylvania DER and Cambria County Soil Conservation District requirements, and regulations and in addition, thereto:
A.	The permitee is responsible for the prevention of damage to other

property or for personal injury which may be caused by  the work for which a permit will have been issued.
 


B.	No person shall modify, fill, excavate, pave, grade or regrade land in any manner so close to a property boundary line that would endanger or damage any adjoining street, alley or any oth r public or private property without
supporting and protecting sue property from settling, cracking, erosion, sediment,

flooding or any other consequential physical damage.

C.	No person shall deposit or permit to be placed debris or other material

whatsoever or cause such to be thrown or place in any drainage ditch or struci:ure

in such a manner as to obstruct free flow.	All existing drainage ditches, culverts, drain pipes and structures shall be kept open and free flowing at all time.
D.	All graded surfaces shall be seeded, sodded or otherwise protected from erosion within 30 days of project completion and shall be maintained until growth is well established.
E.	The permit officer may further require permittee to provide adequate

dust control measures.

SECTlON 5: PERMIT CHANGES

After theissuance of a permit by   the Township Building Permit Officer, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application without the writter consent or approval of the Township Build ing Permit Officer.
SECTION 6: PLACARDS

In addition to the permit, the Township Bllilding Permit Officer shall issue

a  placard which shall be displayed 011   the premises during the time the work is in progress.	This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its issuance and shall be signed by the Township Building Permit Officer.
SECTION 7: START OP WORK AND EXPIRATION OF PER.HIT

A.	The proposed work shall begin within one (l)month after the date of
 
issu3nce of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Township Building Permit Officer.
B. All work shall be completed within six (6)months of the date of

issuance of the permit.	If any work is to be performed beyond this period, a

new permit must be obtained under the conditi.ons and requirements cited in Sections

3  and 4 of this Ordinance.

SEC1ION 8: INSPECTION AND REVOCATION

During the permitted work period, the Township Permit Officer or other authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit application and with all applicable Township laws and ordinances.	In the event the Township Building Permit Officer discovers that the work does not comply with the permit application and any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Township Building Permit Officer shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Upper Yoder for whatever action it considers necessary.

s·EC'IION 9:	FEES

Applications for a permit shall be accompanied by  a fee , payable to the Township, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed work as determined by the Township Building Permit Officer at the following rates:
 
Minimum Permit Fee up to $1,000.00 of construction

ESTJ:MATED COST:

For each additional $1,000.00 0£  consturction

Inspection Fee:
 
$25.00

FEB

$10.00

$10.00
 

SECTIO'N 10: APPEALS

Any person aggrived by the Township Building Per it Officer's estimate of

4
 


the cost of the proposed work may appeal to the Upper Yoder Township Zoning Hearing Board.	Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within thirty (30) days after the determination by the Township Building Permit Officer.	Upon receipt
of such appeal,  the.  Upper Yode,; Township  Zoning Hearing Baatd  shall se.t.:a .time and

place not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days for the purpose of hearing the appeal. Notice of the time and place of the hearing of the appeal shall be given to all parties at which time they may appear and be heard. The determination of the estimated cost by the Upper Yoder Township Zoning Hearing Board shall be final in all cases.
SECTION 11: PENALTIES

Any person	ho fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of thei Ordinance, or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order o direction of the Township Building Permit Officer or any otheT authorized employee of the Township   shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shnll pay a fine to the Township of Upper Yoder of not less than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars, nor more than Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars, plus costs of prosecution.	In
i;l-eili:l!·.t  of such payments,	such person shall be imprisoned in the Cambria County

Jail for a petiod not to exceed ten (10)days.	Each day during which any violation of this Ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.	In addition to
tl1e    above penalties, all ocher actions are hereby reserved including a action in equity for the proper enforcement of this Ordinance.	The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or non-compliance with, this Ordinance shall not
excuse the violation or non-compliance or permit it to continue ; and all such persons

shall be required to correc t or remedy such violations and non-compliance within a teisonable time.  Any excavation, filling, and/or grading in non-compliance with

5
 


this Ordinance may be declared by   the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Upper Yoder to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
SECTION 12: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE

If any section, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this Ordinance should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance which shall remain in full force and effect. For this purpose the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.
SECTIOij 13: EFFECTIVE DArR

 
This Ordinance shall become effective upon adoption.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED  this	/0f'Aday of	_,,!JL. .
I
 



1993.
 



UPPER YODER TOWNSHIP






 








ATTEST:





Secretary


6
 
UPPER YODER TOWNSHIP, CAMBRIA COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA

APPLICATION TO OBTAIN PERMIT FOR THE EXCAVATION,
FILLING AND/OR GRADING OF LAND
NO.	_


NAME(S) OF APPLICANT(S)

ADDRESS	-
RELATIONSHIP TO PREMISES	----,( aw-ne-r.-A g-e-nt ,---.-L-e-ss_e_e )	-
OWNER OF PREMISES	-
ADDRESS	-
CONTRACTOR	-
ADDRESS	-
DISCRIPTION OF EXCAVAT ION	-


 
STARTING DATE

ESTIMATED COST OF CONTRACT
 





FEES
 
Minimum Permit Fee:	$25.00
ESTIMATED COST	FEE
For each $1,000.00 of construction:	$10.00 Inspection Fee:	$10.00

=======================================================================	=====
The proposed work shall begi n within six (6) months after the date
of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Townsh ip Building Permit Officer.
A ll work shal l be completed w ithin one (1)year of the date of issuance
of the permit .
Dated this	day of	19







Singatu re(s) of Applicant (s)
 

ORDINANCE NO.  c::?.!:3

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE UPPER YODER TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE NO. 219, AS AMENDED, BY AMENDING THE PRESENT ARTICLE Ill, PARAGRAPH 33, THE DEFINITION OF "SUBDIVISION" AS SET FORTH HEREIN.

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Upper Yoder, Cambria County, Pe·nnsylvania, and it is hereby ordained and enacted as follows:

ARTICLE Ill, PARAGRAPH  33, OF THE UPPER YODER TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE, AS AMENDED, SHALL BE AND THE SAME HEREBY IS AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS:

33. "Subdivision" - The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purposes, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfers ·of ownership or building or lot development: Provided, however •.that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement or access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. Furthermore, the term subdivision shall not apply to the division or redivision of land to an adjoining landowner to correct or adjust the boundary between the two lots, provided that the boundary adjustment does not require the creation of any street, alley, easement, or access and provided that the adjustment will not cause the grantor's property to violate dimensional and setback requirements contained in the Upper Yoder Township Zoning Ordinance No. 220, as amended, applicable to the grantor's property.   ·

ENACTED THIS 23Ro DAY OF AUGUST, 2001,  TO  BECOME EFFECTIVE UPON EXECUTION BY THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF UPPER YODER  TOWNSHIP.
'   .
ADEST:  ."·

.	'
 
.· 7??
'
. '



I .
 
kc=y cJ.v
Secretary
 

STONYCREEK RIVER WATERSHED




STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



ORDINANCE











ORDINANCE NO. 270
Upper Yoder Township Stonycreek River Watershed Stormwater Management Ordinance providing for a comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation  of development and activities causing accelerated runoff and requiting permits for stormwater discharges .







UPPER YODER TOWNSIDP, CAMBRIA COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA







Adopted at a Public Meeting Held on

-r -J<9 -.,,...._U_,  / y"l--/_S-+-I	,20_{_0
 
A1ticle I - General Provisions

 
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 108. A1ticle II - Definitions
 
Sh01t Title
Statement of Findings Purpose
Statutory Authority Applicability Repealer Severability	.
Compatibility with Other Requirements
 
Article ID - St01mwater Management Standards

 
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304.
 
General Requirements Exemptions
Volume Controls Rate Controls
 

Article IV - Stormwater Management Site Plan Requirements

 
Section 401.
Section 402.
Section 403.
Section 404.
Section 405.
Section 406.
Section 407.
 
Plan Requirements Plan Submission Plan Review
Modification of Plans
Resubmission of Disapproved Stormwater Management Site Plans Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity
As-Built Plans, Completion Certificate and Final Inspection
 

A1ticle V - Operation and Maintenance

 
Section 501.
Section 502.
 
Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners Operation and Maintenance Agreements
 

Article VI - Fees and Expenses

 
Section 601. Article VII - Prohibitions
Section 701.
Section 702.
Section 703.
 
General




Prohibited Discharges and Connections Roof Drains
Alteration  of SWM BMPs
 

Article VIII - Enforcement and Penalties
 


 
Section 801.
Section 802.
Section 803.
Section 804.
Section 805.
Section 806. Article IX - References A1ticle X - Adoption
 
Right-of-Entry Inspection Enforcement
Suspension and Revocation
Penalties Appeals
 
Appendix A: Appendix B: Appendix C: Appendix D:
 
Operation and Maintenance Agreement Disconnected Impervious Area (DIA) St01mwater Management for Small Projects Management Distlict Map
 
ARTICLEI- GENERAL  PROVISIONS

Section 101. Short Title

This Ordinance shall be known  and may be cited as the "Upper Yoder Township Stonycreek River Watershed Stormwater Management Ordinance ."

Section 102. Statement of Findings

The governing body of the Municipality finds that:

A.	Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development throughout a watershed increases flows and velocities, cont1ibutes to erosion and sedimentation , overtaxes the call"ying capacity of streams and stonn sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines flood plain management and flood control effotts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases non-point source pollution of water resources.

B.	A comprehensive program of stormwater management,  including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing accelerated runoff , is fundamental to the public health, safety and welfare and the protection of people of the Commonwealth , their resources and the environment.

C.	Stormwater is an imp01tant water resource, which provides groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and maintains smface water quaJity.

D.	Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems  under the National  Pollutant Discharge Elimination  System (NPDES).

Section 103. Purpose

The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote health, safety, and welfare within the Municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in Section 102 of this Ordinance, through provisions designed to:

A.        Meet  legal  water  quality  requirements  under  state law, including  regulat ions  at 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 93 to protect , maintain, reclaim and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this Commonwealth.

B.	Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.

C.	Manage stonnwater runoff close to the source.
 

D.	Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and management.

E.	Maintain  groundwater  recharge,  to  prevent  degradation  of  surface  and  groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.

F.	Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.

G.	Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent Stormwater Management (SWM) Best Management Practices (BMPs) that are implemented within the Municipality.

H.	Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.

Section 104.  Statutory Authority

A.	Primary Authority :

The municipality is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act" and the (appropriate municipal code).

B.	Secondary Autho1ity:

The Municipality also is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the autho1ity of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended .

Section 105.  Applicability

All  Regulated  Activities  and all  activities  that  may  affect stormwater  runoff , including  Land Development and Ea1th Disturbance Activity , are subject to regulation by this Ordinance.

Section 106. Repealer

Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Municipality inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.

Section 107. Severability

In the event that a court of competent jmisdiction declares any section or provision of this Ordinance invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.
 
Section 108.  Compatibility with Other Requirements

Approvals issued and actions taken under this Ordinance do not relieve the Applicant of the responsibility to secure required pennits or approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law , regulation or ordinance.















































r-
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Ordinance, ce1tain tenns and words used herein shall be interpreted as
follows:

A.	Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural,  and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.

B.	The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.

C.	The  words  "shall" and  "must" are  mandatory;  the  words  "may" and  "should"  are
permissive.

Agricultural Activity - Activities associated with ag1iculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation , and animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, ha1rnwing, planting, harvesting crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an Agricultural Activity.

Applicant - A landowner , developer or other person who has filed an application to the Municipality for approval to engage in any Regulated Activity at a project site m the Municipality.

Best Management Practice (BMP) - Activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from Regulated Activities, to meet State Water Quality Requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Ordinance. Sto1mwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categ01ies or measures : "structural" or "non-structural". In this Ordinance, non-structural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff . Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands , to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter st1ips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, penneable paving, grassed swales, iiparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural Stormwater BMPs are permanent appmtenances to the project site.

Capture - Collecting runoff to be stored for reuse or allowed to slowly infiltrate into the ground.

/		Conservation District - A conservation district, as defined in section 3(c) of the Conservation Distiict Law (3 P. S. § 851(c)), as amended, that has the autho1ity under a delegation agreement executed with the Department to administer and enforce all or a portion  of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code _ l02.
 

Design Storm - The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g. a 5-year-stoim) and duration (e.g. 24 hours), used in the design and evaluatjon of stormwater management systems. Also see Return Peliod .

Detention Volume - The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the waters of this Commonwealth at a controlled rate.

DEP - The Pennsylvania Department of Environmenta l Protection.

Development Site (Site) - See Project Site.

Disconnected Impervious Area (DIA) - An impervious or impe1meable surlace which is disconnected from any sto1mwater drainage or conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area which allows for infiltration, filtration , and increased time of concentration as specified in Appendix B, Disconnected Impervious Area.

Disturbed Area - An unstabilized land area where an Earth Disturbance Activity is occuning or
has occun-ed.

Earth Disturbance Activity - A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surlace of the land, including, but not limited to, clea1ing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; building construction; the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or eaith materials .

Erosion - The natural process by which the smface of the land is worn away by water, wind or
chemical action.

Existing Condition - The dominant land cover during the five (5) year pe1iod immediately preceding a proposed Regulated Activity.

FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Floodplain - Any land area susceptible to  inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time byPADEP)  .

Floodway - The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required  to catTy and discharge the  100-year flood.   Unless otherwise specified,
I	the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by
1	FEMA.   In an  area where  no FEMA  maps  or studies have defined  the  boundary  of  the  100-year
floodway, it is assumed- absent evidence to the contrary - that the floodway extends from the
stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
 
Forest ManagemenUTirnber Operations - Planning and activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.

Geotextile - A fabric manufactured from synthetic fiber that is used to achieve specific objectives, including infiltration, separation between different types of media (i.e., between soil and stone), or filtration.

Hotspot - Areas where land use or activ1t1es generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants that are higher than those that are typically found in stonnwater (e.g., vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities, vehicle fueling stations, fleet storage areas, vehicle equipment and cleaning facilities, and vehicle service and maintenance facilities).

Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) - Infiltration rates of  soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well  as surface intake rates.  Soils are classified into four HSG' s (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation  district  offices.    Soils  become  less pervious  as  the  HSG  va1ies  from  A  to  D
(NRCS3.4).

Impervious Surface (Impervious Area) - A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall incl ude, but not be limited to, roofs, additional indoor Jiving spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.

Infiltration  - Movement  of surface  water  into the soil,  where  it is absorbed  by  plant  roots,
evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge groundwater.

Karst - A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, underground  drainage and caves. Karst is f01med on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.

Land Development (Development) - Inclusive of any or all of the following meanings: (i) the improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts , or parcels of land for any purpose involving (a) a group of two or more buildings, or (b) the division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features; (ii) any subdivision of land; (iii) development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA Municipalities  Planning Code.
 
Low Impact Development - A land development and construction approach that uses various land planning, design practices, and technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource systems, and reduce infrastructure costs.

Municipality - (municipality name) , (county name) County, Pennsylvania. NRCS - USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
Peak Discharge - The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.

Pervious Surface (Pervious Area) - Any area not defined as impervious.

Project Site - The specific area of land where any Regulated Activities in the Municipality are
planned, conducted or maintained.

Qualified Professional - Any person licensed by  the Pennsylvania Depmtment of State or otherwise qualified by law to perf01m the work required by the Ordinance.

Regulated Activities - Any Earth Disturbances Activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.

Regulated Earth Disturbance Activity - Activity involving  Earth Disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.

Retention Volume/Removed Runoff - The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the smface waters of this Commonwealth du1ing or after a storm event.

Return Period - The average interval, in years, within which a st01m event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example, the 25-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a 25-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e. a 4% chance).

Runoff - Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.

Sediment - Soils or other mate1ials transported by smface water as a product of erosion.

Small Project - A small project is defined as a regulated activity that creates disconnected impervious areas equal to or greater than 500 sq. ft. and less than 5,000 sq. ft.

State Water Quality Requirements - The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.

Stormwater - Drainage runoff from the smface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
 
Stormwater Management Facility - Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects sto1mwater runoff. Typical st01mwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, stmm sewers, pipes, and infiltration facilities.

Stormwater Management Plan - The (name of stormwater management plan) for managing stormwater runoff adopted by the County of (county name) as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended , and known as the "Storm Water Management Act".

Stormwater Management Best Management Practices - Is abbreviated as BMPs or SWM
BMPs throughout this Ordinance.

Stormwater Management Site Plan - The plan prepared by the Developer or his representative indicating how storm water runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with this Ordinance. Stormwater Management Site Plan will be designated as SWM Site Plan throughout this Ordinance.

Subdivision - As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities  Planni ng Code, Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.

USDA - United States Department of Agriculture.

Void Ratio - The ratio of the volume of void space to the volume of solid substance in any material.

Waters of this Commonwealth - Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or pa1ts thereof , whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.

Watershed - Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other smface water of the Commonwealth.

Wetland - Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,  including  swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
 
ARTICLE III - STORMWATER MANAGEl\IIENT STANDARDS

Section 301. General Requirements

A.	For all Regulated  Activities,  unless  preparation  of  an  SWM Site Plan  is specifically exempted in Section 302:

l.	Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM Site Plan is required.

2.	No Regulated Activities shall commence until the municipality issues written approval of an SWM Site Plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.

B.	SWM Site Plans approved by the Municipality, in accordance with Section 406, shall be on site throughout the duration of the Regulated Activity.

C.	The Municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for meeting the State Water Quality Requirements other than those in this Ordinance, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with, State law including but not limited to the Clean Streams Law.

D.	For all Regulated Ea11h Disturbance Activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities (e.g., du1ing construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements under the Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed  in  the Erosion	and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (E&S Manual)2, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection, No. 363- 2134-008 (2000), as amended and updated.

E.	For all Regulated  Activities,  implementation  of  the Volume Controls in Section 303 is required with the exception of regulated activities that meet the exemption ciite1ia found in Section 302.A of this Ordinance.

F.	Impervious Areas:

I .      The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total proposed development even if development is to take place in stages.

2.	For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used
in determining conf01mance with this Ordinance.

3.	For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this Ordinance.
 

G.	Stormwater flows onto adjacent prope11y shall not be created, increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written permission of the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requiremen s of this Ordinance.

H.	All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:

1.	Protect health, safety, and property;

2.	Meet State Water Quality Requirements as defined in Article II;

3.	Meet the water quality goals of this Ordinance by implementing measures to:

a.	Minimize disturbance to  floodplains, wetlands, natural  slopes over  8%, and existing native vegetation .

b.	Preserve and maintain trees and woodlands . Maintain or extend ripa1ian buffers and protect existing forested buffer. Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas whenever feasible.

c.	Establish   and  maintain   non-erosive   flow  conditions   m   natural   flow
pathways.

d.	Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction . Over disturbed areas, replace topsoil to a minimum depth equal to the original depth or 4 inches, whichever is greater.  Use tracked equipment for grading when feasible.

e.	Disconnect  impervious  smfaces  by  directing  runoff  to  pervious  areas,
wherever possible.

4.	To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for Low Impact Development	Practices described in "The Pennsylvania Sto1mwater Best Management Practices Manual" (SWM Manual) 1 •

I.	The design of all facilities over Karst shall include an evaluation of measures to minimize adverse effects.

J.	Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this Ordinance.

K.	Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and rate control capacities over a pe1iod of time not less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm.

L.	For all Regulated Activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented , operated, and
maintained  to meet  the purposes  and requirements  of  this  Ordinance  and  to meet  all
 
requirements  under Pennsylvania Code Title 25, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm Water Management Act.

M.	The design stonn volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge should be obtained from the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas  14, Volume 2, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National  Weather Service, Hydrometeorological  Design Studies Center, Silver
Spling, Maryland,  20910.	NOAA 's Atlas 145  can  be accessed at Internet  address:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.

N.	Va.J.ious BMPs and their design standards are listed in the SWM Manual. 1

1.	The applicant may meet the Rate Controls crite1ia in Section 304 through off-site stormwater management measures as long as the proposed measures 31·e in the same subwatershed as shown in Ordinance Appendix D. Off-site stonnwater control measures may only be sought if it is shown that on-site stmmwater control measures cannot be physically accomplished. This does not relieve the applicant from meeting the Volume Controls criteria in Section 303 on-site .

Section 302. Exemptions

A.	Regulated  Activities that create Disconnected  Impervious Areas smaller than 500 sq. ft.
are exempt from all requirements in this Ordinance.

B.	Regulated Activities that create Disconnected Impervious Areas equal to or greater than 500 sq. ft. and less than 5,000 sq. ft. are exempt from the Peak Rate Control and the SWM Site Plan preparation requirement of this Ordinance, but should comply with the small project requirements found in Appendix C of the Ordinance.

C.	Regulated Activities that create Disconnected Impervious Areas equal to or greater than 5,000 sq. ft. and less than 10,000 sq. ft. are exempt only from the peak rate control requirement of this Ordinance.

D.	Agricultural activity is exempt from the rate control and  SWM Site Plan preparation requirements of this Ordinance provided the activities are perfo1med according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter  102.

E.	Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate control and SWM Site Plan preparation requirements of this Ordinance  provided  the  activities  are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
 

Additional Exemption Criteria

1.	Exemption Responsibilities - An exemption shall not relieve the Applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to protect public health , safety, and property.	·

2.	HQ and EV Streams - An exemption shall not relieve the Applicant from meeting the special requirements for watersheds draining to identified high quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters and Source Water Protection Areas (SWPA) and requirements for non-structural project design sequencing.

3.	Drainage Problems - If a drainage problem is  documented  or known  to exist downstream of or is expected from the proposed activity, then the Municipality may require the Applicant to comply with the Ordinance .

4.	Even  though  the developer  is exempt,  he is not relieved from complying  with
other regulations .

Exemptions from any provisions of this Ordinance shall not relieve the Applicant from the requirements in Sections 301.D. through L.

Section 303. Volume Controls

The low impact development  practices provided  in the SWM Manual 1  shall be utilized for all
Regulated Activities to the maximum extent practicable.

Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in Subsection 1 or the Simplified Method in Subsection 2 below. For Regulated Activities that create 10,000 square feet or less of impervious cover that do not require hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this Ordinance establishes no preference for either methodology; therefore, the Applicant may select either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated with each methodology, and other factors.

1.	The Design  Stonn Method  (CG-1 in  the SWM Manual 1)  is applicable  to  any  size of Regulated Activity.  This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.

a.	Do not increase the post-development  total runoff  volume for all stmms equal to
or less than the 2-year, 24-hour duration precipitation.

b.	For modeling purposes:

L	Existing	(pre-development)	non-forested	pervious	areas	must	be
considered meadow or its equivalent.

ii.	Twenty  (20) percent of  existing impervious  area, when  present , shall  be
considered meadow in the model for existing conditions.
 
2.	The Simplified Method  (CG-2 in the SWM Manual 1
 

provided below is independent of
 
site conditions and should be used if the Design St01m Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to Regulated Activities greater than 10,000 square feet or for projects that require design of stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious su1faces:

a.	Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches (2") of runoff from
all new impervious suifaces.

b.	At least the first one inch (1.0'') of runoff from new impervious surfaces shall be pe1manently removed from the runoff flow (i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this Commonwealth). Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.

c.	Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in  all cases at least the first one-half inch (0.5'') of the permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.

d.	This method is exempt from the requirements of Section 304, Rate Controls.

Section 304. Rate Controls

A.	Areas  not  covered  by  a  Release  Rate  Map  from  an  approved  Act 167  Stormwater
Management Plan:

Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for the 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year storms. If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the post -development analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of discharge indicated by the pre-development analysis for 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year, 24-hour st01ms, then the requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise, the Applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.

B.	Areas   covered   by   a   Release   Rate   Map   from   an   approved   Act 167  Stormwater
Management Plan:

For the 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and  100-year storms, the post-development peak discharge rates will follow the applicable approved management district or release rate map. The approved management district map  for the  Stonycreek  River  watershed  is found in Appendix D. The stormwater management district crite1ia for the Stonycreek River watershed is found in Table 1. For any areas not shown on the release rate maps or management distiict maps, the post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment  discharge  rates.
 
TABLE!
Stormwater Management Districts in the Stonycreek River Watershed




I .
 
ARTICLE IV - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS

Section 401. Plan Requirements

r  I	The following items shall be included in the SWM Site Plan:

A.	Appropriate sections from the Municipal Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in prepaiing the SWM Site Plans. In	instances where the Municipality Jacks Subdivision and Land Development regulations, the content of SWM Site Plans shall  follow the County's  Subdivision and Land Development  Ordinance .

B.	The Municipality shall not approve any SWM Site Plan that is deficient in meeting the requirements of this Ordinance . At its sole discretion and in accordance with this Article, when a SWM Site Plan is found to be deficient , the Municipality may either di approve the  submission  and  require  a  resubmission,  or  in  the  case  of  minor  deficiencies  the
I I	Municipality may accept submission of modifications.
I
C.	Provisions for pe1manent access or maintenance easements for all physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as necessary to implement the operation and maintenance plan discussed in item E.9 below.

D.	The following signature block for the Municipality:

"(Municipal Official or designee), on this date (date of signature),  has  reviewed  and hereby certifies that the SWM Site Plan meets all design standards and crite1ia of the Municipal  Ordinance No. (Number assigned to the Ordinance)."

E.	The SWM Site Plan shall provide the following information:

1.	The overall stormwater management concept for the project.

2.	A dete1mination of  Site Conditions in accordance with the SWM Manual 1 • A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas such as brownfields.

3.	St01mwater runoff design computations, and documentation as specified in this Ordinance, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet the requirements of this Ordinance, including the recommendations and general requirements in Section 301.

4.	Expected project time schedule.
 

5.	A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared for and submitted to the approval auth01ity.

6.	The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality, and peak flows) on sunounding properties and aquatic features and on any existing sto1mwater conveyance system that may be affected by the project.

7.	Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs including drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.

8.	SWM Site Plan shall show the locations of existing and proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells .

9.	The SWM Site Plan shall include an operation and maintenance (O&M) plan for all  existing and proposed physical stormwater management facilities.   This plan shall   address   l ong-term   ownership   and   responsibilities   for   operation   and maintenance as well as schedules and costs for O&M activities .

Section 402. Plan Submission

A.	__ Seven (7) copies of the SWM Site Plan shall be submitted as follows:

1.	 	Three (3) copies to the Municipality .

2.	__ Two (2) copy to the Municipal Engineer (when applicable).

3.	 	One (1) copy to the County Conservation District (optional) .

4.	__ One (1) copy to the County Planning Commission/Office .

B.	Addition al copies shall be submitted as requested by the Municipality or DEP.

Section 403. Plan Review

A.		The SWM Site Plan shall be reviewed by a Qualified Professional for the Municipality for consistency with the provisions of this Ordinance. Review by the County Conservation District is optional. After review, the Qualified Professional shall provide a written recommendation for the municipality to approve or disapprove the SWM Site Plan . If it is recommended to disapprove the SWM Site Plan, the Qualified Professional shall state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The Qualified Professional also may recommend approval of the SWM Site Plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable conditions for approval  in writing. The SWM Site Plan review and recommendations shall be completed within the time allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code for reviewing subdivision plans .
 
B.		The Municipality shall notify the Applicant in writing within 45 calendar days whether the SWM Site Plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM Plan involves a Subdivision and Land Development Plan, the notification period is 90 days. If a longer notification pe1iod is provided by other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the Applicant will be so notified by the Municipality . If the Municipality disapproves the SWM Plan, the Municipality shall cite the reasons for disapproval in writing.

Section 404. Modification of Plans

A modification to a submitted SWM Site Plan that involves a change in SWM B:MPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that  is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM Site Plan as dete1mined by the Municipality, shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM Site Plan in accordance with this Article.

Section 405. Resubmission of Disapproved Storm Water Management Site Plans

A disapproved SWM Site Plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the Municipality's concerns, to the Municipality in accordance with this Article. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM Site Plan .

Section 406. Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity

The Municipality's approval of an SWM Site Plan authorizes the Regulated Activities contained in the SWM Site Plan for a maximum term of validity of five years following the date of approval. The Municipality may specify a term of validity sh01ter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM Site Plan . Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Municipality signs the approval for an SWM Site Plan . If an approved SWM Site Plan is not completed according to Section 407 within the te1m of validity, then the Municipality may consider the SWM Site Plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. SWM Site Plans that are considered disapproved by the Municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with Section 405 of this Ordinance.

Section 407. As-Built Plans, Completion Certificate and Final Inspection

A.	The Developer shall be responsible  for providing  as-built  plans  of  all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM Site Plan. The as-built plans and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted to the Municipality.

B.	The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion signed by a Qualified Professional verifying that all pe1manent SWM BMPs have been  constructed  according to the approved plans and specifications . If any licensed Qualified Professionals contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed Qualified Professional must sign the completion  certificate.
 

C.	After receipt of the completion certification  by the Municipality, the Municipality may conduct a final inspection.
 
ARTICLE V • OPERATION  AND MAINTENANCE

Section 501.	Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners

A.	The Municipa lity shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities p1ior to final approval of the SWM Site Plan. The Municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as pa1t of the requirements for approval of the SWM Site Plan . Such a requirement is not an indication that the Municipality will accept the facilities. The Municipality reserves the 1ight to accept or reject the ownership and operating responsib ility for any p01tion of the stormwater management controls .

B.	Facilities, areas, or structures used as Stormwater Management BMPs  shall  be enumerated as pe1manent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that rnn with the land.

C.	The Operation and Maintenance Plan shall be recorded as a restiictive deed covenant that runs with the land.

D.	The Municipality may  take  enforcement  actions  against  an  owner  for  any  failure  to satisfy the provisions of this A1ticle.

Section 502. Operation and Maintenance Agreements

The owner is responsible for Operation and Maintenance of the SWM BMPs . If the owner fails to adhere to the Operation and Maintenance Agreement, the Municipality may perfo1m the services required and charge the owner approp1iate fees. Non-payment of fees may result in a lien against the property .

Section 503. Stormwater Management Easements

A.	Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for off-site st01mwater control , unless a waiver is granted by the Municipality .

B.	Sto1mwater management easements shall be provided by the Applicant or property owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or the preservation  of stmmwater runoff conveyance, infiltration , and detention areas and  other stormwater controls and BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement under Section 502.
 

ARTICLE VI - FEES AND EXPENSES

Section 601. General

The fees required by this Ordinance are as stated herein . The fees shall be established by the Municipality to defray review costs incurred by the Municipality and the Municipal Engineer. All fees shall be paid by the Applicant.



Section 602. Municipality Drainage Plan Review Fee


The Municipality shall establish a Review Fee Schedule by resolution of the municipal governing body based on the size of the Regulated Activity and based on the Municipality's costs for reviewing Drainage Plans. The Municipality shall periodically update the Review Fee Schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately reimbursed.



Section 603. Expenses Covered by Fees


The fees required by this Ordinance shall at a minimum cover:

A.	Administrative Costs.

B.	The review of the Drainage Plan by the Municipality  and the Municipal Engineer.


C.	The site inspections.

D.	The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage improvements during construction .

E.	The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management facilities and drainage improvements presented  in the Drainage Plan.

F.	Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions  regulated by this  Ordinance, correct violations , and assure proper completion of stipulated remedial actions.
 

ARTICLE VII-PROHIBITIONS

Section 701. Prohibited Discharges and Connections

A.	Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsmface, which allows any non­ sto1mwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the waters of this Commonwealth is prohibited.

B.	No person shall allow, or cau e to allow , discharges into smface waters of this Commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except (1) as provided in subsection C below, and (2) discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.

C.	The following  discharges  are auth01ized  unless  they  are dete1mined  to be significant
conttibutors to pollution to the waters of this Commonwealth:

-	Discharges from fire fighting activities	-	Flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands
-	Potable water sources including water
line flushing	-	Uncontaminated water from
foundations or from footing drains
-	Irrigation   drainage	-	Lawn   watering
-	Air conditioning condensate	-	Dechlorinated swimming pool
discharges
-	Springs	-	Uncontaminated  groundwater
-	Water from crawl space pumps	-	Water from individual residential car
washing
-	Pavement wash waters where spills or
leaks of toxfc or hazardous materials
have not occun-ed (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used	-	Routine external building wash down
(which does not use detergents or other compounds)

D.	In the event that the Municipality or DEP determines that any of the discharges identified in	Subsection  C,  significantly   contribute   to   pollution   of   the   waters   of   this Commonwealth, the Municipality or DEP will notify the responsible  person( s) to cease the discharge.

Section 702. Roof Drains

Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs and to the maximum extent practicable satisfy the crite1ia for Disconnected Impervious Areas unless directed otherwise by the Municipality.

Section 703. Alteration of SWM Bl\1Ps

No person  shall modify,  remove,  fill, landscape , or alter  any SWM BMPs, facilities,  areas, or
structures, without the written approval of the Municipality.
 

ARTICLE VIII - ENFORCEMENT  AND PENALTIES

Section 801.  Right-of-Entry

Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Municipa lity to inspect the condition  of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this Ordinance.

Section 802.  Inspection

SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee (including the Municipality for dedicated and owned facilities) according to the following list of minimum frequencies:

1.	Annually for the first 5 years.

2.	Once every 3 years thereafter.

3.	During or immediately after the cessation of a 10-year or greater st01m.

Section 803. Enforcement

A.	It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any Regu lated Activity except as provided in an approved SWM Site Plan, unless specifically exempted in Section 302.

B.	It shall be unlawful to violate Section 703 of this Ordinance.

C.	Inspections  regarding  compliance  with  the  SWM  Site Plan  are a responsibility  of  the
Municipality.

Section 804. Suspension and Revocation

A.	Any approval or permit issued by the Municipality may be suspended or revoked for:

1.	Non-compliance  with  or  failure  to  implement  any  provision  of  the  approved
SWM Site Plan or Operation and Maintenance Agreem nt.

2.	A  violation  of  any  provision  of  this  Ordinance  or  any  other  applicable  law, Ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the Regulated Activity.

3.	The creation of any condition or the commission of any act du1ing the Regulated Activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of others.

B.	A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Municipality when:
 

1.	The Municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the violations that caused the suspension .

2.	The Municipality is satisfied that the violation has been c01Tected .

C.	An approval that has been revoked by the Municipality cannot be reinstated . The Applicant may apply for a new approval under the provisions of this Ordinance.

D.	If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health , or prope1ty, at its sole discretion, the Municipality may provide a limited time period for the owner to correct the violation . In these cases, the Municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not c01Tect the violation within the allowed time period, the Municipality may revoke or suspend any, or all , applicable approvals and pe1mits pertain1ng to any provision of this Ordinance.

Section 805. Penalties


A.  Anyone violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 or no more than $500
for each violation, recoverable with costs, or imprisonment of not more than days, or both .
Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.


B.  In addition, the municipality, through its solicitor , may institute injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this Ordinance . Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders , temporary or permanent injun tions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief

Section 806. Appeals

A.	.      Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipality or its designee, relev ant  to the provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the Municipality within thi1ty (30) days of that action .

B.	Any person agg1ieved by any decision of the Municipality, relevant to the provisions of th is Ordinance, may appeal to the County Court Of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within thi1ty (30) days of the Municipality 's decision.
 

ARTICLE IX - REFERENCES

1.	Pennsylvania Depa1tment of Environmental Protection (DEP). No.  363-0300-002 (2006), as amended and updated. PeTZnsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.  Hanisburg, PA.      ·

2.	The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). 363-2134-008 (2000),
as amended  and updated.	Erosion. and Sediment Pollution  Control Program Manual.
l	Hanisburg , PA.
3.	United States Depaitment of Agriculture (USDA), National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).  National  Engineering  Handbook.   Part 630: Hydrology,  1969-2001.
Originally  published  as  the  National  Engineering  Handbook,  Section  4:  Hydrology. Available online at:  http://www .wcc.nrcs.usda.gov/hydro/hydro-techref-neh-630.html.

\	4. United States Depa1tment  of  Agriculture  (USDA),  Natural  Resources  Conservation Service (NRCS). 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition.   Washington, D.C.

5.	US Department of Commerce (USDC), National Oceanic  and  Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service (NWS), Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center. 2004-2006.  Precipitation-Frequencv  Atlas of the  United States, Atlas 14,	Volume 2, Silver Sp1ing, Maryland, 20910. Internet address : http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.




ARTICLE X - ADOPTION



To the extent any prior Ordinance adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Upper Yoder Township including Ordinance No. 254, is inconsistent with any provision herein , such Ordinance or any portion thereof is hereby repealed and if any sentence, clause or section of thi s Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions , sentences, clauses or sections of this Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall be effective on  JQ.v/l O?o,c::?o1u	and shall remain in force until modified, amended or rescinded by thct'Boar   of Supervisors of Upper Yoder Township,
Camb1ia County, Pennsylvania.
 




ENACTED AND ADOPTED by the Board of Supervisors of Upper Yoder Township this
;c;lh day of	u ly	, 20 10.
I .
UPPER  YODER TOWNSHIP SUPERVISORS
I	ATTEST:	By:


fl Cl// R	/!;_	-
Secretary















J	' Supervisor
 



DRAINAGE PLAN APPLICATION

1.	Name of subdivision or development -----------------

2.	Type of subdivision or development proposed --------------
l	3.   Name of applicant-------------- Telephone No . ----


\	(if corporation, list the corporation's name and the names of two officers of the corporation)
I





















6.	Area of proposed and existing impervious area on entire tract :

a.	Existing (to remain)		s.f .	_		_ % of property
b.	Proposed	s .f.	% of property

7.	Calculation method used 	

 
8.	Signature  of applicant  or authorized  agent----------
 
date
---
 

//////l////  //////l//l////////    ////////////l/l/////////////////l ///////////l//l/////l/l///l///////////I///////////
(Information below this line to be completed by Upper Yoder Township)

 
Date complete application received--
 
Received by -----------
 

Total Fee--- Date fee paid ---
 

Payment received by----------
 
APPENDIX A

OPERATION  AND MAINTENANCE  AGREEMENT STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT  BEST MANAGEMENT  PRACTICES
(SWMBMPs)

 
THIS  AGREEMENT,  made  and  entered  into this   	 	
 
day of	__
 
20_,	by	and	between	(hereinafter	the
"Landowner"), and --------------    	
County, Pennsylvania, (hereinafter "Municipality");

WITNESSETH

WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real prope1ty as recorded by deed in the land records of                                     County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book                          at Page
 	,(hereinafter  "Property") .

WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and

WHEREAS, the SWM BMP Operation and Maintenance Plan approved by the Municipality (hereinafter refelTed to as the "Plan") for the property identified herein, which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made part hereof, as approved by the Municipality, provides for management of stormwater within the confines of the Prope1ty through the use of BMPs; and

WHEREAS, the Municipality,  and the Landowner, his successors and assigns, agree that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Municipality and the protection and maintenance of water quality require that on-site SWM BMPs be constructed and maintained on the Property ; and

WHEREAS, the Municipality requires, through the implementation of  the  SWM Site Plan, that SWM BMPs as required by said Plan and the Municipal Stormwater Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately operated and maintained by the Landowner, successors and assigns.

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration  of the foregoing promises, the mutual covenants
contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto agree as follows:

1.	The Landowner  shall construct the BMPs in accordance with the plans  and specifications identified in the SWM Site Plan.

2.	The Landowner shall operate and maintain the BMPs as shown on the Plan in good working order in accordance with the specific maintenance requirements noted on the approved SWM Site Plan.

3.	The Landowner  hereby  grants permission  to the Municipality,  its authorized  agents  and employees, to enter upon the property , at reasonable times and upon presentation of proper
 
credentials ,   to   inspect	the  B.MPs  whenever	necessary.	Whenever	possible,   the Municipality shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the property.



4.	In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BJ\1Ps per paragraph 2, the Municipality or its representatives may enter upon the Prope1ty and take whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said BJ\1P(s). It is expressly understood and agreed that the Municipality is under no obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the Municipality.



5.	In the event the Municipality, pursuant to this Agreement, peifmms work of any nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the Municipality for all expenses (direct and indirect) incuned within 10 days of receipt of invoice from the Municipality.



6.	The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper maintenance of the onsite BMPs by the Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement shall not be deemed to create or affect any additional liability of any party for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.



7.	The Landowner, its executors , administrators, assigns, and other successors in interests, shall release the Municipality from all damages, accidents, casualties, occunences or claims which might arise or be asserted against said employees and representatives from the construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the B.MP(s) by the Landowner or Municipality.



8.	The Municipality shall inspect the BJ\1Ps at  a minimum  of  once every  three  years  to ensure their continued  functioning.
 

This  Agreement	shall  be  recorded	at  the  Office  of  the  Recorder  of  Deeds   of
_	_ County, Pennsylvania , and shall constitute a covenant running with the Property
and/or equitable servitude, and shall  be binding  on the Landowner,  his administrators, executors ,
assigns, heirs and any other successors in interests, in perpetuity .

ATTEST:

WITNESS the fo1lowing signatures and seals:

(SEAL)	For the Municipality:




For the Landowner :




ATTEST:

-------------(City, Borough, Township)

County of		, Pennsylvania

 
I,  	 	
 
 	, a Notary Public in and for the County and
 

State aforesaid, whose commission expires on the	day of _	__

20	, do hereby certify that	whose name(s)

is/are signed to the foregoing Agreement bearing date of the	day of

 	, 20	, has acknowledged the same before me in my said County and State.

GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS _		day of		, 20___




NOTARY PUBLIC	(SEAL)
 
APPENDIXB DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA)
B.1.	Rooftop  Disconnection

When rooftop downspouts are directed to a pervious area that allows for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration, the rooftop may qualify as completely or  partially Disconnected Impervious Area (DIA) and a portion of the impervious rooftop area may be excluded from the calculation of total impervious area.

A rooftop is considered to be completely or parti ally disconnected if it meets the requirements listed below :

•	The contributing area of rooftop to each disconnected discharge is 500 square feet or less, and
•	The soil, in proximity of the roof water discharge area, is not designated as hydrologic soil group "D" or equivalent , and
•	The overland flow path from roof water discharge area has a positive slope of 5% or less.

For designs that meet these requirements, the portion of the roof that may be considered disconnected depends on the length of the overland path as designated in Table B. l.

Table B.1: Partial Rooftop Disconnection
Length of Pervious Flow Path *	Roof Area  Treated as Disconnected
(ft)	(% of contributing area)
0 - 14	0
15 - 29	20
30-44	40
45-59	60
60-74	80
75 or more	100
* Flow path cannot include impervious surfaces and must be at least 15 feet from any impervious surfaces.

B.2.	Pavement Disconnection

When pavement runoff is directed to a pervious area that allows for infiltration , filtration , and increased time of concentration , the contributing pavement area may qualify as a DIA that may be excluded from the calculation of total impervious area. This applies generall y only to small or narrow pavement structures such  as driveways and narrow pathways through otherwise pervious areas (e.g., a walkway or bike path through a park).

Pavement is disconnected if the pavement , or area adjacent to the pavement, meets the requirements below:
 

•	The cont1ibuting flow path over impervious area is not more than 75 feet, and
•	The length of overland flow is greater than or equal to the contiibuting length, and
•	The soil is not designated as hydrologic soil group "D" or equivalent, and
•	The slope of the contributing impervious area is 5% or less, and
•	The slope of the overland flow path is 5% or less.

If the discharge is concentrated at one or more discrete points, no more than 1,000 square feet may discharge to any one point. In addition, a gravel strip or other spreading device is required for concentrated discharges. For non-concentrated discharges  along the edge of the pavement , this requirement is waived; however, there must be a provision for the establishment  of vegetation along the pavement edge and temporary stabilization of the area until  vegetation becomes  stabilized.

REFERENCE

Philadelphia  Water Department.   2006.   Stonnwater Management  Guidance Manual.   Section
4.2.2: Integrated Site Design. Philadelphia, PA.
 

APPENDIXC




Optional Stormwater Management for Small Projects




Applicability: Stormwater management procedures for projects with between five hundred (500) square feet and (4,999) square feet of proposed impervious area. All of the proposed impervious area that is created by a regulated activity must be disconnected impervious area, otherwise the Applicant cannot use this document to meet stormwater management requirements, and  is therefore responsible for meeting all stormwater management requirements of the Ordinance. Disconnected impervious area and regulated activities are defined in Section C.2 of this document.

Note: This small projects document is not to be used to plan for multiple lots without obtaining prior written approval from the Municipality. Approvals and actions associated with this document do not relieve the Applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law or ordinance.
 
STORMWATERMANAGEl\!IENTPROCEDURES FOR SMALL PROJECTS

Introduction

This handbook has been developed to allow homeowners to comply with stormwater management criteria for new projects to meet the requirements of the Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinance of the Municipality including sizing, designing, locating, and installing on-lot measures, referred to herein as "Best Management Practices" (BMPs).  Pennsylvania Act 167 was authorized on October 4, 1978 (32 P.S.,
P.L. 864) and gave Pennsylvania municipalities the power to regulate activities that affect stormwater runoff and surface and groundwater quantity and quality.

Individual home construction projects on single-family lots which result in between 500 square feet and 4,999 square feet of proposed impervious area (including the building footprint, driveway,  sidewalks, and parking  areas) are not required  to submit formal
stormwater management (SWM) site plans to the Municipality or County; however , they
I .	are still required  to  address water  quality and infiltration  goals as outlined  in this  small
projects document.   If the guidelines presented in this brochure are followed, the
individual homeowner will not require professional services to comply with these water quality and infiltration goals.

Section C.l describes requirements and outlines the method for designing a suitable BMP, and a description of what needs to be included on the simple sketch plan.  Section
C.2	presents definitions of key terms. Section C.3 presents options of BMPs that can be considered for on-lot stormwater management. An example of how to obtain the size and dimensions of a BMP is explained in Section C.4.

The stormwater management method for small projects requires:


•	The first 1" of rainfall runoff from proposed impervious surfaces to be captured (see definition of captured in Section C.2).

The purpose of this small projects document is to help reduce stormwater runoff in the community, to maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources and public safety.

What needs to be sent to the Municipality?

Even though a formal SWM site plan is not required for individual lot owners, the small projects worksheet found in Table C-4 and a simple sketch plan containing the features described in Step 4 of Section C.1· needs to be submitted to the Municipality, and if applicable, the contractor prior to construction.
 
l '
I



C.1   Determination of Simplified Approach Volume Requirements

All proposed impervious areas must be included in the determination of the amount of new impervious areas and the size of proposed BMPs needed to control stormwater. Proposed impervious areas on an individual residential lot include: roof area, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, patios, porches, permanent pools, or parking areas. Sidewalks, driveways, or patios that are constructed with gravel or pervious pavers that will not be converted to an impervious surface in the future need not be included in this calculation. Therefore, the amount of proposed impervious area can be reduced for proposed driveways, patios, and sidewalks through the use of gravel, pervious pavement, and turf pavers.  All proposed impervious areas must be constructed so that runoff is conveyed to a BMP; no runoff can be directed to storm sewers, inlets, or other impervious areas (i.e., street).

In addition, the use of low impact development is recommended to further minimize the effect of the new construction on water, land, and air. Low impact development is a method of development that incorporates design techniques that include: minimizing the amount of land disturbance, reducing impervious cover, disconnecting gutters and directing runoff to vegetated areas to infiltrate, and redirecting the flow of runoff from impervious driveways to vegetated areas instead of to the street or gutter.

The amount of impervious area that needs to be controlled may be reduced by disconnecting impervious areas as discussed below as a BMP and as found in Ordinance Appendix B.

Below are the steps that must be undertaken to meet the Ordinance requirements. The results obtained for each step must be included in the Small Projects Worksheet found in Table C-4:

STEP 1 - Determine the total area of all proposed impervious surfaces that will need to drain to one or more BMPs. Determine locations where BMPs need to be placed so that runoff from all of the proposed impervious surfaces can be captured. Select the BMPs to be used and determine the requirements of each from Section C.3. For instance, the back half of a garage may drain 200 square feet of roof to a rain barrel, and the front half of a garage may drain 200 square feet of roof and 540 square feet of driveway to an infiltration trench. Then, obtain the required storage volume and surface area needed for each of the proposed BMPs from the appropriate heading below.

For Rain Barrels/Cisterns

STEP 2 -Select the proposed impervious area value in Column 1 of Table C-1 that is closest to, but not less than, the determined value.

STEP 3 - Determine the volume that needs to be provided in cubic feet and gallons to satisfy the volume requirements using Columns 2 and 3 in Table C-1.
 
ToMc C-1: Calculating lhin U"ri cl/Clstcrn Storage Volume for I" Ruin rall'

Cnln11111 I	r..1.,_l	Cv lumn  3
rrnfl<llied lmpen·iow; Arca	Volu me or llllln Barrol/Cistom1	Volume or Ruin llwrrcl/Cistcrn
(JOUate  feet)	ccuhkfoot )	l2•llm,.l

I	V1m{r	\lll'H...1/
Su111 of all Pronoscd Impervious Arc11s	( 1•c 1/12)•11/0.75:V•n"	VR 111:r* 7.4M=Vu.n ,t
50	6	42
100	II	83
200	22	166
300	33	249
400	44	33'.!
51Kl	56	4 16
600	67	49Y
700	78	582
800	89	665
900	100	748
1.000	III	83 1
1.100	122	914
1.200	133	9'J7
1.300	144	I.OKI
1,400	156	1,164
1.50/J	167	1.247
1,60/J	178	1,330
1.700	189	1.413
1.800	200	1.4%
1,1)()()	2 11	1,579
2.000	22:?	1.66'.!
2.100	233	1.745
2,200	244	1.829
2.300	256	1.912
2.400	2(17	1.9'15
2.5{](1	278	2.117
2.(i{)()	289	2.161
2.700	:100	2.2  4
2.UOO	311	2.327
2.900	3 2	2.410
3.000	333	2.494
3.100	344	2.577
3.200	356	2.660
3.300	367	'.!.743
3,400	378	2.826
3,500	389	2.909
3.600	400	'.!.992
3,700	4 11	3.(175
3.SOO	42'.!	3.158
3.900	433	3.242
4,0IMl	444	3.325
4,100	456	3.408
.200	1167	3.491
.uoo	478	3.574
4.400	489	3.657
4.500	500	3.740
4.600	511	3.823
4.700	522	3.906
4.800	533	3.990
4.900	544	4.073
4,999	556	4.155
l'ht,: l)'V11,;3l \1"UlllC of 3 r.un lm'rcl 1i; l-.,'1. "l.'Cn !iO  ?UO i;:i.IJon., .kl mott lh:in I  r,11n l»ml ITU) be
°"-"..'\.k:J. L.:tri.:r mlmTI1..-s 1n;,y n..-quire a ct cm.
:As....ume th:u dk'. l"'JJn OOm:l/di;t..:m  is :?5';(o rull
 
For Rain Gardens/Bioretention or Dry Well #1:

STEP 2 - Select the proposed impervious area value in Column 1 of Table C-2 that is closest to, but not less than, the determined value.

STEP 3 - Using the value from Column 1 determined in Step 2, select the depth (D) of the proposed BMP, and then simply determine the surface area needed for that depth from Column 2 of Table C-2.
I .
I		Note: The arrows under Column 2 in Table C-2 indicate which range of depths is appropriate for each BMP. To determine the depth based on the area, select an area that corresponds to the value in Column 1 that is closest to, but not more than the area to be used. To determine the area based on the depth, select a depth that is closest to, but not less than, the depth that is to be used.














































5
 
Table C-2: Calculating Rain Gardc11/Uiorctmtio11 •nd Dry Weil #1Storage Volume and Surface Arca t'or 1" Rain fall

rIH-• I	-	Column 2	--	'_	I  'l

Surface Arca  of  Rain Gardeu/lliorctcntion or Dri• Well #I Acc:cpt..ablc IXpt.h:;; ror r-.och HMP an: indic:itcd by the arrows below (sauarc   rect)

An'tJ Reqttil"<'cl	An•a llt.'tJUirc1d	Area Rt•quiret!	Area Rc'quirctl	Arca Required	Area  Required	Area Required	
Area Required
fora  BMPwillt	;;1ra BMP willr	.foru HMPwi1/J	for  a /JM /' 11'i1h	fa r a fJMP wilh	for a BMP willt	fora BMP wilh	for a /JM P wi1h
aD<•111l1(D)of	<1D<•111l1(D)	a D</J1l1(D) of	a Ocplh(D} of	a Dcp1h(D) of	a f)cp// 1(/)) n(	a Detlllr(V) of	a Dep1h(D) of
0.5'	n{ 1.0'	1.5'	2,()'	2.5'	3.0'	3.5'	4.0'
1    ;-'1£_11	,...._ -1
l	j	t	I Dry WL"U UI O .S'-4.0')   I
f11U1;c c11Uon  (U.5'-1.0')		
•
I	;11.in
Sum Qf all Proposed  lmpcr'lious
Areas	A = Volumc/D, where Volume'= (1112)•/





















































1 A umc Uiat the r.i.in gardcn/biurct ·ntim1 or lhc dry we ll JI I :ire 0% foll

6
 
For Infiltration Trench or Dry Well #2:

STEP 2 - Select the proposed impervious area value in Column 1 of Table C-3 that is closest to, but not less than, the determined value.

STEP 3 - Using the value from Column 1 determined in Step 2, select the depth (D) of the proposed BMP, and then simply determine the surface area needed from Column 2 of Table C-3.

Note: The  arrows under Column 2 in Table C-3 indicate which range of depths is appropriate for each BMP. To determine the depth based on the area, select an area that corresponds to the value in Column 1 that is closest to, but not less than, the area to be used. To determine the area based on the depth, select a depth that is closest to, but not less than, the depth that is to be used.














































7
 

....
C'nfkmn I
 
Table C-3: Calculating hlflllration Trench and Dry Well #2 Slol'agc Volume and Surface Arca fol' I" UainC.11
CoJumn 2	.-
 
Surface Area of lnllltratinn Trench or Dry Well #2
Aet.·1.1M<1btc llc1>1h. for Each RMP;ire indicau."tl by 1.hc ;irmw<" below
Arca (.auarc fccO	(MIUare l'cct)
An:·a f?rquircd    ArcnR<•quin•d   Art:ll Required     Area ll<•c111ir<•d    Arca Required   A rea l?equired    Area Required    Aree1 R(!quircd fora   BM!'	Jorn  BMP	Jin· a llMP	far11  BMP	fora   UM/'	fvraBMP	fora   BMP	Jor11 BMP wi1ltt1	with a	wit/Jo	H'it/Ja	witl1a	H'itli a	with a	with a
DefJ l/1(D)af	De1J1/i(D)  {	Dep1h( D)oj	Dep11i(D) 0f	Dep1h(Ll)11f	Lle(Jlh!Dlr4	DefJlli(D)  f	Dep1/i(D)of
1.5'	2.0'	2.5 '	3.0'	3.5'	4.0'	4.5'	5.0'
•




100	14	10	7	6	5	5	4
200	28	21	17	14	12	10	9	8
300	42	31	25	21	18	16	14	13
400	5(1	42	33	28	24	2 1	19	17
son	69	52	42	35	30	26	23	2 1
600	83	63	50	42	36	3 1	28	25
700	97	73	58	49	42	36	32	29
800	Ill	83	67	56	48	42	37	33
900	125	94	75	63	54	47	42	38
1.000	139	llM	83	69	60	52	46	42
1.100	153	115	92	76	65	57	51	46
1.200	167	125	100	83	71	63	56	50
1.300	18 1	135	108	()	77	68	60	54
1.-100	194	14(>	117	97	83	73	65	58
1.500	208	156	125	104	89	78	69	63
1.600	222	167	133	111	95	83	74	67
1,700	'.!36	177	142	118	IOI	89	79	71
1.800	250	188	150	125	107	94	83	75
1.900	264	198	158	132	IIJ	99	88	79
:!.000	'.!78	208	1 61	13	11	104	93	:1.3
2,llU)	292	2 19	175	146	125	lll9	97	88
:!.200	306	229	183	153	131	115	102	92
2.300	319	240	192	160	137	l '.!0	106	96
2,4(Ul	333	250	200	167	143	125	111	100
2.5<)0	347	260	208	17-1	149	1 30	116	104
2.600	361	27 1	217	181	155	135	120	108
2.700	375	281	225	1sg	16 1	141	125	1 13
2.800	389	292	233	194	167	146	130	117
2.900	403	302	242	201	m	151	134	121
3.000	417	313	250	208	179	156	139	125
3.IUO	43 1	323	258	215	185	16 1	1-14	129
3.200	444	333	267	2::!2	190	1<>7	148	133
3,JOO	4.'8	:144	275	229	196	172	15.	138
3.400	472	354	283	236	:!02	177	157	142
3.500	486	365	292	243	208	182	16'.!	146
 
3.600	500	375	300	250	214
 
-	188	167	ISO
 
3,700	5 14	385	308	257	220	193	171	154
 
3.80!.I
 
'	518	3%	317	16-1	22	190	17tJ	158	l
 
J.9rn1	54:2	406	325	271	232	'.!OJ	181	163
4.000	556	417	333	'.!7N	238	208	185	167
4.100	569	427	342	285	244	214	190	171
4.'.!00	583	438	350	292	250	2 19	194	175
4.300	597	44g	358	299	256	:!2.J	199	179
4.400	611	458	367	J06	262	229	204	1113
4.500	625	469	375	313	268	234	208	188
4.600	639	479	383	319	274	2-10	2 13	192
4.700	653	490	392	326	280	245	218	196
4.800	667	500	400	333	286	2 0	222	200
4.900	681	510	408	340	29:!	:?55	227	204
..	4.999	694	521	4 17	347	29	260	231	208

8
 

For Disconnected Rooftop Areas:

STEP 2 - Select th e proposed impervious area value in Column 1 of Table C-4 that is closest to, but not less than, the determined value. Using the value from Column 1, select the corresponding soil group in column 2 determined from Map III-4, and corresponding slope in column 3 which is the slope of the path the stormwater from the roof travels along, from Table C-4.

STEP 3 - Using the value from Column 3 detennined in Step 2, use column 4 to select the length of the flow path that is closest to, but not less than the value, and then simply determine the roof area treated as disconnected from Column 5 of Table C-4. Therefore, the value from Column 5 is the percentage of the total imperviou s area that can be excluded.


Table C-4:CaIculatm' g Roof1top D1' sconnectedimperv10us Area percentage
Roof Area
Impervious	Length of Flow	Treated as
Rooftop Area	Soil Group	Slope(%)	Path (ft)*	Disconnected (%
(square feet)	of Contributing
Area)



 


A, B, orCor
equivalent
 
0-5
 

0-500	?:.5




D	?:.0	?:.0	0








 

?:.500
 
A, B,C, D, or
equivalent Soils
 

?:.0	?:.0	0
 









Flow path cannot include impervious surfaces and must be at least 15 feet from any impervious surfaces.
 
For Pavement Disconnection:

STEP 2 - Select the contributing flow path value, which is the length of the impervious portion of the flow path that stormwater runoff from pavement travels along, in Column 1 of Table C-5 and the corresponding length of overland flow which is the total length that the st01mwater runoff travels along the flow path, and the soil group determined from Map III-4, located in columns 2 and 3 respectively, from Table C-5.

STEP 3 - Using the value from Column 3 determined in Step 2, select the slope of the contributing impervious area and slope of the overland flow path in Columns 4 and 5, respectively, and then simply determine if the pavement section is eligible for disconnection from Column 6. If the pavement is eligible for disconnection, then the area of the pavement may be excluded from the total impervious area.

Note: If the discharge is concentrated at one or more discrete points, no more than 1,000 square feet may discharge to any one point. In addition, a gravel strip or other spreading device is required  for  concentrated  discharges.  For  non-concentrated  discharges  along the edge of the pavement, this requirement is waived; however, there must be a provision for the establishment of vegetation  along the pavement  edge and temporary  stabilization of the area until vegetation  becomes stabilized.

Table C.5:CaIcuIatm. e; Pavement   1sconnect1on Ell'gl'bITHty
 
Contributing	Length of	Slope of	Slope of Overland
 
Eligible for
 
Flow Path	Overland Flow	Soil Group
(feet)	(feet)
 
Contributing
Impervious Area
(%)
 
Flow Path
(%)
 
Pavement
Disconnection (Yes/No)
 

 


Length of	A, B,  orCor Overland Flow		equivalent
 
0-5	0-5
 
Yes
 
Equal to or Greater	5+	5+	No
Than  Contributing
Flow Path
1-75	D	O+	O+	No


Length of
Overland Flow	A,B,  C,D,or
less than		O+	O+	No Contributing Flow	equivalent  Soils
Path

O+	A, B, C, D, or	No
equivalent Soils
 

STONYCREEK RIVER ·CAMBRIA AND SOMERSET COUNTIES ACT 167 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN




•
LOCATION MAP






































/·: HVDROLOGIC SOIL GROUPS
;	·A- High Infiltration Rates (Lo\'!Rt1noff Potenti31)









N





II
 
STEP 4 - Sketch a simple site plan as shown in Figure C-1 that includes:


•	Name and address of the owner of the property , and or name and address of the individual preparing the plan, along with the date of submission.


•	Location   of  proposed	structures,   driveways,  or  other  paved   areas  with approximate size in square feet.

•	Location, orientation, and dimensions of all proposed BMPs. For all rain gardens/bioretention, infiltration trenches, and dry wells, the length, width, and depth must be included on the plan . For rain barrels or cisterns the volume must be included.

I	•	Location of any existing or proposed on-site septic system and/or potable water
r	wells showing rough proximity to infiltration facilities.

•	Location of any existing waterbodies such as; streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands, or other waters of the Commonwealth within fifty (50) feet of the project site, and the distance to the project site and/or BMPs. It is recommended that the project or BMPs be located at least than fifty (50) feet away from a perennial or intermittent stream. If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed, convenant, easement, etc.), the existing buffer shall be maintained .


•	Location  of all existing structures including buildings,  driveways, and roads within fifty (50) feet of the project site.

Fill in the small projects worksheet found in Table C-4, then submit the worksheet and the simple site sketch to the Municipality.


























12
 


Figure C-1: Typical Dry Well Configuration filled with Stone Fill (Left) and Structural Prefabricated Chamber (Right)



MillC,-eek






8MP!:1. astern (166 Gallons>


Rain Gutter



 

...    ·;:·?:'tj
 
200sf(Jev)
--------------
200sf(&ont)
 



 	Potable Water Well 	
 



 




f

.io
 






Rain Gutter


Area
 

[ce­

Q c
,, 0
e-
 
BMP#2 Infiltration Trench
 	(20' l x 3' VI x 3' 0:1 	 Pervio1.1s: A.-e;a

Direction of RmDff
 
Pervious
d5	IL


 


Pine Street






13
 
lllame  Joe Hcmeo"'lner
Address: 1.2 3 Pine Stre t
Awtown,  PA 19087
Date: August .31, 2ooa
 
Table C-4: Small Projects Worksheet


























Rain Garden/Bioretcntion or Dry Well #I
 
C.2   Definitions

Best Management Practice (BMP) - Activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to manage storrnwater impacts from Regulated Activities , to meet State Water Quality Requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Ordinance. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures : "structural" or "non-structural". In this Ordinance, non­ structural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior -related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff . Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities , filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving , grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices . Structural Stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.

Capture - Collecting runoff to be stored for reuse or allowed to slowly infiltrate into the ground .

Disconnected Impervious Area (DIA) - An impervious or impermeable surface which is disconnected from any stormwater drainage or conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area which allows fot infiltration , filtration, and increased time of concentration as specified in Appendix B, Disconnected Impervious Area.

Earth Disturbance Activity - A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments ; road maintenance; building construction; the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials .

Geotextile - A fabric manufactured from synthetic fiber that is used to achieve specific objectives, including infiltration , separation between different types of media (i.e., between soil and stone), or filtration .

Hotspot - Areas where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants that are higher than those that are typically found in stormwater (e.g., vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities , vehicle fueling stations, fleet storage areas, vehicle equipment and cleaning facilities , and vehicle service and maintenance facilities) .

Impervious Surface (Impervious Area) - A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include, but not be limited to, roofs, additional  indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration .
 
Infiltration - Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge groundwater.

·Low Impact Development - A land development and construction approach that uses various land planning, design practices, and technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource systems, and reduce infrastructure costs.

Pervious Surface (Pervious Area) - Any area not defined as impervious .

Regulated Activities - Any Earth Disturbances Activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.

Runoff - Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.

Stormwater - Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.

Void Ratio - The ratio of the volume of void space to the volume of solid substance in any material.
 
C.3	Description of BMPs

The following is a description of several types of BMPs that could be implemented. The requirements of each BMP as described below are taken directly from the PA Stormwater BMP Manual (December 2006). Refer to Chapter 6 of the PA BMP Manual which can be found on the PA Department of Environmental Protection's website for specifications and steps for construction for the following BMPs. A list of routine maintenance for each of the BMPs described below is also included at the end of this section.

Disconnected Impervious Area (DIA)

Disconnected Impervious Area (DIA) may be used as a storm.water BMP for certain situations. When stormwater is disconnected from a rooftop by allowing the roof to drain to a pervious surface, and it meets certain conditions, then the initial impervious area may not be subtracted from the total impervious area. This applies specifically to rooftops and pavement. Reference Ordinance Appendix B for a more detailed description, and the requirements and applicability of DIA as a BMP.

Rain Barrels/Cisterns

Rain barrels are large containers that collect drainage from roof leaders and temporarily store water to be released to lawns, gardens, and other landscaped areas after the rainfall has ended. Rain barrels are typically between 50 and 200 gallons in size. The stored water can also be used as a non-potable water supply. Cisterns are larger than rain barrels having volumes of 200 gallons or more, and can be placed on the surface or underground. Figures C-2 and C-3 show examples of rain barrels and cisterns, respectively, that could be used. Rain barrels and cisterns are manufactured in a variety of shapes and sizes. All of these facilities must make provisions for the following items:

•	There must be a means to release the water stored between storm events in order for the necessary storage volume to be available for the next storm.
•	Stormwater must be kept from entering other potable  systems, and pipes  and storage units must be clearly marked "Do Not Drink."
•	An overflow outlet should be placed a few inches below the top with an overflow pipe to divert flow away from structures.
•	Use screens to filter debris, and covers (lids) to prevent mosquitoes.
•	Make sure cisterns are watertight and do not leak.
•	Rain barrels are typically assumed to be 25% full to calculate volume since they are not always emptied before each stonn.*
 
Figure C-2: Rain Barrels

 

t	*This 25% has already been taken into account in Table 3.
Figure C-3: Cisterns

 
Source (for both pies): Pennsylvania Stormwatcr BMP Manual (2006)

Infiltration Trench

An infiltration trench is a long, narrow, rock-filled trench with  or without  a perforated pipe that receives stormwater runoff and has no outlet. Runoff is stored in the void space between the stones and in the pipe and infiltrates through the bottom and into the underlying soil matrix. Infiltration  trenches  perform  well for removal  of  fine sediment and associated pollutants. Figure C-4 shows a typical infiltration trench configuration. Infiltration  trenches shall incorporate or make provisions  for the following elements:

•	Perforated pipe is to be set level.
•	The width is limited to between 3 and 8 feet, and the depth ranges from 2 to 5 feet.
•	Trench should be wrapped in nonwoven geotextile (see definition in Section C.2) on the top, sides, and bottom.
•	There should be a positive overflow that allows stormwater that cannot be stored or infiltrated to be discharged into a nearby vegetated area.
 

•	Roof downspouts may be connected to infiltration trenches, but should contain a cleanout to collect sediment and debris before entering the infiltration area.
•	Infiltration testing is recommended to ensure that the soil is capable of infiltrating stormwater.	A description of how an infiltration test is performed is found in Appendix C of the Pennsylvania Stonnwater Best Management Pra ctices Manual (Document No. 363-0300-002), December 30, 2006.
•	It is recommended  that there be a 2-foot clearance above the regularly  occurring
seasonal high water table and a minimum depth to bedrock of 2 feet.
•	The infiltration trench should be at least 50 feet from individual water  supply wells, 100 feet from community or municipal water supply  wells,  and  50 feet from any septic system component. It should not be located near hotspots (see definition  in Section C.2).
•	The infiltration trench should be located so that it presents no threat to sub-surface structures such as building foundations and basements .
•	Protect infiltration areas from compaction.
•	The ratio of the collected area to the footprint of the facility should be as small as possible with a ratio of less than 5:1preferred.

Figure C-4: Typical Infiltration Trench


 

O'Vl;:. l :Lf•,P !'..!();,J '.'\1(.l',/t. 'J
GE:QTEX 11U:

 
1	I
 
c;c.: IIf (,1-
T::;E •.JcH
'.//..RES
 



f' "l''iM	/
i;	--	--

 
·;.•_,·
 
co.·nli.U;..)USL .
rrPr nR.l..1rr, 1 1!:i:;r r.Pr ;i.-
1.-.1M   ci·.i:. '.tETER
cor ;,11·1ua1_,s 1 ta ·J '.'vn·...• ! H
GEOT<;> 11lF.
(lOP s·:•E S.  t..,, t.lJ B::)T-('"\t ;
LL"''' UM .(J J.:Ml r r;F-( :,:ir i)
cc1.,P.::.e .t.·:.:,rJ=:cc :""  c
L.'r 1:-:n .'Pt-.c. - Er> ;a t P. r,:.:.c.ric
 

Source: Pennsylvani a Scormwacer BMP Manual (2006)

Rain Garden/Bioretention Area

A rain garden (bioretention area) is an excavated depression area on the surface of the land in which native vegetation is planted to filter and use stormwater runoff . Runoff ponds on top of the surface of the rain garden and then infiltrates into an enhanced soil below the surface where plants can use the water to grow. Bioretention also improves water quality, vegetation filters the water, and the root systems encourage or promote infiltration. Figure C-5 shows a typical rain garden. Key elements of a rain garden include:

•	Ponding depths of 1foot or less (recommended) .
•	A combination of native shrubs, grasses or mulch, trees, and flowers that can tolerate dry and wet weather also known as facultative plants (FAC). A list of
 
types of plants to use in the bioretention  area is shown below in Table C-5.  The plants shown below are taken from the PA Wildlands Conservancy plant list, and the plant list found in Appendix B of the PA BMP Manual .  The PA Wildlands Conservancy plant list is found at:
http://www.wildlandspa. orgfTDE CMS/database!U serFiles/File/weblist%202008 .
pdf , and the PA BMP Manual is found at:
http://www.depweb.state.pa.us/watershedmgmt/cwp/v  iew .asp?a= 1437&q=52906 3&watershedmgmtNav=%7C . When using the PA BMP Manual plant list, check
l	the Wetland indicator column for plants with a PAC designation. When using the
I
PA Wildlands Conservancy list check the culture column for plan ts that can
tolerate both wet and dry conditions, denoted by the abbreviations W and DR.
•	Only shrubs, grasses, trees, and flowers should be used; vegetables should not be planted in the bioretention  area.
•	An overflow area where, if the bioretention area were to overflow, the water would flow over pervious area (i.e., grass, meadow) , and would not cause haim to property
•	An overflow such as a domed riser to allow excess flow from large storms to travel to other substantial infiltration areas or pervious areas.
•	Typical side slopes of 3:1are recommended, with 2: 1 being the maximum.
•	The soil/planting mix depth should be between 1.5 feet and 6 feet deep.

Figure C-5: Typical Rain Garden/Bioretention Area


 
 
Table C-5: Plant List for Use in a Bioretention/Rain Garden

Common Name	Scientific Name	Plant Type	Photos




Red Maple	



Acer rubrum	



Tree	




Grey Birch	



Betula populifolia	



Tree	




Shadbush Serviceberry	



Amelanchier canadensis	




Tree	




Eastern Cotton­ wood	



Populus grandidentata	




Tree	



Virginia Sweetspire	


ltea virginica	


Shrub	





Red-Twig Dogwood	



Cornus sericea (stolonifera)  'Arctic Fire'	




Shrub	
 





Southern Arrow­ wood	



Viburnum dentatum	




Shrub




Black Choke Berry	



Aronia melanocarpa	



Shrub





Great Blue Lobelia	




Lobelia siphilitica	




Perennial



Dwarf Pink false
aster	


Boltonia asteroides
'Nana'	



Perennial




White false aster	


Boltonia asteroides 'Snowbank'	



Perennial





Switchgrass	




Panicum virgatum	




Grass

Source:   Pennsylvania Stonnwater BMP Manual (2006)
 
Dry Wells

A dry well, also referred to as a seepage pit is a subsurface storage facility that temporarily stores and infiltrates runoff from the roofs of buildings or other impervious surfaces. A dry well can be either a structural prefabricated chamber (Dry Well #1) or an excavated pit filled with stone fill (Dry Well #2). Dry wells discharge the stored runoff via infiltration into the surrounding or underlying soils. Figure C-6 shows a typical prefabricated dry well and a typical dry well configuration with stone fill. The following elements shall be incorporated into all dry well designs:


•	These facilities should be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the building foundation to avoid foundation seepage problems and are not recommended if their installation would create a risk for basement flooding.
•	Construction of a dry well should be performed after surface soils in all other areas of the site are stabilized to avoid clogging.
•	During construction, compaction of the subgrade soil in the bottom of the dry well should be avoided, and construction should be performed only with light machinery.
•	Depth of a dry well should be between 1.5 feet and 4 feet. Gravel fill should consist of stone of an average of one and one half to three (1.5 - 3.0) inches in diameter with the gravel fill wrapped in a nonwoven geotextile that separates the stone fill from the surrounding soil.
•	At least 1foot of soil needs to be placed over the top of the dry well.
•	Dry wells should be inspected  at least four (4) times annually as well as after
large storm events.
•	Dry wells should have overflow pipes to allow high volumes of runoff to connect to other on-site substantial infiltration areas or pervious areas.
•	Every dry well needs to have at least one monitoring well.
•	Infiltration testing is recommended to ensure that the underlying soil is capable of infiltrating the needed volume of stormwater.

Figure C-6: Typical Dry Well Configuration filled with Stone Fill (DRY WELL #2) (Left) and Structural Prefabricated Chamber (DRY WELL #1) (Right)


 
Source (for pie on left):hllp://www.seamm.sunvsb.edu/pa ges/BMPsForMarin as.ht m
Source (for pie on right): h np://www .copelandconcretcinc.ner/1800652.html
 

Routine Maintenance for BMPs


•	Vegetation along the surface of an infiltration trench should be maintained in good condition, and any bare spots should be revegetated as soon as possible.
•	Vehicles shouldn 't be parked or driven on an infiltration trench, and care should be taken to avoid excessive compaction by mowers.
•	Any debris such as leaves blocking flow from reaching an infiltration trench or bioretention/rain garden should be routinely removed.
•	While vegetation is being established, pruning and weeding may be required for a bioretention/rain garden.
•	Mulch in a bioretention/rain garden needs to be re-spread when erosion is evident. Once every two to three years or after major storms the entire area may require mulch replacement.
•	At least twice a year the landowner needs to inspect the bioretention/rain garden for sediment buildup and vegetative conditions.
•	During periods of extended drought, the bioretention/rain garden requires watering.
•	Trees and shrubs in a bioretention/rain garden need to be inspected at least twice per year by the landowner to evaluate their health.  If they are in poor health, they need to be replaced.
•	Dry wells need to be inspected by the landowner at least four times a year and after significant rainfalls , and debris/trash , sediment, and any other waste material need to be removed and disposed of at suitable disposal/recycling sites and in compliance with local, state, and federal waste regulations .
•	For dry wells, gutters need to be regularly cleaned out, and proper connections must be maintained to facilitate the effectiveness of the dry well.
•	The filter screen for the dry well that intercepts roof runoff must be replaced as necessary .
•	Dry wells that are damaged need to be fixed or replaced within two weeks of being damaged.
 

•	If an intermediate sump box exists in conjunction with a dry well, it must be cleaned out at least once per year.
•	Rain barrels and cisterns need to be cleared of debris routinely at least every three months and after significant storms to allow stormwater from gutters to enter them.
•	Gutters that directly convey rain water to dry wells, rain barrels, and cisterns need to be routinely cleared of trash and debris at least every three months and after significant storms.
•	Rain barrels and cisterns must be kept covered.

•	Rain barrels and cisterns should be routinely emptied so that they are only 1.4 of the way full to allow for storage of additional rainwater.
•	Overflow outlets from rain barrels and cisterns must be kept free and clear of

debris.

•	Rain barrels and cisterns that are damaged need to be fixed or replaced within two weeks of being damaged.

C.4	Example

Simplified Approach Volume Determination:

Joe Homeowner wants to build a 400 square foot two car garage, and a 540 square foot (30' L x 18' W) impervious driveway that is graded so that the stormwater runoff drains to the grassy area along one edge of the driveway. (A duplicate of Table C-1 is provided below in Table C-6, a duplicate of Table C-3 is provided below in Table C-7 and outlines the steps of this example) a duplicate of Figure C-1 (Figure C-7) and a duplicate of Table C-4 are provided in Table C-8.

STEP 1 - Determine the total area of all proposed impervious surfaces to drain to each
BMP:







Total Proposed Surface
 
Note:	If the driveway used pervious pavement (i.e., paving blocks) , then the total impervious area would only be 400 square feet, and no stormwater management practices would need to control runoff from the driveway.

Select a BMP or combination of BMPs from Section C.3 to be used to satisfy the volume requirement. Determine the length, width, depth and other requirements for the BMPs in Section C.3. A BMP needs to be placed to catch runoff from the back of the garage, and a BMP needs to be placed to capture runoff from the front of the garage and the driveway. Figure C-7 shows the direction the runoff flows and the locations where the BMPs are to be placed.

Joe Homeowner would like to use a rain barrel (BMP #1) to capture the runoff from the rear of the garage and an infiltration trench (BMP #2) to capture runoff from the front of the garage and the driveway.

STEP 2 and 3 for Bl\1P #1 (Rain Barrel/Cistern)

STEP 2 - Select the proposed impervious area value for BMP #1, the rain barrel or cistern, in Column 1 that is closest to, but not less than 200 in Table C-6:

The value in Column 1 that is closest to but is not less than 200 is 200.

STEP 3 - Determine the volume that BMP #1 must be to satisfy the volume requirements using Columns 2 and 3 in Table C-6:

The volume in gallons of the rain barrel/cistern to be used as BMP #1, assuming the rain barrel/cistern is 25% full, is determined by finding the row in Column 3 that corresponds to the impervious area value determined in Step 1. Therefore, the volume of BMP #1, the rain barrel/cistern must be 2: 166 gallons . A combination of rain barrels could be used in succession as shown in Figure C-2, or a cistern could be used.
 
Table C-6: E•amplc - Calculating Stor•K• Volume for Rain Durrcl/CiJ<tern '

 
C<1lumn I	Co1Wllll 2	--
 

Column 3
 
Pmfl""'d    ln1pcniou•Arca	Volume of Rain Dari·clfC:i.tcm'	Volume of R iu H.arri!l/Cistcrn
("'luai·cfeel)	(cubic feel)	(allon•I

I	Vkn..:r	\IRR   11/
Sum of all Prnnn,;cd Tmpcrviou• Areas	(I*( l / 12}*0/0.75=Vnnd	Vnmr • 7.4R-Vnue:11
50	6	42
JJlQ	II	- _12_
 
I 21 ""200 J
 
--	I31(. 166 J 	
 
300	33	24\1
400	44	332
500	56	416
600	67	499
700	78	58:!
800	89	665
900	100	74X
1000	I l l	831
1 100	122	914
1200	1:13	997
1:l!M)	144	1,08 1
l •l!Xl	156	1,164
1500	167	1.247
1600	178	U30
1700	189	1 ,4 13
1800	WO	1,4%
l<XXJ	21 1	1579
2000	222	1662
2100	233	1745
2200	244	1 829
2300	:!56	1912
2400	2h7	199:'
25110	278	2.078
2600	289	2 161
2700	3!Xl	2244
 
2800	--
 
3 11	2327
 
2900	)'..!'.!	24!0
3000	333	2494
3100	344	2577
3200	356	2.660
3300	367	2743
3400	378	2826
350()	389	2909
3600	400	2992
3700	411	3075
3800	422	3158
3900	433	.::!-r:!
41M10	44-1	3325
41<Xl	456	3408
4200	467	3491
4300	478	3574
4400	489	3657
4500	50()	'.1740
46!M)	S 11	3,823
47<Xl	522	3906
48<Xl	533	3990
49()0	544	4073
4999	555	4.155
1111c t}'rm::,il \'ulumc or a. rnm hand 1s hctwccn :>O  OO j;illlon.1:,        m c 1h;m I ram ham:l 111.\) he
rn..'\.'.Jcd. lnl"!:.cr \'Olumt may r1.-quin: :i cisti:rn.
:,,,,. mnc th:n thc rJin h;mclfcii;lCm 1i- 25% foll



'27
 
I

l	STEPS 2 and 3 for BMP #2 (Infiltration Trench)

STEP 2 - Select the proposed impervious area value for BMP #2, the infiltration trench, using Column 1 in Table C-7:

Find the row in Column 1that is closest to but not less than 740 (200 from the front of the garage+ 540 from the driveway).  Therefore, the value selected is 800.

STEP 3 - Utilizing the value from Column 1 determined above, and the surface area that the proposed BMP will occupy, identify the proposed depth and corresponding surface area needed using Column 2 in Table C-7:

Joe Homeowner would like to place the infiltration trench along the edge of the driveway that the runoff drains to, so it would have a length of 20 feet. The smallest width that can be used, as stated in the infiltration trench requirements in Section C.3, is 3 feet. Therefore, the area of the infiltration trench is:

20 * 3 = 60 square feet

To find the minimum depth of the trench, move toward the right side of the table from 800 square feet in Column 1to Column 2, and find the column with a value of as close to but not more than 60 square feet, which is 56 square feet. Then obtain the minimum depth of the facility by reading the depth from the column heading at the top of the table. Therefore, the depth of the trench would need to be 3.0 feet.

Selected BMPs: Rain barrel(s) 166 gallons and a 20' L x 3' W x 3.0' D infiltration trench

STEP 4 -Make a sketch of the site plan as shown in Figure C-7, and fill in the small projects worksheet found as shown in Table C-8.



28
 


Column I


Tolal 1'1·01><u;ed hupo1-.'ious
A1-ea (<quarc feet)
 
T•blc C-7: E•amplc -Cakul aling Slorai:e Volume Sua·face Arca •11d Depth for lnl'lltralion Trench

Column 2	--
Surface A rca uf lnOltralion Trmch or Or\' Well #?
Accqn;ibh: IJqxhii fur Each HMJ> :trc i11tlil':11cJ hy lhe;rruw below
(ouuare fccO
 
A rca f<C'q11ircd fora/JM   P wi1ila Dc111h(D) of 1.5'
 
A rell  Ncquircd
forf/BMI'
H'il/i  (J D<'J>l/ifDluf 2.IJ'
 
A 1w1Rc.•quin•cl
,(ora/JMP wiJlt o Dqnh( D )  oj 2.5'
 
An:a Rt:quir<•tl fu r a/JM P wi1lra D<"t!lh(D)  f 3.0'
 
/\rC.alle1j1iir( •d foro   llMP wit/ta Dcprh(IJ)  of 3.5"
 
A rl'a R1•quired
fora BMP
wil/ 1 a Deplli(D J of 4.0'
 
Art'll Required
forn/IMI'
with a DqJ1l1(1J) f 4.5'
 
Area  Required Jura BM P with a Deprh(D)of
5.o·
 
+----;::=====t===  I   htliltralioR Tn-m.•11  C !.0'-5J)1
I	Dry \\'cll #?  ,.5'·4.0')	1 1         ---------
 

t---------+I
 


 
Sum of all Proposedhppcrvious
J\,rCI).<
 

A = Volumc/D,   •here Vol ume' = ((1/12)•1)/0.4
 
100
 
14	10	8	7	6	5	4
 
200
 
28	2 1	17	14	12	10
 
300
 
42	31	25	2 1
 
18	16	14
24	2 1	19	17
30	26	23	2 1
36	31	28	25
 
42	36	32	29
48	42	37	33
54	47	42	38
 
1000	139	104	83	69	60
1100	153	1 15	92	76	65
1200	167	125	100	83	71
1300	181	135	108	<JO 	77
1400	194	146	117	97	83
1500	208	156	125	1 04
1600	'.!22	167	133	11 1	95
1700	236	177	142	1 18	IOI
IROO	250	I gg	150	125 	107
l<JOO	264	1%	15H	132 	113
2000	:!7X	20fi	107	139 	119
 
52	46	42
57	5 1	46
63	56	50
68	60	54
73	65	58
69	63
83	67
89	79	7 1
94	83	75
99	79
10-l
 
21CK)	'.!92	219	175 	146
 
125
 
109	97	88
 
2200	306	229	183	153	131
2JCK)	319	240	192	160	117
2400	3J3	250	2CKl	167	143
2500	347	260	208	174	149
2600	361	27 1	2 17	181	1 55
2700	375	281	225	1 88	161
2800	389	292	233	194	167
2900	403	302	242	20 I 	173
3CXIO	417	313	250	'.!08 	179
3 100	43 1	3'.!J	258	2 15 	185
3200	4-M	333	267	22 	190
:non	458	344	275	229 	196
34<Kl	472	354	283 	202
3500	486	365	292	243	208
](i()()	5()()	375	300	250 	214
3700	514	385	308	'.!57	220
JRfiO	52H	396	317	26J
 
115	102
l '.!O	106
125	11 1
130	116
l'.\5	120
141	l'.!S
1-16	l '.10
15 1	134
156	139
161	144
167	148
172	153
177	157
IH'.!	1 62
188	1 67
193	17 1
1 98
 

96
100
104
108
113
117
12 1
125
129
133
138
142
146
150
154
158
 
3900	542	406	:\25	27 1
 
203	181	163
 
4000	556	417	333	27!i	208	IRS	167
4 100	569	427	342	285	'.!44	'.!14	1 90	171
4200	583	438	350	292	250	2 19	19-1	175
4300	597	448	358	299	256	199	179
4400	611	458	367	306	:?62	:!29	183
 
4500	625
 
469	375	3 13	268	234	208	188
 
4(>00	63'1	-179	383	31 9	274	240	21J	192
 
47lK l 	653
 
490	392	326	280	245	21	1%
 
4800	667	500	333	'.!86	250	22	200
4900	681	510	408	292	227	204
 
4999	694	521	417	347	298	'.!60
1A"sumc a vuitl r.iLio ur 40%

29
 
231
 
208
 



Figure C-7: Typical Dry Well Configuration filled with Stone Fill (Left) and Structural Prefabricated Chamber (Right)

Mill Cl'eek






BMPt"l Cistern (166Gallons)


 





=-::  1 .
 





200sf<re-)
 
Rain Gutter



.,\'l-,;:.
 
+--------------
200ff(front)
 


Potable Watcr'\IVcll
 



 




I	Rain  Gl.ltter 	
.J
Pervious Area
i
 














PineStreet
 
1
"D -0
... .:!::!
D -V
...
 
BMP#2 Infiltration  Trench
 	(20'La 3'VI H 3' O) 	


Pe:rvio1is A.-ea



Direction of nDff




!'lame Joe Hcm o"'Jner
Addr5s: l.2 3 Pine Stre:<t
A1ytown,  PA t908 7
Dillte; August 31, 2008
 




30
 
Table C.8:Examp!e -SmaIIPro.tects Worksheet WI'th ResuIts

 
APPENDIXD MANAGEMENT DISTRICTS MAP
 
STONYCREEK RIVER - CAMBRIA AND SOMERSET COUNTIES ACT 167 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN



