8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 1/620
Township of Uwchlan, PA
Monday, August 17, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class Township Code, the codification
of a complete body of legislation for the Township of Uwchlan, County of Chester, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General
Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 265, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Uwchlan, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Uwchlan," hereinafter referred to as
the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of ordinances and
resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of
such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution. All such
provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan, and it is the intention of said Board of
Supervisors that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as
it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed
provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this
Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township of
Uwchlan and in force on the date of the adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 2/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal;
provided, however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from repeal of
ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously
repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 5-15-2009.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the
Township prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision of the Township or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Township.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the
Township or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Township or other
instruments or evidence of the Township's indebtedness.
Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax rate.
Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special taxes, assessments or
charges.
Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or acquiring property
by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise of eminent domain.
Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or reconstruction or opening of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place
or property or designating various streets as public highways.
Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose districts and designating the
boundaries thereof; providing for a system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers
or water supply lines.
Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the
Township or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for municipal employees.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 3/620
R.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
A.
Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit
or service obtained from the Township.
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A
and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and
shall, upon being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation;
new provisions.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions
of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical
and style changes were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention
of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and revisions described above,
changes and revisions of a substantive nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and
made a part hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included in the Code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the
Board of Supervisors, and it is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had previously formally amended to
read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective
date of the Code specified in § 1-15.[1]
Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were added,
amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes
indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the following history:
"Amended (added, deleted) 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04." Schedule A, which contains a
complete description of all changes, is on file in the Township offices.
Nomenclature. "Philadelphia Suburban Water Company" or "PSWA" is changed to "Aqua
Pennsylvania" throughout the Code.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Where the provisions of the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation impose greater restrictions or
requirements, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other divisions in the Code or in
supplements made to the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to
the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 4/620
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or referring to the statutes or
to other parts of the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the
Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the Ordinance Book in the
office of the Township Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon
adoption, such copy or copies shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and
such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary, available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be
deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in
the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and directed by him or her to
keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the
office of the Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all legislation
adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective date of this codification which the
Board of Supervisors shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements to said
Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner required a notice
of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public and the filing of an attested copy
of this ordinance with the county, as required by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, or to alter or
tamper with the Code or any part or portion thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the
law of the Township to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a violation of
this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by
the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the
determination of the violation by the District Justice and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 5/620
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable, and if any clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation and application
to the clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance
and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after October 27,
2009.
Chapter 7. Ambulance Services
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
General References
Fire police — See Ch. 20.
Mutual aid for emergency services — See Ch. 27.
Emergency communications services — See Ch. 119.
Article I. Nonemergency Response Charges
[Adopted 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-09]
§ 7-1. Policy; purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township finds that the continuing use of the personnel and
equipment of the Uwchlan Ambulance Corps and other ambulance services for nonemergency
purposes consumes excessive levels of ambulance service which deprives others requiring emergency
services from receiving prompt responses from said services, thereby potentially endangering the life
and safety of individuals served by emergency ambulance services in the Township. Every location
that consumes emergency ambulance service in nonemergency situations places an unfairly
disproportionate burden for the funding of the ambulance services on taxpayers of Uwchlan Township
and other funding sources of the ambulance services. The following provisions and the fee imposed
hereby are authorized in order to provide revenue to help defray the costs of ambulance services
covered by the fees. The fee imposed hereby is not a penalty or fine.
§ 7-2. Imposition of response fee.
There is hereby imposed a response fee upon every unit of real property within the service territory of
the Uwchlan Ambulance Corps for the consumption of ambulances and ambulance services in
nonemergency circumstances.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 6/620
[1]
A.
B.
§ 7-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
INCIDENT OF SERVICE
Each time one or more ambulance personnel, vehicles and equipment commences and completes
a response to an identifiable unit of real property as recorded by the Chester County Department
of Emergency Services dispatch system and which sets forth the time the personnel were present
upon the property.
NONEMERGENCY
An incident of service not involving a life-threatening medical condition or serious bodily injury.
Examples of nonemergencies include cause to transport individuals to hospitals for treatment and
sicknesses and illnesses which are non-life-threatening.
SERVICE TERRITORY
The geographic area served by the Uwchlan Ambulance Corps as designated from time to time by
the Chester County Department of Emergency Services.
UNIT OF REAL PROPERTY
A single residential dwelling, business offices, retail establishments, group homes, nursing homes,
convalescence homes, assisted-living facilities, continuing-care facilities and all other residential,
commercial and industrial properties located within the service territory.
§ 7-4. Fee amount.
The response fee imposed herein shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors for each nonemergency incident of service. The amount of the response fee represents a
portion of the cost of equipment, personnel and overhead for one incident of service.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 7-5. Reports; invoices.
The Uwchlan Ambulance Corps shall identify each nonemergency incident of service and report the
identity of the unit of real property and the time of the response to the Chief of the Corps. The
president or his designee shall mail an invoice to the owner of the unit of real property as appears in
the most recent tax assessment records. Each invoice shall be paid in full within 30 days of its date.
§ 7-6. Action upon failure to pay; use of amounts collected for
violations.
If such invoice is not paid in full within 30 days, the Uwchlan Ambulance Corps may commence
appropriate legal action to collect amounts owed.
All amounts collected for violation of this article shall be paid to the Uwchlan Ambulance Corps to
help defray the costs of providing ambulance services.
Chapter 9. Attorney Fees, Debt Collection, and Refunds
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 6-13-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-02. Amendments noted where applicable.]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 7/620
A.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 126.
Sewer rates and charges — See Ch. 200, Art. I.
Taxation — See Ch. 230.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 9-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited to as the "Attorney Fee, Debt Collection, and Refund
Ordinance."
§ 9-2. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of the provisions hereof shall be held to be
unconstitutional, invalid or illegal by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the
Board of Supervisors that this chapter would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provisions had not been included herein.
§ 9-3. Authority to implement provisions.
The proper officials of the Township are hereby authorized and empowered to take such additional
action as they may deem necessary or appropriate to implement this chapter.
§ 9-4. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective five days from the date of enactment.
Article II. Debt Collection
§ 9-5. Delinquent money collected; penalties; interest and costs.
All fees, rents, charges, penalties, fines or any other money owed to the Township under this Code or
Township resolution and not paid on or before the 30th day after the billing/notice date of the fee, rent,
charge, penalty, fine or any other money owed shall be deemed to be delinquent and subject to a
penalty of 5%. It shall be the duty of the Township to proceed to collect such delinquent fees, charges,
penalties, fines and any other money owed together with costs accrued thereon, including attorney
fees, by action at law and/or by filing a lien or liens for the same in the office of the Prothonotary of the
Court of Common Pleas of Chester County, Pennsylvania, and such liens, together with costs, and
interest accrued thereon, including attorney fees, shall be filed and collected in accordance with the
law. Interest in the amount of 10% per annum shall begin to accrue on the date of the filing of a lien.
§ 9-6. Collection procedures; appeals.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance with the Municipal
Claims Law.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 8/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in connection with the collection
of an account, the Township shall mail or cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice of such intention to the taxpayer or other entity liable for the account (the
"account debtor").
If, within 30 days after mailing the notice in accordance with Subsection A, the certified mail to
any account debtor is refused or unclaimed or the return receipt is not received, then at least
10 days prior to the assessing or imposing of such attorney fees, the Township shall mail or
cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second notice to such account debtor.
All notices required by this chapter shall be mailed to the account debtor's last known post
office address as recorded in the records or other information of the Township, and verified
from the County Office of Assessment and Revision of Taxes.
Each notice as described above shall include the following:
The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due and the amount owed, including
penalty and interest.
A statement of the Township's intent to impose or assess attorney fees within 30 days
after the mailing of the first notice, or within 10 days after the mailing of the second
notice.
The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney fees may be avoided by
payment of the account.
The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone number of the Township
official designated as responsible for collection matters.
Appeals.
A challenge to an invoice/bill/notice for any fee, rent, charge, penalty, fine or any other money
owed to the Township under this Code or Township resolution shall be filed with the Township
in accordance with this section set forth below no later than 30 days from the mailing date of
said invoice/bill/notice. Notice of an appeal shall be delivered to the Township by United
States Mail, postage prepaid, or by acceptance of service by an authorized representative at
the Township building. Each appeal shall include the following:
The name and address of the individual or entity filing the notice of appeal.
The reason for the appeal, including a copy of the invoice/bill/notice.
A complete description of any circumstances believed to be relevant to the Township's
determination.
The Township shall, no later than 60 days from receipt of the notice of appeal, make a
determination on the appeal or issue a request for further information or documentation in
support of the appeal. If the Township requests further information or documentation, the
Township shall, no later than 60 days from receipt of the requested information or
documentation, make a determination on the appeal.
Any individual or entity aggrieved by a final determination by the Township who has a direct
interest in such determination shall have the right to appeal to the Chester County Court of
Common Pleas in accordance with the Local Agency Appeal Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
Article III. Attorney Fees
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 9/620
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
§ 9-7. Schedule of fees.
The Township hereby approves the following schedule of attorney fees for services in connection
with the collection of delinquent unpaid accounts, which schedule is hereby declared to be fair and
reasonable compensation for the services set forth below, all in accordance with the principles set
forth in Section 3(a.1) of the Municipal Claims Law as added by Act No. 1 of 1996:
Legal Services Fee for Services
Verification of owner(s) and mailing address for
delinquency letter
$50
File lien and mailing demand letter $235
File amended lien and mailing demand letter $235
Revive lien $235
Prepare writ of scire facias $250
Obtain reissued writ $235
Prepare and mail letter under Pa. R.C.P § 237.1 $75
Prepare motion for alternate service $235
Prepare motion for summary judgment and related
judgment
$250
Prepare and mail notice to all holders of interests
in the real property
$285
Prepare writ of execution $285
Attendance at sale, review schedule of distribution
and resolve distribution issues
$375
Charge for check which does not clear $35
Services not covered above Hourly amount equal to solicitor's regular
charges to the Township
There shall be added to the above amounts the reasonable out-of-pocket expenses of counsel in
connection with each of these services, which may include, but not be limited to, court filing fees
as set forth by the Chester County Prothonotary, fees required by the Chester County Sheriff's
office, and title search fees. Counsel's out-of-pocket expense shall be itemized in the applicable
counsel bills, which shall be deemed to be part of the fees.
The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to the Township's claim in each
account.
Article IV. Refunds
§ 9-8. Refund entitlement; interest.
A person who overpaid any license fee, penalties, fines or any other moneys to the Township,
except any tax of any sort, shall be entitled to a refund of the overpayment by filing a refund
request with the Township. A person shall only be entitled to a refund of the overpayment for those
amounts paid within the last year from the date of filing the request.
A person shall not be entitled to interest on the amount of the refund.
§ 9-9. Regulations for refunds and appeals.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 10/620
[1]
[1]
The Board of Supervisors may adopt by resolution, regulations for the processing of appeals and
refund claims for overpaid accounts.
Chapter 12. Authorities
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
General References
Intermunicipal agreements — See Ch. 27.
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
Article I. Downingtown Area Regional Authority
[Adopted 6-17-1985 by Ord. No. 85-06]
§ 12-1. Intent to organize.
The Board of Township Supervisors of this Township hereby signifies its intention to organize an
Authority, jointly with the Townships of Caln, West Whiteland, and East Caln and the Borough of
Downingtown, under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, as amended),[1] to be named the "Downingtown Area Regional Authority."
Editor's Note: For current provisions, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 12-2. Public hearing.
In preparation for the passage of this article, a public hearing was held on June 17, 1985, as required
by law, for discussion of the intention of the Borough of Downingtown and the Townships of East Caln,
Uwchlan, West Whiteland and Caln to create said Authority.
§ 12-3. Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuance of said intention, the Articles of Incorporation of said Authority are hereby approved and
adopted in the following form.[1]
Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the Township offices.
§ 12-4. Appointment of member; term.
The member of the Board of said Authority who is named in the aforesaid Articles of Incorporation as
being appointed by this Township is hereby specifically appointed as a member of said Board for the
term set after his name, commencing on the date of appointment and computed from the first Monday
of January 1986.
§ 12-5. Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman of the Board of Township Supervisors of this Township is hereby authorized and
directed to execute said Articles of Incorporation on behalf of said Township, with such changes therein
as the signer may approve, and the Secretary or Assistant Secretary is hereby authorized and directed
to affix thereto and attest the Seal of said Township. Said officers are further authorized and directed to
cause a notice of intention to file said Articles of Incorporation to be published as required by law and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 11/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
to file said Articles of Incorporation (when they have been executed also by the officers of the
Townships of Caln, East Caln and West Whiteland and the Borough of Downingtown), together with a
certified copy of this article and required proofs of publication, with the Secretary of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, and to take all such action as they may deem necessary or appropriate to establish
said Authority and carry out the intention of this article.
§ 12-6. Initial project.
The initial project to be undertaken by said Authority is as follows: to provide wastewater treatment
facilities, transmission and distribution facilities and systems by acquiring, holding, improving,
maintaining and operating such facilities and/or contracting with others for such facilities; and with
respect thereto, said Authority shall have all powers granted by the Act.
Chapter 17. Environmental Advisory Council
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 4-9-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 17-1. Creation.
An advisory council to be known as the "Uwchlan Township Environmental Advisory Council" is hereby
created and shall continue to function until this chapter is revoked.
§ 17-2. Composition.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall be composed of at least three, and no more than seven,
members. Members of the Uwchlan Township Environmental Advisory Council shall be residents of the
Township.
§ 17-3. Members.
Environmental Advisory Council members shall be appointed in accordance with the following
procedures:
All Council members shall be appointed by the Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors.
Council members' terms of office shall expire at the reorganization meeting of the Board of
Supervisors following the last year of their term of office.
Duly appointed Council members shall serve a term of three years, except that initial appointment
shall be so staggered that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the membership shall expire each
year.
Whenever possible, one member shall also be a member of the Uwchlan Township Planning
Commission.
§ 17-4. Compensation.
Council members shall receive no compensation for their services but may be reimbursed for the
expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 12/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
§ 17-5. Coordination of activities.
The Environmental Advisory Council is to be advisory to and shall coordinate its activities with the
elected officials, Planning Commission, Historical Commission, Parks and Recreation Committee, and
such other local governmental agencies as the Board of Supervisors may from time to time designate.
§ 17-6. Bylaws.
The Council may adopt bylaws with the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 17-7. Powers.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall have the power to:
Make recommendations as to matters concerning protection, conservation, management,
promotion, and the use of natural resources, including air, land and water resources, located
within its territorial limits.
Comment on environmental issues associated with subdivision and land development applications
and submissions, and proposed ordinance amendments, as required by the Board of Supervisors.
Identify environmental issues and problems and recommend plans and programs for the
promotion and conservation of the natural resources and for the protection and improvement of
the quality of the environment within Uwchlan Township, consistent with the Township
Comprehensive Plan.
Make recommendations as to the possible environmental issues regarding the use of open land
areas within Uwchlan Township.
Work with schools and local environmental groups to enhance and promote community
environmental education programs.
Develop an environmental resources inventory, including flood-prone areas, swamps and other
unique natural areas, for the purpose of obtaining information on the proper use, protection and
management of those areas.
Work with existing Township watershed associations and other interested parties in preparing a
Township-wide watershed management plan.
Develop environmental education awareness programs for Township residents.
Investigate and make recommendations regarding grants available to the Township related to
environmental issues and education.
Undertake such other environmental tasks as required by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 17-8. Meetings.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall meet regularly on an every-other-month basis. The
Environmental Advisory Council shall initially meet within 30 days following the appointment of its
members by the Township, at which time it shall organize and elect from its own membership a Chair
and a Secretary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. A majority of the membership of the
Council then in office shall constitute a quorum.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 13/620
§ 17-9. Records and annual report.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall make
an annual report which shall be printed in the Annual Township Report or otherwise made known and
available. Minutes of each meeting shall be forwarded to the Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 17-10. Expenses.
The Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, appropriate funds for those
expenses incurred by the Environmental Advisory Council.
Chapter 20. Fire Police
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 4-12-1982 by Ord. No.
82-01. Amendments noted where applicable.]
General References
Ambulance services — See Ch. 7.
Intermunicipal agreements — See Ch. 27.
Alarm systems — see Ch. 82.
Emergency communications systems — See Ch. 119.
§ 20-1. Nomination and confirmation,
The Lionville Fire Company may nominate any of its members as special fire police. All special fire
police so nominated shall, before they enter upon their duties as such, be confirmed by the
Supervisors of Uwchlan Township at their annual reorganization meeting or at such time throughout
the year as may be necessary to add or delete names. Before assuming their duties, these members
so nominated shall meet with the Chief of Police or his designated representative to have their duties
properly explained.
§ 20-2. Meetings; officers.
Such nominated members of the Fire Company shall meet at least annually and elect officers
consisting of at least President, Vice President and Secretary. These officers, or their authorized
representative if no officer is present, shall at all times be in charge of the remainder of the members
when at Township-sanctioned activities or at other occurrences stated in §§ 20-3 and 20-4 of this
chapter.
§ 20-3. Powers and duties.
[Amended 3-10-1986 by Ord. No. 86-02]
When so confirmed by the Township and displaying a badge of authority, the special fire police shall
have full power to regulate traffic and keep crowds under control at or in the vicinity of any fire at which
the Lionville Fire Company is in attendance and to exercise such other police powers as are necessary
in order to facilitate and prevent interference with the work of firemen in extinguishing fires. These
powers shall also be in effect when the special fire police services are needed by the Uwchlan
Ambulance Corps or the Uwchlan Township Police Department.
§ 20-4. Additional powers.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 14/620
[1]
[Amended 3-10-1986 by Ord. No. 86-02]
In addition to the circumstances outlined in § 20-3 above, the special fire police shall have such police
powers as necessary to perform their duties when functioning as such at parades, vehicular accidents,
floods, other emergencies, or other functions at the request and approval of the Board of Supervisors
and when so functioning shall be deemed to be performing their duties and subject to the direction of
police authority until the situation no longer exists. Under no circumstances shall this chapter be
construed to grant special fire police the right to exercise the powers of arrest nor carry, use or
possess any weapon while serving in their official capacity, regardless of licensing or other regulation.
§ 20-5. Requests for services.
When receiving requests for their services for other than emergency situations, the special fire police
shall notify the Board of Supervisors of such for the Board's approval. The Board of Supervisors may
waive this responsibility and place it in the hands of the Chief of Police or the Township Manager for
approval of the requests.
§ 20-6. Display of authority; control at scene.
All special fire police, when on duty, shall display a badge of authority, wear protective colored clothing,
and shall be subject to the control of the Fire Chief or, in his absence, the highest ranking fire official at
the scene for fire-related activities; and for any other activities, the fire police shall be subject to the
control of the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the highest ranking police officer on duty at the time of
the activity at which the special fire police are functioning.
§ 20-7. Workers' compensation and liability coverage.
As provided for under the Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation Act,[1] the special fire police shall be
covered by the Township's workers' compensation policy and shall be entitled to the benefits thereof in
the case of injuries received while actually engaged in their duties or while going directly to or returning
directly from their place of duty to their residence or fire house. While performing their duties, the
special fire police shall also be covered by the Township's liability policy. For the purposes of this
section, it is expressly understood that the special fire police shall receive Township coverage for only
the above-stated activities listed in §§ 20-3 and 20-4. Coverage will also be provided for those
instances where the special fire police are called to serve under a mutual aid agreement with a
neighboring municipality. This instance will only apply after a request for such service is made by a
responsible official of the community in question and a mutual aid pact is in effect.
Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 101 et seq.
Chapter 27. Intermunicipal Agreements
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
General References
Authorities — See Ch. 12.
Article I. Regional Sewer Treatment Plant Agreement
[Adopted 10-14-1985 by Ord. No. 85-13]
§ 27-1. Intent.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 15/620
[1]
[1]
[1]
The Board of Supervisors hereby signifies its intention to enter into an intermunicipal agreement for the
purposes of expanding and then operating and maintaining the regional sanitary sewer treatment plant,
a copy of said agreement being attached hereto.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-2. Execution of agreement.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of this Township is hereby authorized and directed to
execute said agreement on behalf of said Township, with such changes therein as the signer may
approve, and the Secretary is hereby authorized and directed to affix thereto and attest the Seal of
said Township.
Article II. Intermunicipalities Agreement
[Adopted 2-10-1986 by Ord. No. 86-01]
§ 27-3. Approval of agreement.
The intermunicipalities agreement in the form presented to this meeting is hereby approved.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-4. Execution of agreement.
The execution and delivery of the same by the officers of the Borough/Township/Authority is hereby
ratified.
Article III. Water Service Area Agreement
[Adopted 2-26-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-06]
§ 27-5. Approval and execution of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township hereby adopts and approves the water service area
agreement between the Township, West Whiteland Township and Uwchlan Township Municipal
Authority, which is incorporated herein by reference, and further authorizes its Chairman, C. Ward
Braceland, to execute that agreement on behalf of the Township with an attestation by the Township's
Manager, Douglass Hanley.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-6. Term; objectives.
For purposes of compliance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
the following information is offered: The initial term of the agreement is 50 years; and the objective and
purpose of the agreement is to delineate areas of West Whiteland Township which will be served with
retail public water by the Uwchlan Township Municipal Authority and/or Uwchlan Township and those
areas of West Whiteland Township which will be served with retail public water by West Whiteland
Township to the exclusion of the Uwchlan Township Municipal Authority and/or Uwchlan Township so
as to arrive at a most cost-efficient and effective distribution of retail public water to the area. The
agreement need not be financed, and no organizational structure is created for implementation of the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 16/620
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
agreement. The agreement does not contemplate the acquisition of property, nor is an entity created
for the purposes of administration of the agreement.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article IV. Downingtown Area Recreational Consortium
[Adopted 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14]
§ 27-7. Agreement; terms and conditions.
The Board of Supervisors hereby authorizes an agreement among some or all of the following political
subdivisions: the Borough of Downingtown, Downingtown Area School District, East Brandywine
Township, East Caln Township, Upper Uwchlan Township, Uwchlan Township, Wallace Township, West
Bradford Township and West Pikeland Township to form a consortium to be known as the
“Downingtown Area Recreational Consortium” (hereinafter the "Consortium"), on the following terms
and conditions:[1]
The agreement states as its purpose to foster a cooperative effort in policies, plans and operations
for recreation programs for the citizens of the member municipalities; provides for eligibility,
representation, withdrawal and participation of the member municipalities; establishes operating
policies; provides for financing Consortium projects; and provides for the acquisition and
disposition of Consortium property.
The term of the agreement is perpetual, subject to the right of individual municipalities to withdraw
in accordance with the agreement.
The agreement is for the purpose and objective of providing recreational activities to the residents
of the constituent municipalities.
The agreement delegates authority to the Consortium Board of Directors and Operating
Committee to prepare annual budgets, to propose and recommend Consortium programs and to
conduct the general business of the Consortium as more fully set forth in the agreement.
The agreement provides that the activities of the Consortium shall be funded by charging fees to
the program participants. Each municipality is responsible for a proportionate share of the cost of
administration of the Consortium according to a formula attached as Exhibit A to the agreement.
The Consortium is authorized to acquire and provide office space, furnishings, supplies and
equipment and other personal property which shall be managed by the Consortium Operating
Committee. The Consortium is authorized to contract with member municipalities to provide
facilities on real property. If it is deemed necessary by the Consortium to dispose of any property
valued at $500 or more, it must be offered to the general public at bid or auction. The proceeds of
any such sale are to be distributed to each participating municipality according to their individual
percentage of ownership in the property sold.
The Consortium is authorized to hire and pay the salary and benefits of an Executive Director and
such other employees as the Consortium deems appropriate.
Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-8. Execution of documents.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors is authorized to sign any and all documents necessary to
enter into the Consortium agreement consistent with the terms of this article.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 17/620
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 27-9. Ratification of prior actions.
Any and all actions taken prior to the date of this article by the Board of Supervisors, the Township
Manager or other employees of the Township in order to effectuate and enter into the Consortium
agreement are hereby ratified.
Article V. Intermunicipal Police Cooperation and Municipal
Drug Task Force Agreements
[Adopted 8-9-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-08]
§ 27-10. Intermunicipal police cooperation agreement; terms and
conditions.
In accordance with the provisions of the ICA, Uwchlan Township shall enter into an
intergovernmental police cooperation agreement ("IPCA") with other municipalities in Chester
County, Pennsylvania, under the terms of which police officers (including both full-time and parttime
officers) of each signatory municipality will be granted authority to officially act as police
officers of other signatory municipalities (subject to the terms of the IPCA) when performing duties
in other signatory municipalities, and also under which procedures for the Police Department of
each signatory municipality to render aid and assistance to one another will be established.
The IPCA to be signed by Uwchlan Township and other municipalities shall conform substantially
to the draft of the IPCA currently on file in the offices of the Township.
After execution by the Township and at least one other signatory municipality, either the original or
a duplicate copy of the executed IPCA shall be kept on file at all times in the offices of Uwchlan
Township; as additional municipalities sign the IPCA or withdraw from the IPCA, the original IPCA
(or duplicate thereof) to be kept on file at all times in the Township offices shall accurately reflect
all the then-current parties signatory to the IPCA.
§ 27-11. Duration of IPCA.
The duration of the IPCA, and the Township's participation therein, shall be indefinite, subject to
the provisions of Subsection B hereof.
Withdrawal from the IPCA by Uwchlan Township shall be effected by the Township giving seven
days' written notice to all then-participating signatory municipalities to the IPCA.
§ 27-12. Purposes and objectives of IPCA.
The purposes and objectives of the IPCA include but are not limited to:
Improving law enforcement in Chester County, Pennsylvania, especially in Uwchlan Township and
other signatory municipalities of the IPCA, by granting police officers authority to exercise official
duties in signatory municipalities, thereby alleviating problems of arrests being determined
improper or unlawful because of jurisdictional or municipal boundary issues;
Enhancing the coordination of drug investigations in Chester County, Pennsylvania; and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 18/620
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
Providing mutual police aid across jurisdictional lines to enable police to more-effectively enforce
the provisions of narcotic and controlled substance statutes, thereby preserving the safety and
welfare of persons in Uwchlan Township and in the other signatory municipalities.
§ 27-13. Manner and extent of financing of IPCA.
Each signatory municipality shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by reason of actions taken
by its police pursuant to the IPCA, no other financing being necessary or required to effectuate its
purpose.
§ 27-14. Organizational structure of IPCA.
No additional organizational structure is necessary to implement the provisions of the IPCA, nor will
any property, real or personal, be acquired, managed or disposed of in order to effectuate the
purposes contained in the IPCA.
§ 27-15. Municipal Drug Task Force agreement; terms and
conditions.
In accordance with the provisions of the ICA and the provisions of the MPJA, Uwchlan Township
shall also enter into a Municipal Drug Task Force agreement ("MDTFA") with the Office of the
Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania ("OAG"), the Chester County District
Attorney, and other municipalities in Chester County, Pennsylvania, by and through which these
entities shall coordinate narcotics investigations, enforce narcotics and other controlled substance
statutes, and coordinate prosecutorial activities in order to interdict illegal narcotic and controlled
substance activities in Chester County, Pennsylvania.
Uwchlan Township shall utilize the services of both full-time and part-time officers of its Police
Department under the conditions contained in the MDTFA and in compliance with the MPJA.
The MDTFA to be signed by Uwchlan Township, the OAG, the Chester County District Attorney
and other municipalities shall conform substantially to the draft of the MDTFA currently on file in
the offices of the Township.
After execution by the Township, the OAG, the Chester County District Attorney and at least one
other municipality, either the original or a duplicate copy of the executed MDTFA shall be kept on
file at all times in the offices of the Township; as additional municipalities sign the MDTFA, or
withdraw from the MDTFA, the original of the MDTFA (or duplicate thereof) to be kept on file at all
times in the Township offices shall accurately reflect all the then-current parties signatory to the
MDTFA.
Pursuant to the MDTFA, Uwchlan Township shall establish appropriate procedures to comply with
all relevant provisions of the MDTFA and such regulations and directives as may be issued from
time to time by the OAG.
§ 27-16. Duration of MDTFA.
The duration of the MDTFA, and the Township's participation therein, shall be indefinite, subject to
the provisions of Subsections B and C hereof.
Withdrawal from the MDTFA by Uwchlan Township shall be effected by the Township's giving 30
days' written notice to all other parties to the then-current MDTFA.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 19/620
C.
A.
B.
If the OAG terminates the existence of the Drug Task Force created pursuant to the provisions of
the MDTFA, the Township's participation in the MDTFA shall automatically terminate without
further action of the Township Board of Supervisors, effective on the date of such termination by
the OAG.
§ 27-17. Purpose and objectives of MDTFA.
The purpose and objectives of the MDTFA include but are not limited to county-wide coordination of
police activities in order to enhance the combating of illegal narcotic and controlled substance
trafficking and expediting and enhancing intergovernmental cooperative activities with signatories to
the MDTFA to enhance interdiction of illegal drug and controlled substance activities.
§ 27-18. Financing of MDTFA.
The MDTFA shall be financed by funds supplied by the OAG.
§ 27-19. Organizational structure of MDTFA.
Any organizational structure required to implement the provisions of the MDTFA shall be established
through such directives, procedures, and guidance as may be issued by the OAG, the Chester County
District Attorney, the Uwchlan Township Police Department, and other police departments whose
municipalities are signatory to the MDTFA.
§ 27-20. Acquisition, management and disposal of property by
MDTF.
The acquisition, management or disposal of any and all property, whether real or personal, acquired or
to be acquired pursuant to the provisions of the MDTFA shall be in accordance with the terms of the
MDTFA and such directives and procedures issued by the OAG.
§ 27-21. Retention of managerial responsibilities.
Uwchlan Township shall remain responsible and maintain responsibility for the management, control
and direction of its police officers, subject to such assistance (financial or otherwise) supplied by the
OAG.
§ 27-22. When effective.
After adoption by Uwchlan Township, this article shall become effective when both:
Uwchlan Township and at least one other municipality have signed the IPCA; and
Uwchlan Township and the OAG, the Chester County District Attorney and at least one other
municipality have signed the MDTFA.
Article VI. Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 10-25-1993 by Ord. No. 93-10]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 20/620
[1]
[1]
§ 27-23. Agreement; terms and conditions.
This local government shall join with other local governments in accordance with the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Law by becoming a member in INVEST and by entering into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Treasury Department (the
"agreement"), upon such terms and conditions as are more fully set forth in the attached agreement, a
signed copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article is adopted.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-24. Duration.
The duration of the agreement shall be for a period of three years, with automatic renewal of one-year
periods.
§ 27-25. Purpose.
The purpose of the agreement is to permit the State Treasurer to invest the funds of this local
government, with the objectives of safety of principal, liquidity, and high yield consistent with sound
investment strategy.
§ 27-26. Financing.
The agreement will not be financed, except for the purchase of INVEST shares in quantities
determined by this local government.
§ 27-27. Investment manager.
The State Treasurer shall serve as the investment manager under the terms of the agreement.
§ 27-28. Purchase and redemption of shares.
This local government is permitted to purchase and redeem shares that in turn are pooled with other
local government shares to acquire and sell certain investment securities, at a rate of $1 per share.
§ 27-29. Individuals authorized to perform account activities.
Any one of the following individuals shall be authorized to make deposits and withdrawals, establish
accounts, and perform such other duties as are necessary or appropriate for participation as an
INVEST member.[1]
Editor's Note: The current list of authorized individuals is on file in the Township offices.
Article VII. Mutual Aid Agreement for Emergency Services
[Adopted 2-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-03]
§ 27-30. Agreement; terms and conditions.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 21/620
[1]
[1]
A.
The Board of Supervisors hereby authorizes an agreement with West Whiteland Township to provide
mutual aid to each other in response to emergency situations. A true and correct copy of the
agreement is attached to this article as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference, and sets forth
the conditions, terms, purposes and objectives of the agreement and the manner in which property is
managed under the agreement.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Township offices.
Article VIII. Use of Recreational Lands and Facilities
[Adopted 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-05]
§ 27-31. Agreement; terms and conditions.
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township hereby authorizes an agreement with Downingtown
Area School District and the Lionville Youth Association for the purposes of mutual use of recreational
lands and facilities. A true and correct copy of the agreement is attached to this article as Exhibit A,
and incorporated herein by reference, and sets forth the conditions, terms, purposes and objectives of
the agreement and the manner in which property is managed under the agreement.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-32. Authorization.
The Board of Supervisors and officers of Uwchlan Township are hereby authorized to sign the
agreement and take all steps necessary to effectuate the terms and conditions of the agreement.
Article IX. Responsibility for Certain Streets in Whiteland
Ridge
[Adopted 11-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-15]
§ 27-33. Purpose and objectives.
West Whiteland Township and Uwchlan Township have granted approval to a final plan of subdivision
known as “Whiteland Ridge,” authorizing the development of a parcel of ground located in both
municipalities. Grandview Drive and James Ross Drive are streets proposed to be laid out and
constructed within the Whiteland Ridge development. Although located in both municipalities, a portion
of the streets and the stormwater management facilities constructed as a part thereof are located in
Uwchlan Township. The purpose of this article is to authorize an agreement between said
municipalities, pursuant to which Grandview Drive and James Ross Drive shall be built to West
Whiteland Township's specifications, the escrows guaranteeing completion and maintenance thereof
shall be posted with and a portion of the streets, as described by metes and bounds in the
intermunicipal agreement between West Whiteland Township and Uwchlan Township, shall be
maintained by West Whiteland Township. All liquid fuels taxes payable by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as a consequence of maintenance of the streets shall be payable to West Whiteland
Township.
§ 27-34. Conditions of agreement.
Grandview Drive and James Ross Drive and all drainage facilities constructed in connection
therewith as shown on the approved subdivision plan, whether located in West Whiteland
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 22/620
B.
C.
D.
E.
Township or Uwchlan Township, shall be constructed to West Whiteland Township's street and
drainage specifications; and the portion of the streets located in Uwchlan Township, as described
in the intermunicipal agreement between the Townships, shall be maintained by West Whiteland
Township.
All financial security otherwise required to be posted for that portion of the street located in
Uwchlan Township will be authorized by the agreement to be posted with the Board of Supervisors
of West Whiteland Township.
Upon completion of construction of Grandview Drive and James Ross Drive, that portion of
Grandview Drive and James Ross Drive, as described in Subsection A above, located in Uwchlan
Township shall be dedicated to West Whiteland Township.
West Whiteland Township, upon acceptance of dedication of said streets, shall be permanently
responsible for the streets' maintenance and upkeep. Maintenance responsibility shall continue
until the streets are at anytime in the future lawfully vacated as public streets by West Whiteland
Township following compliance with such procedures and approvals as are by law required.
Uwchlan Township shall assign and set over to West Whiteland Township all liquid fuels tax
monies due and payable by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to which Uwchlan Township
would otherwise be entitled had that portion of Grandview Drive and James Ross Drive located in
Uwchlan Township been dedicated to Uwchlan Township as public streets for permanent
maintenance.
§ 27-35. Approval; implementation; organizational structure.
The agreement authorized by this article shall be approved by the Boards of Supervisors of each
municipality, and the agreement shall be implemented by West Whiteland Township. No formal
organical structure of entity is necessary to implement the provisions of the authorized agreement.
§ 27-36. Duration.
The agreement shall remain in full force and effect until such time as Grandview Drive and James
Ross Drive are vacated as public streets pursuant to statutory procedure, or until such time as the
agreement authorized by this article is mutually amended, modified or terminated by the contracting
municipalities.
§ 27-37. Financing.
Other than the above-mentioned assignment of liquid fuel tax monies, no special financing is required
to implement the provisions of the agreement authorized hereby.
§ 27-38. Management of property.
As described above in § 27-34, the agreement authorized hereby shall require that portion of
Grandview Drive and James Ross Drive constructed in Uwchlan Township to be dedicated and
maintained by West Whiteland Township. Consequently, West Whiteland Township shall acquire the
requisite real property rights and engage in any necessary management. No licensing or disposal of
the property is anticipated.
§ 27-39. Authorization.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 23/620
[1]
[1]
[1]
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township is authorized to make and execute the agreement with
West Whiteland Township attached hereto as Exhibit A and made a part hereof.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-40. Amendments.
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township hereby ordains that it may execute such amendments
to the agreement authorized by this article as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this
article and as mutually agreed to by West Whiteland Township and Uwchlan Township.
Article X. Mutual Utility Alliance
[Adopted 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-09]
§ 27-41. Execution of agreement.
The proper officers of Uwchlan Township are authorized and directed to execute and deliver an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement, dated June 8, 1998, attached hereto and made a part
hereof.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-42. Terms and conditions.
The conditions, duration and term, purpose and objectives, scope and authority delegated, manner
and extent of financing, organizational structure and manner in which personal property shall be
acquired, managed and disposed of, are set forth in the attached agreement.
Article XI. Downingtown Area Community Planning Group
[Adopted 8-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-11]
§ 27-43. Authorization.
This article is an article authorizing Uwchlan Township to enter into an intergovernmental cooperation
agreement with East Brandywine, East Caln, Uwchlan, Upper Uwchlan, Wallace, West Bradford, and
West Pikeland Townships, and the Borough of Downingtown, all municipalities of Chester County,
Pennsylvania, for the purpose of establishing the Downingtown Area Community Planning Group.
§ 27-44. Agreement.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act of December 19, 1996, P.L.
1158, No. 177 (53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.), local governments may enter into intergovernmental
cooperation agreements for the purpose of cooperatively performing intergovernmental powers and
duties. Uwchlan Township desires to enter into articles of agreement (the "agreement") with the
municipalities named in § 27-43 to establish the Downingtown Area Community Planning Group.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-45. Purpose and objectives.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 24/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as follows:
To serve as a mutual forum to identify, discuss, study and bring into focus regional needs and
opportunities regarding growth management.
To develop and review policies, plans and priorities regarding regional growth management.
To provide and maintain effective communication and coordination among the member
governmental agencies.
To facilitate proposals, agreements and cooperative action among member governments for
related growth management issues that cross municipal boundaries.
To promote intergovernmental cooperation and gather information regarding regional issues
affecting growth management.
§ 27-46. Duration.
The agreement shall continue until revoked by actions of the members, as provided for in the
agreement.
§ 27-47. Financing.
The agreement shall be financed by the assessment and collection of dues from the members,
contribution by members and by the acceptance of gifts, grants or similar subsidies.
§ 27-48. Administration.
The agreement shall be administered by a Board of Directors composed of two persons appointed by
each municipal member of the group as set forth in the agreement. Each municipal member shall be
entitled to one vote. The Board shall elect a Chairman, Secretary, and Treasurer by a majority vote of
the Board.
§ 27-49. Acquisition and management of property.
It is not anticipated that any real or personal property will be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed
of by the Group. If property is acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of, such transactions shall be
funded by those member municipalities who, by affirmative vote at a Board meeting, elect to participate
in a property transaction.
§ 27-50. Contracts.
The agreement shall not authorize the entering into of contracts for employee group life insurance or
benefits.
§ 27-51. Execution of agreement.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute the
articles of agreement as described hereinabove on behalf of the Township.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 25/620
[1]
[1]
A.
§ 27-52. Representatives.
In accordance with the provisions of the agreement, Uwchlan Township will, from time to time,
designate two persons to be representatives for the Planning Group. One of such persons shall be a
member of the Board of Supervisors, and one shall be a designee of the governing body.
Article XII. Mutual Aid Agreement for Special Events
[Adopted 7-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-02]
§ 27-53. Agreement.
The Township hereby agrees to cooperate with the Borough of Downingtown in accordance with the
terms of the special events mutual aid agreement which is attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Township offices.
Chapter 39. Manager
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 2-17-1969 by Ord. No.
69-02. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 39-1. Creation of office.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of Uwchlan.
§ 39-2. Appointment and removal.
The Manager shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors and may be removed by the Board at
any time.
§ 39-3. Compensation.
[Amended by Ord. No. 72-14[1]]
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed annually by the Board of Supervisors.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 39-4. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township and shall be responsible to the
Board for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township. His powers and duties
shall relate to the general management of all Township business not expressly imposed or conferred
upon other Township officers by statute. His powers and duties shall include the following:
He shall supervise the administrative staff and be responsible for the activities of all Township
departments other than that of the Police Department.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 26/620
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
[2]
[1]
Each year, he shall prepare a budget for the Township and submit it to the Board of Supervisors
for adoption prior to the beginning of the fiscal year.
He shall keep the Board fully informed of the financial conditions and future needs of the Township
through periodic and special reports.
He shall prepare agendas for all meetings of the Board.
He shall serve to bring about a close liaison between departments, committees, commissions or
other bodies and the Board of Supervisors so that the Township government may function properly
and serve the community to the best advantage.
In cooperation with the Chief of Police or ranking police officer, he shall see that all laws and
ordinances are enforced.
The Manager shall make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors on the hiring and
removing of employees on the basis of merit, after consultation with the heads of the several
departments.
Chapter 41. Map, Official
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 10-22-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-05. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 41-1. Adoption of Official Map.
The plan attached and appended hereto, titled "Uwchlan Township Official Map," prepared by E. B.
Walsh & Associates, Inc., consisting of one sheet, is hereby adopted as the Official Map of Uwchlan
Township in accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.[2]
Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
§ 41-2. Contents.
The Official Map of Uwchlan Township depicts by mapping and textual notes existing and proposed
public streets, watercourses and public grounds; existing and proposed public parks, playgrounds and
open space reservations, pedestrian sidewalks, trails and easements, railroad rights-of-way, floodways
and flood plains and conservation easements.
§ 41-3. Time limit for reservations for future takings or
acquisitions.
In accordance with and subject to the requirements of Section 406 of the Municipalities Planning Code,
[1] the Board of Supervisors hereby reserves for a period of 20 years from the effective date of this
chapter for future taking or acquisition for public use the streets, trails, sidewalks, easements, open
space and public grounds depicted on the Official Map.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10406.
Chapter 51. Planning Commission
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 27/620
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 6-7-1960 by Ord. No. 9;
amended in its entirety 6-14-1971 by Ord. No. 71-07. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
General References
Construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See Ch. 153.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 179.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 260.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 51-1. Continuation of existing members.
All members of the existing Uwchlan Township Planning Commission, appointed under the provisions
of Ordinance No. 9 of June 7, 1960, shall continue in office until the end of the terms for which they
were appointed, and their successors shall be appointed as provided by this chapter.
§ 51-2. Membership; appointments; terms; compensation.
The Uwchlan Township Planning Commission shall consist of seven members. Additional members
shall be appointed by the Board under the provisions of this chapter. All new members shall be
residents of the Township. At least five members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of
Uwchlan Township. No more than two members may be officers or employees of the Township. As
new members or additional members are appointed, they shall be appointed for terms of four years,
except that appointment of additional members shall be made so that no more than two shall be
reappointed or replaced during any future calendar year. The Chairman of the Planning Commission
shall properly notify the Board of vacancies in the Commission, and such vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired term. All members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation but
may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses. Officers or employees of the Township,
however, shall not, by reason of membership on the Planning Commission, forfeit the right to exercise
the powers, perform the duties or receive the compensation of the municipal offices held by them
during such membership.
§ 51-3. Removal of members.
The Board of Supervisors may remove any member, or members, of the Planning Commission for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Board, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote.
A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing. Any
appointment to fill a vacancy created by removal shall be only for the unexpired term.
§ 51-4. Officers; rules of procedure.
The Uwchlan Township Planning Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and
create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The Commission may make and alter rules for its
procedure consistent with the ordinances of the Township and the laws of the Commonwealth.
§ 51-5. Appropriation of funds; expenditures.
The Board of Supervisors shall appropriate from the general Township funds such money as may be
necessary and may be available for the work of the Planning Commission in the year in which the
appropriation is made. The Planning Commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 28/620
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
[2]
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
(1)
[3]
(2)
(3)
[4]
(4)
(5)
B.
deem necessary for its work and may contract with planners, surveyors and other consultants for such
technical services as it may require upon authorization of the Board of Supervisors. These and other
expenditures as may be necessary and proper shall be within the amount appropriated for the purpose
by the Board of Supervisors or placed at the Commission's disposal from other sources.
§ 51-6. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have the power and shall be required to:
File with the Township Secretary a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and
determinations, which records shall be a public record. The Planning Commission shall
annually make a written report of its activities to the Board by March 1 of each year.
Prepare revisions to the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Township and
present these revisions for the consideration of the Board of Supervisors.
Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors proposed amendments to the Uwchlan
Township Zoning Ordinance, including regulations for planned residential development.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Zoning.
Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors proposed amendments to the Subdivision
and Land Development Regulations.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
Promote public interest in and understanding of the Comprehensive Plan and planning.
Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private agencies and individuals as to the
effectiveness of the proposals of such agencies and individuals.
Hold public meetings on a regularly scheduled basis and public hearings as required.
Require from other departments and agencies of the Municipality such available information
as relates to its work.
In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make examinations and surveys,
either after permission has been obtained from the owner or after public notices.
Review and comment on all Township ordinances, or amendments to Township ordinances,
proposed for enactment.
The Planning Commission shall, upon request of the Board of Supervisors:
Prepare and present an Official Map for consideration and, after adoption, maintain for the
Board of Supervisors the Official Map and make recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors on proposed changes in such Map.
Administer the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations.[3]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
Administer the Planned Residential Development Regulations.
Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors amendments to the Building Code.[4]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Construction Codes, Uniform.
Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors a Housing Code and make
recommendations to the Board on proposed amendments thereto.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 29/620
(6)
C.
Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to fulfill the duties and
obligations imposed.
In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or recommendation of the Planning
Commission which involves engineering consideration shall be subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer.
§ 51-7. Acceptance of funds or other assistance.
The Planning Commission may, with the consent of the Board of Supervisors, accept and utilize any
funds, personnel or other assistance made available by the county, the commonwealth or the federal
government or any of their agencies, or from private sources. The Board may enter into agreements or
contracts regarding the acceptance or utilization of the funds or assistance in accordance with the
governmental procedures of the Township.
Chapter 62. Salaries and Compensation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Supervisor
[Adopted 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
§ 62-1. Annual compensation.
Each supervisor of Uwchlan Township, elected or appointed, taking office on or after the effective date
of this article shall receive compensation as a supervisor in the annual amount of $4,125.
§ 62-2. Method of payment.
Such compensation shall be paid in monthly installments.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 77. Adult Entertainment
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
Article I. Display, Sale and Distribution of Obscene
Materials
[Adopted 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-15]
§ 77-1. Authority.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 30/620
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class Township Code to prohibit nuisances and to
promote the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety of the citizens of Uwchlan Township and the
authority of political subdivisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to enact local ordinances to
regulate, inter alia, the sale, distribution, display and exhibition of and activities concerning obscene
and other sexual material as provided for in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903(k), and as upheld by the United
States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania in Brown v. Pornography Commission of
Lower Southampton Township, 620 F. Supp 1199 (E.D. Pa. 1985), the Township of Uwchlan enacts the
following article.
§ 77-2. Definitions.
Terms used within this article shall have the meanings as defined in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903(B) and (E),
entitled "Obscene and Other Sexual Materials and Performances." The text of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903 is
appended hereto as Appendix A and is incorporated herein by reference thereto.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 77-3. Prohibited activities; definitions.
No person, knowing the obscene character of the materials or performances involved, shall, within
the Township of Uwchlan:
Display or cause or permit the display of any explicit sexual materials, as defined in
Subsection B of this section, in or on any window, showcase, newsstand, display rack,
billboard, display board, monitor, viewing screen, motion-picture screen, marquee or similar
place in such manner that the display is visible from any public street, highway, sidewalk,
transportation facility or other public thoroughfare, or in any business or commercial
establishment where minors, as a part of the general public or otherwise, are or will probably
be exposed to view all or any part of such materials;
Sell, lend, distribute, exhibit, give away or show any obscene materials or offer to sell, lend,
distribute, exhibit or give away or show, or have in his possession with intent to sell, lend,
distribute, exhibit or give away or show, any obscene materials to any person or knowingly
advertise any obscene materials in any manner;
Design, copy, draw, photograph, print, utter, publish or in any manner manufacture or prepare
any obscene materials. The terms “publish” and “publication,” in the context of this article,
shall include but shall not be limited to the various methods by which graphic, textual, audio,
and/or video information is made the subject of information communication and/or retrieval
over a network of computers, including the international network of interconnected computers
known as the “Internet.” Such methods include but are not limited to electronic mail, automatic
mailing list services, newsgroups, chat rooms, and the creation of or the posting of
information to sites on the World Wide Web; so long as the act of publication, communication,
or information retrieval takes place by means of a computer physically located in Uwchlan
Township;
Write, print, publish, utter or cause to be written printed, published or uttered any
advertisement or notice of any kind giving information, directly or indirectly, stating or
purporting to state where, how, from whom, or by what means any obscene materials can be
purchased, obtained or had;
Produce, present or direct any obscene performance or participate in a portion thereof that is
obscene or that contributes to its obscenity; or
Hire, employ, use or permit any minor child to do or assist in doing any act or thing mentioned
in this subsection.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 31/620
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
Dissemination to minors. No person shall knowingly disseminate, by sale, loan, or otherwise,
explicit sexual materials to a minor. “Explicit sexual materials,” as used in this subsection, means
materials which are obscene or:
Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture file, videotape or similar visual
representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual
conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or
Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however reproduced, or sound recording
which contains any matter enumerated in Subsection B(1), or explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic
abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors.
Admitting minor to show. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for monetary
consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to a minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to
admit a minor to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion-picture show or other presentation
or performance which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic
abuse and which is harmful to minors.
Definitions. As used in Subsections B and C of this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HARMFUL TO MINORS
That quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct,
sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful, or morbid interest of minors;
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with
respect to what is suitable materials for minors; and
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, educational or scientific value
for minors.
KNOWINGLY
General knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or grounds for belief which warrants
further inspection or inquiry, of both:
The character and content of any material or performance described herein which is
reasonably susceptible of examination by the person charged with violation of this article;
and
The age of the minor or the fact that minors are among those likely to view or receive the
obscene materials; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse
from liability hereunder if the person charged with violation of this article made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor or to prevent minors
from inclusion among those likely to view or receive the obscene materials.
MINOR
Any person under the age of 18 years.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT
The condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.
Requiring sale as a condition of business dealings. No person shall knowingly require any
distributor or retail seller, as a condition to sale or delivery for resale or consignment of any
literature, book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, storypaper, paper, comic book, writing, drawing,
photograph, videotape, figure or image, or any written or printed matter, or any article or
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 32/620
[1]
A.
B.
C.
instrument, to purchase or take by consignment for purposes of sale, resale or distribution any
obscene literature, book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, storypaper, paper, comic book, writing,
drawing, photograph, videotape, figure or image, or any written or printed matter of an obscene
nature or any article or instrument of an obscene nature.
§ 77-4. Applicability.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any recognized historical society or museum accorded charitable
status by the federal government, any county, city, borough, township or town library, any public library,
any library of any school, college or university or any archive or library under the supervision and
control of the commonwealth or a political subdivision.
§ 77-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article
that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article II. Establishments Serving Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-16]
§ 77-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALCOHOL
Ethyl alcohol of any degree of proof originally produced by the distillation of any fermented liquid,
whether rectified or diluted with or without water, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall
include synthetic ethyl alcohol, but shall not mean or include ethyl alcohol, whether or not diluted,
that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for beverage purposes.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
Any liquor, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic beverage, or
combination of liquors and mixed liquor a part of which is spirituous, vinous, fermented or
otherwise alcoholic, including all drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures, and
reused, recovered or redistilled denatured alcohol usable or taxable for beverage purposes
which contains more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume.
Any malt or brewed beverage, beer, lager beer, ale, port or similar fermented malt beverage
containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume, by whatever name such beverage may be
called.
Any whiskey or alcoholic distillate from a fermented mash of grain, capable of being used for
beverage purposes.
ESTABLISHMENT DEALING IN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 33/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Any business or commercial establishment (whether open to the public at large or where entrance
is limited by cover charge or membership requirement), including those licensed by the
commonwealth for sale and/or service of alcoholic beverages; and any bottle club; “bring your own
booze” (“BYOB”) establishment; hotel; motel; restaurant; nightclub; country club; cabaret; meeting
facility utilized by any religious, social, fraternal, or similar organization; business or commercial
establishment where a product or article is sold, dispensed, served, or provided with the
knowledge, actual or implied, that the same will be or is intended to be mixed, combined with or
drunk in connection or combination with an alcoholic beverage on the premises of said business
or commercial establishment; or business or commercial establishment where the consumption of
alcoholic beverages is permitted. A private residence is not an establishment dealing in alcoholic
beverages.
PERSON
A natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever used in a clause prescribing or imposing
a fine, imprisonment, or both, the term “person,” as applied to “associations,” shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to “corporations,” shall mean the officers thereof,
except, as to incorporated clubs, the term “person” shall mean such individual or individuals who,
under possession and sale of alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 77-7. Prohibited activities.
No person shall expose to public view his or her genitals, including, without limitation, the human
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage, or buttocks, or any simulation thereof, in an establishment dealing in alcoholic
beverages. For purposes of this Subsection A, “buttocks” shall include the area at the rear of the
body which lies between two imaginary lines running parallel to the ground when a person is
standing, the first or top such line drawn at the top of the cleavage of the nates (i.e., the
prominence formed by the muscles running from the back of the hip to the back of the leg), and
the second or bottom line drawn at the lowest visible point of this cleavage or the lowest point of
the curvature of the fleshy protuberance, whichever is lower, and between two imaginary lines on
each side of the body, which lines are perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines
described above, and which perpendicular lines are drawn through the point at which each nate
meets the outer side of each leg. This article would be violated, therefore, if any portion of this
area is visible from any vantage point.
No female shall expose to public view any portion of the breast below a horizontal line across the
top of the areola at its highest point, or simulation thereof, in an establishment dealing in alcoholic
beverages. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast but
shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human breast exhibited by a dress, blouse,
shirt, opaque leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola is not
exposed or visible in whole or in part.
No person maintaining, owning, or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall
suffer or permit any person to expose to public view his or her genitals, including, without
limitation, the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered, pubic area, vulva,
anus, anal cleft or cleavage, or buttocks, as defined in Subsection A hereabove, or any simulation
thereof, within the establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages.
No person maintaining, owning, or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall
suffer or permit any female person to expose to public view any portion of her breasts, as defined
in Subsection B hereabove, or any simulation thereof, within the establishment dealing in alcoholic
beverages.
No person shall engage in and no person maintaining, owning, or operating an establishment
dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, any sexual act which is prohibited by law, the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 34/620
F.
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
touching, caressing, or fondling of the female breast, as that term is defined in Subsection B
hereabove, buttocks, as that term is defined in Subsection A hereabove, anus, or genitals,
including, without limitation, the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered,
or the simulation thereof, within an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages.
No person shall cause and no person maintaining, owning, or operating an establishment dealing
in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit the exposition or availability of any graphic
presentation, including photographs, pictures, or the projection of film, which depicts human
genitals, including, without limitation, the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
covered, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, buttocks, as that term is defined in
Subsection A hereabove, female breast, as that term is defined in Subsection B hereabove,
sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, any sexual act
prohibited by law, the touching, caressing, or fondling of the female breast, as that term is defined
in Subsection B hereabove, buttocks, as that term is defined in Subsection A hereabove, anus, or
genitals, including, without limitation, the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
covered, scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or
drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited activities described in Subsections A
through F, inclusive, hereabove, or any simulation thereof, within any establishment dealing in
alcoholic beverages.
§ 77-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant
may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that
such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article III. Licensing and Regulation of Businesses
[Adopted 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-17]
§ 77-9. Purpose and findings.
Purpose.
Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class Township Code to prohibit nuisances;
to promote the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety of the citizens of Uwchlan Township;
and to regulate the time of opening and closing and the conduct of places of public
entertainment, amusement and recreation, the Township of Uwchlan enacts this article to
minimize and control the adverse effects of adult entertainment business uses (also referred
to hereinafter occasionally as “adult entertainment businesses”) and thereby protect the
health, safety and welfare of its citizens; protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve
the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods;
and deter the spread of blight.
The Board of Supervisors has determined that locational criteria alone can not adequately
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Township and that licensing
is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of adult
entertainment businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that operators do
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 35/620
(3)
[1]
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(2)
B.
not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or
solicitation.
The Board of Supervisors does not intend this article to suppress any speech activities
protected by the First Amendment but to enact a content-neutral article which addresses the
secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses.
Findings.
The Board of Supervisors finds and it adopts by reference the adverse secondary effects of
adult entertainment businesses presented in hearings and in reports and adopted as part of
Township Ordinance No. 98-14, enacted September 14, 1998.[1]
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 98-14 is included in the Township Zoning Ordinance.
The finding noted in Subsection B(1) above raises substantial governmental concerns as do
the following legislative findings:
Adult entertainment businesses have operational characteristics which should be
reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns.
A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of
that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the adult entertainment
businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent
incentive on the operators to see that the adult entertainment business is run in a manner
consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as
the citizens of the Township. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the
licensee is the actual operator of the adult entertainment business, fully in possession
and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult
booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary
sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
Requiring licensees of adult entertainment businesses to keep information regarding
current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain
types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or
suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments.
The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the dayto-
day operation and maintenance of the adult entertainment business, where such
information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the
operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a
limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the
conduct which this article is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such
activity.
The fact that an applicant for a license to operate an adult entertainment business has
been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the
applicant is likely to engage in that conduct in contravention of this article.
The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years
serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases.
The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the Township will be promoted by
the enactment of this article.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 36/620
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
B.
§ 77-10. Definitions.
The defined terms in Uwchlan Township Ordinance No. 98-14, enacted September 14, 1998,[1]
are hereby adopted by reference and include the definitions of adult arcade; adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store; adult cabaret; adult motion-picture theater; adult theater;
employee; escort; escort agency; establishment; massage parlor, nude model studio; nudity or a
state of nudity; person; seminude or in a seminude condition; sexual encounter center; sexually
oriented business; specified anatomical areas; specified sexual activities; and substantial
enlargement; provided, however, that any adult entertainment use existing and in lawful operation
within the Township of Uwchlan on the date of enactment of this article shall be entitled, within 60
days of said enactment, to register said use with the Township Zoning Officer as a lawful
preexisting use, and, as so registered, said use shall not be subject to the provisions of this article.
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 98-14 is included in the Township Zoning Ordinance.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated, unless
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
KNOWINGLY
General knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or grounds for belief which warrants
further inspection or inquiry, of both:
The character and content of any material or performance described herein which is
reasonably susceptible of examination by a licensee or person;
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an
excuse from liability hereunder if the licensee or person made a reasonable bona fide
attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
LICENSEE
A person in whose name a license to operate an adult entertainment business has been
issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in
the case of an employee, the person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing
employment in an adult entertainment business.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
Any of the following offenses:
Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or
display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or
distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a
child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child;
gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
For which:
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of
a felony offense; or
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of
release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 37/620
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
(a)
(1)
E.
convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of
misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of
the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS
Includes any of the following:
The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether
by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the
ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of
law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
§ 77-11. License required; application.
It is unlawful:
For any person to operate an adult entertainment business without a valid adult entertainment
business license issued by the Township pursuant to this article;
For any person who operates an adult entertainment business to employ a person to work for
the adult entertainment business who is not licensed as an adult entertainment business
employee by the Township pursuant to this article; or
For any person to obtain employment with an adult entertainment business without having
secured an adult entertainment business employee license pursuant to this article.
An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the Township, which shall include
authorization to release the information contained therein to other agencies and/or departments
for verification, investigation, and supplementation.
All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application may
request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the
Township to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this article.
If a person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment business is an individual, the person
must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate an adult
entertainment business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty-percent or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant
must be qualified under the following section, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if
a license is granted.
The completed application for an adult entertainment business license shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
If the applicant is:
An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name [including, in the case of any
name change: the former name, date and jurisdiction of the order effectuating the change
and the reason(s) for the change] and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least
18 years of age.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 38/620
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
[1]
[2]
(11)
A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and the names of all
partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership
agreement, if any.
A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation,
evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of
incorporation and qualified and authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania, the
names and capacity of all officers, directors and stockholders controlling 20% or more of
the outstanding shares, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address
of the registered office for service of process.
If the applicant intends to operate the adult entertainment business under a name other than
that of the applicant, he or she must state the adult entertainment business' fictitious name
and submit the required registration documents.
Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity, as defined in this article, and, if so, the specified criminal activity
involved, and the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license
under this article or other similar adult entertainment business ordinance from another
municipality or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
adult entertainment business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well
as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person
residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or
principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this article whose license has
previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult
entertainment business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the
date of denial, suspension or revocation.
Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, holds any other licenses under
this article or other similar adult entertainment business ordinance from another municipality
or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
The specific classification of adult entertainment use license for which the applicant is filing.
The location of the proposed adult entertainment business, including a legal description of the
property, street address, and telephone number(s), if any.
The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
The date, issuing state, and permit number of the applicant's driver's license, social security
number, and his state or federally issued tax identification number.
A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. NOTE: All requirements of
the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the
Building Code,[1] the Firesafety Code,[2] and all other applicable codes, ordinances, and
regulations must be met in addition to the requirements of this article before the issuance of
any building or other permit.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Construction Codes, Uniform.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Construction Codes, Uniform.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 39/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
[1]
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(12)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
F.
G.
A certified straight-line drawing, prepared within 30 days prior to application by a registered
land surveyor, depicting the property lines of the property to be certified and:
Any of the following located within 400 feet of the property to be certified:
A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used regularly for
religious worship and related religious activities.
A public or private educational facility, including but not limited to child day-care
facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private
schools, intermediate schools, junior-high schools, middle schools, high schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges,
and universities. School includes the school grounds but does not include the
facilities used primarily for another purpose.
A licensed premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Any other adult entertainment use.
Any of the following located within 800 feet of the property to be certified:
A boundary of a residential district, as defined in the Uwchlan Township Zoning Code
or any property devoted to a residential us.
Any of the following located within 500 feet of the property to be certified:
A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational
activities, including but not limited to parks, playgrounds, nature trails, swimming
pools, reservoirs, athletic fields, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths,
wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the Township which is under the
control, operation, or management of a Township, county, state, or United States
park and recreation authority.
An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children and family
entertainment.
Before any applicant may be issued an adult entertainment business employee license, the
applicant shall submit, on a form to be provided by the Township, the following information:
The applicant's name or any other name (including any former or "stage" names) or aliases
used by the individual;
Age, date, and place of birth;
Height, weight, hair and eye color;
Present residence address and telephone number;
Present business address and telephone number;
Date, issuing state and number of driver's license and other identification card information;
Social security number; and
Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
Attached to the application form for an adult entertainment business employee license, as
provided above, shall be the following:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 40/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
H.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
A.
A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's
fingerprints on a form provided by the Township's Police Department. Any fees for the
photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously
operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, municipality, state, or country,
any business or has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied,
revoked, or suspended or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, the name
of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and a description in full of the reason for the denial,
revocation, or suspension shall be provided. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or
suspension shall be attached to the application.
A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as
defined in this article, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the date, place
and jurisdiction of each.
Each application form issued pursuant to this section shall require notarization of all signatures
thereto and shall contain the continuing obligation on the part of the applicant to immediately notify
the issuer in the event that any of the information submitted in support of the application should
change or no longer represent the full and complete truth.
§ 77-12. Investigation; issuance of license.
Upon the filing of said application in a fully completed form for an adult entertainment business
employee license or an adult entertainment business license, the application shall be referred to
the appropriate Township official and/or consultant for an investigation to be made on such
information as is contained on the application. This investigation may include such further
interview with the applicant(s) as the investigator may require to resolve any inconsistencies
discovered during the investigation within the application itself or with respect to the information
contained in the application and other information revealed by the investigation.
The application process shall be completed within 45 days from the date the completed
application is filed. After the investigation, the Township shall issue an adult entertainment
business employee license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that
one or more of the following findings is true:
The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the
license, has failed to provide valid documentation when required, or has falsely answered
a question or request for information on the application form;
The applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment to the
Township of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in
relation to any business or property;
The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article;
The adult entertainment business employee license is to be used for employment in a
business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a
particular provision of this article;
The applicant has had an adult entertainment business employee license revoked by the
Township within two years of the date of the current application;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 41/620
(g)
(h)
(2)
B.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
The license fee required by this article has not been paid; and/or
The applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with
any of the provisions of this article.
Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be
subject to appeal as set forth in § 77-16C hereinbelow.
A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written
application of the applicant and a finding by the Township that the applicant has not been
convicted of any specified criminal activity, as defined in this article, or committed any act during
the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license
application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in
§ 77-13 hereinbelow.
Within 45 days after receipt of a complete adult entertainment business license application, the
Township shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant.
The Township shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined
by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
An applicant is under 18 years of age;
An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment to the
Township of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in
relation to any business or property;
An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the
license, has failed to provide valid documentation where required, or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form;
An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license
by the Township to operate an adult entertainment business within the preceding 12
months or his/her license to operate an adult entertainment business has been revoked
within the preceding 12 months;
An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity, as defined in this article;
The premises to be used for the adult entertainment business is in violation of the
locational criteria contained in this article or has not been approved by the Fire Marshal
and the Building Official as being in compliance with all applicable codes, regulations,
and ordinances;
The license fee required by this article has not been paid; and/or
An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with
any of the provisions of this article.
Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be
subject to appeal as set forth in § 77-16C hereinbelow.
The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is
granted, the expiration date, the address of the adult entertainment business and the specific
classification of adult entertainment use for which the license is issued. All licenses shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult entertainment business so that
they may be easily read at any time.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 42/620
E.
F.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
If requested to do so by the investigator, the Fire Marshal and the Building Official shall determine
whether the premises is in compliance or not in compliance and shall so certify to the investigator
within 30 days of receipt of the investigator's request.
An adult entertainment business license shall issue for the specific classification of adult
entertainment use as permitted by ordinance and for which proper application has been made.
§ 77-13. Fees.
The applicable fees for initial and renewal license applications for adult entertainment businesses and
employees shall be as promulgated from time to time by the Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors
by resolution. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Township Manager.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 77-14. Inspections.
An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Township, including the Fire Marshal,
Zoning Officer, or other official and/or consultant to inspect the premises of an adult entertainment
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law.
A person who operates an adult entertainment business or his agent or employee commits a
violation of this article if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises.
§ 77-15. Expiration of license; renewals.
Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making
application as provided in § 77-11 above. Application for renewal shall be made at least 60 days
before the expiration date; and when made less than 60 days before the expiration date, the date
of expiration of the license will not be extended.
When the Township denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one
year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Township finds that the basis for denial
of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
§ 77-16. Suspension or revocation of license.
The Township may suspend or revoke a license, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, if it
determines that:
A licensee or an employee of a licensee has violated or is not in compliance with any
provision of this article;
A licensee or an employee of a licensee has refused to allow an inspection of the adult
entertainment business premises as authorized by this article;
A licensee or an employee of a licensee has knowingly permitted gambling by any person on
the adult entertainment business premises;
A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the
application process;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 43/620
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
C.
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
B.
A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the
premises;
A licensee has knowingly allowed or repeatedly permitted, with or without knowledge,
prostitution on the premises;
A licensee knowingly operated the adult entertainment business during a period of time when
the licensee's license was suspended;
A licensee has knowingly allowed or repeatedly permitted, with or without knowledge, any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on
the licensed premises; or
A licensee is delinquent in payment to the Township, county or state of any taxes or fees past
due.
When the Township revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee
shall not be issued an adult entertainment business license for one year from the date the
revocation became effective.
After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation
of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek judicial review of such administrative action in
any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be reviewed by the court as the
decision of a local governmental agency.
§ 77-17. Transfer of license or premises.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate an adult
entertainment business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated
in the application.
§ 77-18. Location of adult entertainment business.
A person commits a violation of this article if that person operates or causes to be operated an
adult entertainment business in any zoning district other than PI Planned Industrial District, as
defined and described in the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
A person commits a violation of this article if the person operates or causes to be operated an
adult entertainment business:
Within 400 feet of:
A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious
worship and related religious activities.
A public or private educational facility, including but not limited to child day-care facilities,
nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools,
intermediate schools, junior-high schools, middle schools, high schools, secondary
schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and
universities. School includes the school grounds but does not include the facilities used
primarily for another purpose.
A licensed premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Any other adult entertainment use.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 44/620
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Within 800 feet of a boundary of a residential district, as defined in the Township Zoning Code
or a property devoted to a residential use.
Within 500 feet of:
A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational
activities, including but not limited to a parks, playgrounds, nature trails, swimming pools,
reservoirs, athletic fields, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness
areas, or other similar public land within the Township which is under the control,
operation, or management of a Township, county, state, or United States park and
recreation authority.
An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family
entertainment.
A person commits a violation of this article if that person causes or permits the operation,
establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of an adult
entertainment business within 1,000 feet of another adult entertainment use.
A person commits a violation of this article if that person causes or permits the operation,
establishment, or maintenance of more than one adult entertainment business in the same
building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any adult entertainment
business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another adult entertainment
business.
For the purpose of Subsection B of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or
structure used as the part of the premises where an adult entertainment business is conducted to
the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in Subsection B of this section. Presence
of a municipal, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of
calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
For purposes of Subsection C of this section, the distance between any two adult entertainment
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.
§ 77-19. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
A person commits a violation of this article if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an
escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 77-20. Additional regulations concerning nude model studios.
A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation of this article if the person appears
seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to
prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a rest room not open to
public view or visible to any other person.
A person commits a violation of this article if the person appears in a state of nudity or knowingly
allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can
be viewed from the public right-of-way.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 45/620
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
§ 77-21. Additional regulations concerning public nudity.
It shall be a violation of this article for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in an adult
entertainment business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified sexual activities.
It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly or intentionally appear in an adult
entertainment business in a seminude condition unless the person is an employee who, while
seminude, shall be at least two feet from any patron.
It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while seminude in an adult entertainment
business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer
to pay or give any gratuity to any employee while said employee is seminude in an adult
entertainment business.
§ 77-22. Prohibition against minors in an adult entertainment
business.
A person commits a violation of this article if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18
years on the premises of an adult entertainment business.
§ 77-23. Hours of operation.
No adult entertainment business may remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
§ 77-24. Exceptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under § 77-21 above that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in
a modeling class operated:
By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
In a structure which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising
that indicates a nude person is available for viewing.
§ 77-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant
may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that
such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 46/620
A.
Chapter 82. Alarm Systems
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 9-12-1994 by Ord. No.
94-12. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 166.
§ 82-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
ALARM SUPPLIER
The business by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing,
maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, monitoring or installing any alarm
system or causing any alarm system to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered,
replaced, moved, installed or monitored in or on any building, structure or other facility.
ALARM SYSTEM
Any assembly of equipment, mechanical, electrical or battery-operated, arranged to signal the
occurrence of a police, fire, hazard, or medical emergency requiring immediate attention and to
which police or fire units are expected to respond.
ANSWERING SERVICE
A service whereby trained employees, in attendance at all times, receive prerecorded voice
messages from automatic dialing devices reporting an emergency at a stated location, where such
employees have the duty to relay immediately by live voice any such emergency message over a
trunk line to the communications center of the Police or Fire Department.
AUDIBLE ALARM
Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to the interior and/or exterior of a building,
structure or facility and emits a warning signal which is audible outside the building, structure or
facility and is designed to attract attention when activated by a criminal act or other emergency
requiring Police or Fire Department response.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE
A device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to transmit a signal by a
voice coded message that indicates that an emergency condition exists and the need for an
emergency response is required.
CENTRAL STATION
A protective system or group of such systems operated privately for customers by a person, firm
or corporation which accepts recorded messages from automatic dialing devices at a central
station having operators and guards in attendance at all times who have the duty to take
appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message, including the relaying of messages to the
communications center of the Police or Fire Department.
COORDINATOR
An individual/designee named by and accountable directly and solely to the Chief of Police.
EMERGENCY
A police, fire, hazard, or medical emergency.
FALSE ALARM
An alarm(s) activated in the absence of an emergency, whether willfully or by in advertence,
negligence, or an unintentional act, including the malfunction of the alarm system, to which
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 47/620
B.
C.
the Uwchlan Township Police Department responds. The definition excludes alarm(s) caused
by malfunctions of the Chester County Department of Emergency Services receiving
equipment if such alarm is directly connected to the alarm board; testing or repairing of
telephone or electrical lines or equipment outside the premises; acts of God, such an
earthquake, flood, windstorm, thunder, or lightning; an attempted illegal entry of which there is
visible evidence; a crime in progress; or, in the case of an emergency medical alarm, an
actual medical emergency requiring police, fire and/or medical personnel. If doubt exists as to
the cause of the false alarm, the Chief of Police or his designee shall have and make the final
decision regarding the circumstances of the activation.
Multiple alarms received by the Police Department before the system can be deactivated
within a reasonable period of time shall be considered a single alarm.
The definition of a false alarm(s) also includes the intentional activation of a holdup alarm for
other than a holdup in progress, the intentional activation of a burglary alarm for other than a
burglary, the activation of a medical alarm for other than a medical emergency, or the
intentional activation of a fire alarm for other than a fire or hazard.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Any fire department, ambulance or rescue unit providing services within Uwchlan Township.
FIRE EMERGENCY
A fire.
HAZARD EMERGENCY
An explosion, leak of toxic gas, liquid or solid, or a potential explosion or leak.
INTERMEDIARY
A central station protective system or answering service as herein defined.
KEY
To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message either directly or indirectly by
an automatic dialing device.
MEDICAL EMERGENCY
An emergency involving the health of a person.
PERMIT
Written permission duly granted to an applicant by the Township upon payment of the required
fee.
POLICE DEPARTMENT
The Uwchlan Township Police Department.
POLICE EMERGENCY
An incident requiring prompt response by the Police Department.
POLICE AND FIRE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER
The police and fire communications area and other facilities which house communications
equipment and the police radio dispatcher.
CHIEF OF POLICE
The administrative head of the Uwchlan Township Police Department.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
TRUNK LINES
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 48/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A telephone line leading into the communications centers of the Police and Fire Departments that
is for the purpose of handling calls on a person-to-person basis and which is identified by a
specific listing among the white pages in the telephone directory issued by the telephone
company.
§ 82-2. Alarms without timing mechanisms prohibited.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, owners or users of audible alarms must equip such
audible alarms with a timing mechanism that will disengage the audible alarm after a maximum of 15
minutes. Audible alarms without such a timing mechanism shall be unlawful in the Township and must
be disconnected by the owner or user within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter.
§ 82-3. Direct keying of automatic dialing devices.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, all automatic dialing devices that transmit recorded
messages directly to the Police Department or Fire Department shall be keyed to the Chester County
Department of Emergency Services Radio Room, only with its prior approval.
§ 82-4. Listing of installations.
Within 90 days from the effective date of this chapter, every alarm supplier who has installed an
alarm system in the Township, fire, burglar or other, shall furnish to the Police Department the
following information:
The name, residence and telephone number of the owner or user.
The address where the device is installed and the telephone number at that address.
The name, address and the telephone number(s) of any other person or firm who is
authorized to respond to an emergency and gain access to the address where the device is
installed.
The name and telephone number of any other person or supplier who is responsible for
maintenance and repair of the system.
The type of system, i.e., holdup, burglary, fire or medical emergency.
Users of alarm system devices whose devices were installed prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall, within 60 days after such enactment, supply the Uwchlan Police Department with
the information specified in Subsection A(4).
All information furnished pursuant to this section shall be kept confidential and shall be for the
authorized use of the Department of Emergency Services and of the Police Department or its
authorized agent.
§ 82-5. Licensing.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, no one except an alarm supplier holding a valid
license from the Township shall sell, install, service or monitor any alarm within the Township.
The coordinator shall issue an alarm supplier's license to an alarm supplier meeting the
requirements of this § 82-5 upon the filing of the required application and payment of a fee. The
fee structure is as follows: Any alarm supplier who applies for a first-time license, prior to June 30
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 49/620
C.
D.
E.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(3)
F.
of that calendar year, shall be required to pay the full fee. However, any first-time applications
being submitted after June 30 shall be required to pay 1/2 of the fee. Each license shall bear the
signature of the Coordinator and be renewed annually. A copy of the license shall be displayed at
each location and shall be made available for inspection upon request by the Chief of Police or by
the Coordinator.
Each alarm supplier that installs one or more alarm system(s) in the Township shall make service
available directly or through an agent on a twenty-four-hours-per-day basis, seven days a week, to
repair such devices and to correct malfunctions as they occur. Any person using an alarm system
shall make arrangements for service to be available for such device on a twenty-four-hours-perday,
seven-days-per-week basis.
No corporation, sole proprietor, partner, joint venture, trustee, executor, administrator, employee,
fiduciary or stockholder with a five-percent or greater interest in a corporation (except a
corporation whose stock is publicly traded and registered with the Securities and Exchange
Commission or with a state securities commission) applying for a license shall have been
convicted of a felony or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony charge or indictment. Applicant must
furnish a criminal history from the State of Pennsylvania with his application.
The applicant shall furnish an insurance certificate annually confirming that the applicant has in
force general liability insurance coverage in an amount of not less than $300,000 for each
occurrence. An applicant who self-insures such coverage shall furnish evidence of financial ability
by showing that he is bonded for at least $300,000 or by a suitable letter of financial responsibility,
providing that the letter is acceptable to the Township.
A licensee shall pay an annual license fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. Except as specified in Subsection B, the annual fee is to be paid no later than the
last day of February in each calendar year.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5[1]]
No alarm supplier's license shall be required:
Where no alarm permit is required; or
When the installation of such alarm system shall be made in total personally by the
owner or occupant of the premises, except if same is monitored off premises or by a
company providing (monitoring) service.
A license may be revoked or renewal denied if:
The licensee fails to meet the requirements necessary to obtain a license;
The license fee is not paid;
The Chief of Police or his designee has reason to believe the licensee's installations are
the cause of false alarms;
Licensee fails to provide emergency service as required by this chapter; or
Licensee fails to provide updated listing of current customers.
Any licensee who fails to met the requirements as stated in Subsection F, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a criminal fine not to exceed $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution
and reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Enforcement of this section
shall be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for
the enforcement of a summary offense under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 50/620
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
[2]
E.
F.
The Township's Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the
District Attorney.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 82-6. Permit fees.
The user's fee for an alarm system permit shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors, and said permit shall be obtained from the Uwchlan Township Police
Department prior to installation of the alarm system.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The permit shall bear the signature of the Chief of Police or the Coordinator and be valid for the
same period that the applicant shall reside/locate the business upon the premises at which the
system is installed, or until revoked by the Chief of Police or the Coordinator. The permit shall be
physically present upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection
by Uwchlan Police Department personnel.
The permit application shall contain the address of the property, the name of the
residence/business (if applicable), the name of the owner, tenant or agent responsible for the
property, the alarm supplier or other entity responsible for maintaining the system (if applicable),
the type of alarm (burglary, holdup, fire, medical), how the alarm signal will be received by the
communications center (tape, central station, etc.), at least three alternate emergency telephone
numbers of persons to be contacted to secure the property and any additional information as
determined necessary. In the case of fire alarm permits for other than a single-family residence,
the applicant must submit with permit application detailed plans for any fire alarm and suppression
system that is to be permitted/installed. These plans are to be reviewed and approved by the
Township Fire Marshal prior to the issuance of any permit. Construction or installation may not
begin without permit. The issuance of the permit is not a final approval by the Township Fire
Marshal for the proposed system. Final approval may be given only at the completion, inspection
and conformance to all codes and requirements. It shall be the owner's responsibility to amend the
foregoing information whenever the information changes.
Exceptions:
An alarm user who is over the age of 65 and is the primary occupant of a residence, and if no
business is conducted at the residence, may obtain a user's permit from the Township without
paying the above-stated fee.
Any user who fails to obtain a permit within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter or who
fails to pay the registration fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, if
later, shall be liable to pay a late charge penalty for each calendar year that the permit is not
obtained and shall be subject to a criminal fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000, plus the costs
of prosecution and reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Enforcement of this section shall
be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of a summary offense under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The
Township's Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District
Attorney.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5[2]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
All locations in the Township of Uwchlan equipped with alarm systems, except as stated in this
chapter, must apply for and be issued valid permits for same.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 51/620
[3]
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Users may only use an alarm supplier who is licensed to conduct business within Uwchlan
Township and who holds a current/valid alarm suppliers' license. Any user who fails to utilize a
licensed alarm supplier shall be subject to a criminal fine not to exceed $1,000, plus the costs of
prosecution and reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Enforcement of this section shall be
by action brought before a Magisterial District Justice in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of a summary offense under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The
Township's Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District
Attorney.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5[3]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 82-7. No permit required for certain audible alarm systems.
A battery-powered (9 volt, 11.2 volt, or similar voltage) audible alarm system whose sole purpose
is to notify the occupants at that location of an emergency situation shall be exempt from the
permit requirements of this chapter if all of the following conditions exist:
The alarm is not connected to any mechanical or electrical device that automatically notifies a
person or agency outside of that location that the alarm is activated.
The audible alarm does not sound outside of the location (no external speakers or
annunciators).
The internal signal emitted by the audible alarm does not exceed 90 decibels.
The internal alarm does not cause undue annoyance or alarm to occupants of adjoining
premises.
Alarm users who are not required to pay a fee or who are exempt from obtaining an alarm user's
permit as above shall, nevertheless, be subject to the penalty provisions prescribed in this chapter.
After the effective date of this chapter, no one except an alarm supplier holding a valid license
from the Township shall install any alarm system within the confines of the Township.
§ 82-8. Technical information.
Each alarm supplier who, after the effective date of this chapter, sells or leases in the Township an
alarm system shall furnish operating instructions and a manual of operations to the buyer or lessee.
§ 82-9. Inspection of devices.
The public safety requires that the incidence of false alarms and malfunctioning automatic dialing
devices be minimal so as to reduce unnecessary calls to the Police Department and to increase
the effectiveness of properly functioning alarm systems. It is necessary that appropriate Township
officials have the right to inspect the installation and operation of any alarm system installed within
the Township.
Application for a permit for the installation of an alarm system and subsequent installation of such
a system pursuant to a permit issued or the continuance of the use of any alarm system already
installed at the effective date of this chapter shall constitute consent by the owner or lessee
thereof and authorization for inspection by the Chief of Police or the Coordinator.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 52/620
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
All such entries upon the premises where an alarm system is installed and all such inspections of
the installation and operation of alarm systems shall be at reasonable notice, except in emergency
situations.
§ 82-10. Conformance with installation, inspection and testing
standards.
Every alarm supplier selling, leasing or furnishing to any user, or a user who privately installs an alarm
system which is located on premises within the Township, shall:
Be permitted to install only equipment that is listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. as being
electrically safe and meeting the Township requirements for the alarm system. Wiring for the alarm
system must conform with all applicable national, BOCA, electrical and Township codes.
Be required to cause each alarm system installed to be provided with standby battery power which
shall automatically and immediately take over in the event of a power failure.
Be required to install equipment in such a way as to neutralize electrical surges.
Be required to deactivate any alarm system within a reasonable period of time.
§ 82-11. Notification preceding device testing.
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of any alarm system without first notifying the shift
supervisor of the Uwchlan Township Police and/or fire radio network, whichever is appropriate, via the
Police or Fire Department's designated dispatch center.
§ 82-12. Alarm supplier to furnish copy of law.
Alarm suppliers and installers shall furnish at their own expense, at or prior to the time of contracting, a
copy of this chapter to owners, lessees, or users of the equipment or services to be supplied.
§ 82-13. False alarms.
Consent to pay costs; schedule of costs: For the purpose of defraying the costs to the Police
Department for responding to false alarms, the owner, lessee or user of any alarm system,
persons using the services of an intermediary, users of audible alarms and users of any other kind
of direct or indirect connection with the police or fire communications center, except persons using
two-way live voice communication by telephone, shall, as a condition to installation and continued
operation of such equipment or service, execute a consent in such forms as may be prescribed by
the Township that such owner, lessee or user shall pay the Township costs as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for each false alarm originating from the owner's,
lessee's, or user's premises.
[Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-03[1]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Failure to comply. Any such owner, lessee, or user who fails to execute the consent described in
Subsection A within 90 days from the effective date of this chapter shall, within the ninety-day
period, disconnect the alarm system.
Any owner, lessee, or user of an alarm system may revoke or refuse to consent as set forth in
Subsection A, above only by disconnecting the alarm system. With respect to such systems
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 53/620
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
A.
installed at the effective date of this chapter, the owner, lessee or user can refuse to revoke the
aforesaid consent by disconnecting such alarm within 90 days from the effective date of this
chapter and providing written notification of such disconnection.
Penalties provided for false alarms that are relayed or transmitted by an intermediary shall be the
responsibility of the owner or user of the alarm system.
Any police officer responding to an alarm which is determined to be false shall promptly notify the
Chief of Police or his designee of such alarm in writing and shall (if practical) leave notification of
such false alarm at the scene of the alarm.
By submitting an application for permit for the installation of a burglary, fire, medical or other
emergency alarm system and the subsequent installation of such a system or by the continuation
of the use of an alarm system already installed at the effective date of this chapter, the owner,
lessee or user thereof shall agree that such permit application constitutes a waiver by such person
of the right to bring or file any action, claim or complaint whatsoever against any police officer or
emergency personnel who makes a forced entry in response to such an alarm into the premises
on which such an alarm is installed, as result of entry into the subject premises. In the event the
owner of such premises is a person other than the permit applicant, as in the instance of a lessee
or other user not the owner of the premises on which the alarm is installed, such permit application
shall constitute an indemnification agreement by the applicant to hold harmless any such police
officer of emergency personnel, the Township, the Police Department and the Fire Department, as
appropriate, from any and all damages whatsoever claimed by the lessor or owner of the premises
on which the alarm is installed.
Any alarm system which has four or more false alarms within a calendar month shall be subject to
permit revocation.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall notify the alarm user and the alarm supplier
providing the service to the user by first class, postage prepaid, certified mail, of such fact and
direct that the user submit a report to the Chief of Police within five days of receipt of the
notice describing actions taken or to be taken to determine and eliminate the cause of the
false alarms.
If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the Chief of Police shall determine if the action
taken or to be taken will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms; he shall notify the
alarm user in writing that his permit will not be revoked at this time and that if one more false
alarm occurs within the month, the user's permit may be revoked.
If no report is submitted, or if the Chief of Police determines that the action taken or to be
taken will not substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, the Chief of Police shall give
notice to the user that the permit will be revoked without further notice.
§ 82-14. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5[1]]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or permits a violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be invoiced by the Chief of Police or his designee and shall, within 30 days, pay the fee as
stated in § 82-13. Any person firm or corporation who or which fails to make the required payment
within the allotted time period(s) shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant
may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each ten-day period during
which failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate offense. The Township's Solicitor may
assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 54/620
B.
[1]
Any person found guilty of willful false activation of an alarm system shall be subject to a criminal
fine in an amount of not to exceed $1,000, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys'
fees, incurred by the Township. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Enforcement of this section shall be by action
brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of a
summary offense under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township's Solicitor
may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 87. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 166.
Article I. Animal Control
[Adopted 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-11]
§ 87-1. Unlawful to allow animals to run at large or trespass.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any animal to allow such animal to run at
large at any time upon any of the streets or public property and parks in the Township of Uwchlan.
Further, it shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any animal to allow such animal to
run at large or trespass, whether under the immediate control of the owner or not, upon private
property in the Township of Uwchlan of other than the owner, custodian or keeper. Immediate control
shall be defined as the effective use of leash or a leash used in combination with a harness, halter,
muzzle and/or similar device, except hunting dogs accompanying a duly licensed hunter in regular
hunting season upon property where hunting is not prohibited by the owner or by law.
§ 87-2. Duty to seize and impound animals.
[Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04]
It shall be the duty of any police officer, authorized dog control officer or contracted animal control
agency of the Township of Uwchlan who witnesses any animal running at large or trespassing in
conflict with the provisions of this article, or who receives information of any animal so running at large
or trespassing, to seize such animal and dispatch it to a place designated by the Board of Supervisors
as a pound. Notice of such seizure shall be sent to the owner of such animal (if the owner can be
determined) in the manner prescribed by law, and such animal may be redeemed by the owner thereof
within the time specified by law. The owner of an animal so seized and detained shall reimburse the
Township for all costs and expenses that it incurs by reason thereof within 60 days of the release or
other disposition of the animal. Rates for such charges shall be determined from time to time by the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 87-3. Unlawful to allow animals to become nuisances.
Any person or persons who shall keep or confine within the Township of Uwchlan any animal which
shall disturb or be permitted to disturb the peace, quiet and/or sanitary environment of the immediate
neighborhood by continued outcries, objectionable noises, and/or odors shall be guilty of permitting a
nuisance.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 55/620
§ 87-4. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
Any person, firm or corporation that violates or permits the violation of any provision of this article shall
be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township. If the penalty imposed for the violation of this Article I is not
voluntarily paid to the Township, the Township shall initiate a civil enforcement proceeding before a
Magisterial District Judge. Upon a finding of liability for committing said violation or permitting said
violation in such civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, the defendant shall pay
the fine, including additional daily penalties for continuing violations, plus costs and attorneys' fees. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
§ 87-5. Disposal of waste.
It shall be the duty of any person having the custody or control of any dog or domestic animal to clean
up any feces of the animal deposited on the streets (which includes both paved areas and adjacent
unpaved areas), private property or public property in the Township and dispose of such feces in an
appropriate trash receptacle. It shall furthermore be the duty of any person having custody or control of
any dog or domestic animal on any street or public property to have in such person's possession
suitable equipment for the picking up, removal and sanitary disposal of animal feces.
§ 87-6. Exemption.
The provisions of § 87-1 pertaining to dogs on private property under the immediate control of the
owner and § 87-5 shall not apply to any blind person owning a guide dog, any deaf person owning a
hearing dog, any handicapped person who uses a dog for aid, or any municipal or state police
department or agency using a dog in the performance of the functions or duties of such department or
agency.
Article II. Barking Dogs
[Adopted 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08]
§ 87-7. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Uwchlan Township Dog Barking Ordinance."
§ 87-8. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following definitions:
DAY
A twenty-four-hour period.
DOG
Any canine, whether a domestic breed or otherwise, which is in whole or in part a recognized
breed of dog, whether kept for breeding, as a pet, for show, or for any other purpose, whether
legal or illegal.
DOG OWNER
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 56/620
Every person having a right of property in any dog, and every person who keeps or harbors any
dog or has it in his/her care, and every person who permits any dog to remain on or about any
premises occupied by him/her.
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The appointed agent by the Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors, i.e., Codes Officer,
Manager, Solicitor and Township police.
REPETITIVE BARKING NUISANCE
The barking, howling, baying or making of noise by dogs, which noise interferes with or deprives
any person of the peace, quiet, rest, sleep or legitimate enjoyment of his or her property within the
Township, and which barking has no reasonable or legitimate purpose to prevent trespass or harm
to personal safety or property.
§ 87-9. Prohibition; noise as nuisance.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for the owner of any dog to cause or permit a dog or
dogs to bark, howl, bay or otherwise make any repetitive barking noise or disturbance which results in
a nuisance as defined in this article. A nuisance shall be presumed by proof of the continual barking or
making of such noise for a period in excess of five minutes or intermittently for 1/2 hour or more during
any day (twenty-four-hour period) and which is audible on any adjacent property or public right-of-way.
Upon the first offense, the dog owner or keeper will be given a written warning notice by either certified
letter, citation, or personal notice.
§ 87-10. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
The Ordinance Enforcement Officer is authorized to enforce the provisions of the article. After the initial
written warning, anyone found in further violation of any of the provisions of this article by a Magisterial
District Judge in a summary proceeding shall be ordered to pay a penalty of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township in the
enforcement of this article. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each violation of any of the provisions of this article
shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties.
Chapter 92. Bridges
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
Article I. Dowlin Forge Road
[Adopted 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
§ 92-1. Tractor-trailers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any tractor-trailer on Bridge #1572390160002 on Dowlin
Forge Road between Filman and Shelmire Roads.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 57/620
A.
B.
§ 92-2. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as set forth in § 4902(g)(1), of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(g)(1), as amended, or as shall be set forth in any amendment
thereto or successor legislation enacted by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
All fines, penalties, and forfeitures imposed and collected under this article shall be disposed of by
the collecting authority in the manner prescribed by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 92-3. Signs.
The Township of Uwchlan shall erect or cause to be erected and shall maintain or cause to be
maintained such restriction signs, including, if necessary, any advance informational signs, as shall be
required to effectuate the enforcement of this article under applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code and any other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 92-4. Permits for prohibited vehicles; security to cover repairs;
indemnification of Township.
Pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as now set forth in 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(c), the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan shall have the authority to
issue permits for the movement of vehicles of weight or size in excess of the restrictions provided for
by this article for bridges now or hereafter owned by the Township of Uwchlan. No such permit shall be
issued unless and until the applicant for such permit provides such security as the Township of
Uwchlan deems necessary to cover the cost of repairs and restoration necessitated by the permitted
movement of such vehicles over the said bridges; in addition to such security the applicant for such
permit shall also agree to indemnify and save harmless the Township against any and all claims which
may be asserted against the Township for any personal injury or property damage claims which may
arise out of the movement of such vehicles over the said bridges.
Chapter 94. Broadband Communications
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 1-22-1996 by Ord. No.
96-01. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency communications systems — See Ch. 119.
Cable television franchise agreement — See Ch. A270
Article I. General Provisions
§ 94-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Uwchlan Broadband Communications
Ordinance of 1996."
§ 94-2. Purpose.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 58/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
The Township of Uwchlan finds that the development of broadband systems has the potential of having
a great benefit to and positive impact on the people of Uwchlan. Because of the complex and rapidly
changing technologies associated with cable television, the Township also finds that public
convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers vested
in the Township or such persons as the Township so designates. Further, the Township recognizes that
broadband systems have the capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to
Township residents but also a variety of broadband, interactive services to Township agencies and
other institutions. For these purposes, the following goals, among others, underlie the provisions set
forth in this chapter:
Cable services and telecommunications services should be available to as many Township
residents as possible.
A broadband system authorized to provide cable service should be capable of accommodating
both the present and reasonably foreseeable future cable-related needs of the community.
A broadband system should be constructed and maintained during the franchise term so that new
components may be integrated to the maximum extent possible into existing system facilities.
A broadband system should be responsive to the needs and interests of the local community. The
Township intends that all provisions set forth in this chapter be construed to serve the public
interest and the foregoing public purposes, and that any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter
be construed to include the foregoing findings and public purposes as integral parts thereof.
Article II. Definitions and Word Usage
§ 94-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the
meanings given herein, unless otherwise expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number; and the masculine
gender includes the feminine gender. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is
permissive. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined herein shall be given the meaning
set forth in Title 47 of the United States Code, Chapter 5, Sub-Chapter V-A, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.,
as amended, and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning.
ACCESS CHANNEL
Any channel on a broadband system set aside by the franchisee for public, educational, and/or
governmental use.
AFFILIATE
Any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or
control with the franchisee and who is involved in the operation of the franchisee's broadband
system.
BASIC SERVICE
Any cable service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
BOARD
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township or its designated representative.
BROADBAND SYSTEM or SYSTEM
A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service and/or
telecommunications service to multiple subscribers within the Township, but such term does not
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 59/620
include: a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television
broadcast stations; b) a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings
under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities use any public
right-of-way, including streets or easements; c) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
except that such facility shall be considered a broadband system to the extent such facilities
engage in the transmission of video programming, whether on a common carrier or non-common
carrier basis, directly to subscribers; or d) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility systems.
CABLE ACT
The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as amended from time to time.
CABLE SERVICE
The one-way transmission to and/or the two-way transmission from subscribers of video
programming or other programming services; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required
for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL
Any channel on a broadband system set aside by the franchisee for noncommercial educational
use.
FCC
The Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor governmental entity
thereto.
FRANCHISE
The nonexclusive rights granted in accordance with this chapter to construct, operate, and
maintain a broadband system along the public rights-of-way within all or a specified area of the
Township. A franchise shall authorize the franchisee to provide cable service, telecommunications
service, or both, as may be specified in any franchise. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting
and carrying on a business within the Township as required by the ordinances and laws of the
Township, or for attaching devices to poles or other structures, whether owned by the Township or
a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along public rights-of-way.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT
A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter between the Township
and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which the
franchise will be exercised.
FRANCHISE AREA
The area of the Township that the franchisee is authorized to serve by its franchise agreement.
FRANCHISEE
The natural person(s), partnership(s), domestic or foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint
venture(s), or organization(s) of any kind which have been granted a franchise by the Township.
GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS CHANNEL
Any channel on a broadband system set aside by the franchisee for government access use.
GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES
Any and all cash, credits, property or other consideration of any kind or nature received annually,
directly or indirectly, by the franchisee, its affiliates, or any person in which the franchisee has a
financial interest, or by any other entity that is an operator of the broadband system arising from,
attributable to, or in any way derived from the operation of the franchisee's broadband system,
including the studios and other facilities associated therewith. Gross annual revenues include, but
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 60/620
are not limited to, monthly fees charged subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel,
per-program, cable, telecommunications or satellite service; installation, disconnection,
reconnection, and change-in-service fees; leased channel fees; late fees and administrative fees;
maintenance and repair fees; fees, payments, or other consideration received from programmers
for carriage of programming on the system; revenues from converter rentals or sales; studio rental
and production equipment rental fees; advertising revenues (prorated on the basis of the
proportion of the number of subscribers within the Township to the total number of subscribers of
the broadband system which includes the franchise area); revenues from program guides; and
revenues from home shopping and bank-at-home channels. Gross annual revenues shall be the
basis for computing the franchise fee under this chapter.
PAY TELEVISION
A cable service that is sold on a per-channel or per-program basis.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, association, joint-stock company, organization, corporation, or any
lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL
Any channel on a broadband system set aside by the franchisee for noncommercial use by the
general public or noncommercial organizations, and which is available for such use on a
nondiscriminatory basis.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
The surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street,
highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, waterway, easement, or
similar property in which the Township now or hereafter holds any property interest, which,
consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, with the exception of any public park,
recreation, playground and open space area, may be used for the purpose of installing and
maintaining a broadband system. No reference herein, or in any franchise agreement, to a public
right-of-way shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the Township that its interest
or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes,
and a franchisee shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as are properly in the Township
and as the Township may have the undisputed right and power to give, including such rights
available pursuant to Section 621(a)(2) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2).
SALE
Any sale or exchange transaction.
SERVICE TIER
A category of cable service or telecommunications service provided by the franchisee and for
which a separate charge is made by the franchisee.
STREET
The surface of and the space above or below any public street, public roadway, public highway,
public freeway, public lane, public way, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard,
public drive, or any public easement or public right-of-way now or hereafter held by the Township
which shall entitle franchisee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing over poles such
wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments,
and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the
broadband system.
SUBSCRIBER
Any person who legally receives cable service or telecommunications service pursuant to a
franchise, whether or not a fee is paid for such service.
SYSTEM FACILITIES or FACILITIES
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 61/620
A.
Broadband system equipment used by the franchisee to provide cable service or
telecommunications service in the franchise area.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE
The transmission of electronic impulses, other than cable service, over facilities which occupy any
public right-of-way within the Township. Telecommunications service includes, but is not limited to,
voice or data transmissions, as well as any video transmissions which do not constitute "video
programming" as defined by the Cable Act.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan, Pennsylvania, as represented by the Board.
TRANSFER
Any transaction in which an ownership or other interest in a franchisee, its broadband system, or
any person that is an operator of the broadband system is transferred from one person or group of
persons to another person or group of persons so that control of the franchisee is transferred; or
the rights and/or obligations held by the franchisee under a franchise agreement are transferred or
assigned to another person or group of persons. "Control" for these purposes means working
control, in whatever manner exercised. The addition, deletion, or other change of any general
partner of the franchisee, any person who owns or controls the franchisee, or an operator of the
broadband system is such a change of control.
USER
A person or organization utilizing a channel or equipment and facilities for purposes of producing
and/or transmitting material, as contrasted with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.
Article III. Grant of Franchise
§ 94-4. Grant of franchises.
The Township may grant one or more franchises, and each such franchise shall be awarded in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this chapter. This chapter may be amended from time
to time, and in no event shall this chapter be considered a contract between the Township and a
franchisee such that the Township would be prohibited from amending any provision hereof. No such
amendment shall be applied retroactively to materially impair preexisting contractual agreements
entered into between the Township and a franchisee.
§ 94-5. Franchise required.
No person may construct or operate a broadband system over, on, or under public streets in the
Township without a franchise granted by the Township unless otherwise authorized by law, and no
person may be granted a franchise without having entered into a franchise agreement with the
Township pursuant to this chapter.
§ 94-6. Franchise characteristics.
A franchise authorizes use of Township streets for installing cables, wires, lines, optical fiber,
underground conduit, and other facilities to provide cable service or telecommunications service
within a franchise area, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the franchisee to provide
service to, or install cables, wires, lines, underground conduit, or any other equipment or facilities
on private property without owner consent [except for use of compatible easements pursuant to
Section 621 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)], or to use publicly or privately owned conduits
without a separate agreement with the owners.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 62/620
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
The term of a franchise shall not exceed 15 years and may not exceed five years unless the
franchise agreement contains clear and enforceable provisions for regulating upgrades, improving
any customer service requirements, reevaluating the provision of additional access channels,
reevaluating interconnection of the system with other cable systems, and making such other
requirements as may be necessary in light of advancements in technology at minimum intervals of
not greater than every five years.
A franchise is nonexclusive and will not explicitly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other
franchises to operate broadband systems within the Township or affect the Township's right to
authorize use of Township streets by other persons to operate broadband systems or for other
purposes as it determines appropriate.
Once a franchise agreement has been accepted and executed by the Township and a franchisee,
such franchise agreement shall constitute a contract between the franchisee and the Township,
and the terms, conditions, and provisions of such franchise agreement, subject to the chapter and
all other duly enacted and applicable laws, shall define the rights and obligations of the franchisee
and the Township relating to the franchise.
All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the
streets, and the Township reserves the right to reasonably designate where a franchisee's facilities
are to be placed within the streets.
A franchise shall be a privilege that is in the public trust and personal to the original franchisee. No
transfer of a franchise shall occur without the prior consent of the Township and unless application
is made by the franchisee and Township approval obtained pursuant to this chapter and the
franchise agreement.
A franchise holder may not enter into or enforce any exclusive contract with a subscriber
(including a building owner) as a condition of providing or continuing service.
§ 94-7. Franchisee subject to other laws, police power.
A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and
Township laws. A franchisee shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power
of the Township, including all rights the Township may have under 47 U.S.C. § 552.
No course of dealing between a franchisee and the Township, nor any delay on the part of the
Township in exercising any rights hereunder, shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the
Township or acquiescence in the actions of the franchisee in contravention of rights except to the
extent expressly waived by the Township or expressly provided for in a franchise agreement, or
except as provided in 47 U.S.C. § 546(d).
The Township shall have the maximum plenary authority to regulate broadband systems,
franchisees, and franchises as may now or hereafter be lawfully permissible; except where rights
are expressly waived by a franchise agreement they are reserved, whether expressly enumerated
or not.
§ 94-8. Interpretation of franchise terms.
The express terms of this chapter will prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in a
franchise agreement unless such franchise agreement expresses an explicit intent to waive a
requirement of this chapter.
The provisions of a franchise agreement will be liberally construed in favor of the Township in
order to effectuate the purposes and objectives of this chapter and the franchise agreement and to
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 63/620
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
promote the public interest.
Except as to matters that are governed solely by federal law or regulation, a franchise agreement
will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 94-9. Operation of a broadband system without a franchise.
After the effective date of this chapter, any person who occupies Township streets or public rights-ofway
for the purpose of operating or constructing a broadband system and who does not hold a valid
franchise from the Township shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to
its provisions regarding construction and technical standards and franchise fees. In its discretion, the
Township at any time may require such person to enter into a franchise agreement within 30 days of
receipt of a written notice by the Township that a franchise agreement is required; and/or require such
person to remove its property and restore the area to a condition satisfactory to the Township within
such time period; and/or remove the property itself and restore the area to a satisfactory condition and
charge the person the costs therefor. In no event shall a franchise be created unless it is issued by
action of the Township and subject to a franchise agreement.
§ 94-10. Right of condemnation reserved.
Nothing in this chapter or the franchise shall limit any right the Township may have to acquire by
eminent domain or otherwise any property of a franchisee.
Article IV. Applications for Grant, Renewal or Modification
§ 94-11. Written application.
A written application shall be filed with the Township for grant of an initial franchise; renewal of a
franchise under either the formal or informal procedures in accordance with Section 626 of the
Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546; or modification of a franchise agreement pursuant to this chapter or a
franchise agreement. An applicant has the burden to demonstrate in its application compliance
with all requirements of this chapter and all applicable laws.
To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be submitted together with five
copies. The application must be accompanied by the required application filing fee as set forth in
§ 405-15, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all required information. All
applications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the
applicant with respect to the application.
All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the Township for public inspection.
§ 94-12. Application for grant of an initial franchise.
A person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting a request for issuance of a request for
proposal ("RFP") and requesting an evaluation of that proposal pursuant to § 94-12D. Upon
receipt of a request for an RFP from an applicant seeking a franchise to provide cable service
and/or telecommunications service, the Township shall commence a proceeding to identify the
relevant future needs and interests of the community and, upon completion of that proceeding,
shall promptly issue an RFP and proposed franchise agreement, which shall be mailed to the
person requesting its issuance and made available to any other interested party. The applicant
shall respond within the time directed by the Township, providing the information and material set
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 64/620
B.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(3)
C.
forth in § 94-12C. The procedures, instructions, and requirements set forth in the RFP shall be
followed by each applicant as if set forth and required herein. The Township Manager, or his/her
designee, shall be authorized to seek additional information from any applicant and to establish
deadlines for the submission of that information.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 94-12A, a person may apply for an initial franchise by
submitting an unsolicited proposal and requesting an evaluation of that proposal pursuant to § 94-
12D.
An RFP for the grant of an initial franchise shall require, and an unsolicited proposal shall contain,
at minimum, the following information:
Name and address of the applicant and identification of the ownership and control of the
applicant, including; the names and addresses of the 10 largest holders of an ownership
interest in the applicant and affiliates of the applicant, and all persons with five-percent or
more ownership interest in the applicant and its affiliates; the persons who control the
applicant and its affiliates; all officers and directors of the applicant and its affiliates; and any
other business affiliation and broadband system ownership interest of each named person.
A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct and/or operate the proposed
broadband system, including identification of key personnel.
A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to construct and/or operate the
proposed broadband system, including but not limited to a demonstration that the applicant
meets the following criteria:
The applicant must not have submitted an application for an initial or renewal franchise to
the Township, which was denied on the ground that the applicant failed to propose a
broadband system meeting the cable-related needs and interests of the community, or as
to which any challenges to such franchising decision were finally resolved adversely to
the applicant, within three years preceding the submission of the application.
The applicant must not have had any franchise validly revoked by any franchising
authority within three years preceding the submission of the application.
The applicant must have the necessary authority under Pennsylvania law to provide
cable service and/or telecommunications service, as appropriate.
A franchise will not be issued to an applicant that may not hold the franchise as a matter
of law. An applicant must have, or show that it is qualified to obtain, the necessary federal
licenses or waivers required to operate the broadband system proposed.
The Township may, in its sole discretion, refuse to issue a franchise if, at any time during
the 10 years preceding the submission of the application, applicant was convicted of any
act or omission of such character that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal
truthfully with the Township and the subscribers of the broadband system, or to
substantially comply with its lawful obligations under applicable law, including obligations
under consumer protection laws and laws prohibiting anticompetitive acts, fraud,
racketeering, or other similar conduct.
An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially misleading information in
response to an RFP issued by the Township, or intentionally withholds information that
the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if an elected official of the Township holds a
controlling interest in the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Township shall provide an opportunity to an applicant
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 65/620
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
D.
to show that it would be inappropriate to deny it a franchise under Subsection C(3)(b) or
(e), by virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken
by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom, the lack of involvement of the
applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of broadband
systems.
A statement prepared by a certified public accountant regarding the applicant's financial
ability to complete the construction and operation of the broadband system proposed.
A description of the applicant's prior experience in broadband system ownership,
construction, and operation, and, if cable service is proposed, identification of communities in
which the applicant or any of its principals have, or have had, a cable television franchise or
license or any interest therein.
Identification of the area of the Township to be served by the proposed broadband system,
including a description of the proposed franchise area's boundaries.
A detailed description of the physical facilities proposed, including channel capacity, technical
design, performance characteristics, headend, and access facilities.
Where applicable, a description of the construction of the proposed broadband system,
including an estimate of plant mileage and its location, the proposed construction schedule, a
description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to
new facilities, and information on the availability of space in conduits, including, where
appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities.
The proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each service tier, installation,
converters, and other equipment or services, as applicable.
If cable service is proposed, demonstration of how the applicant's proposal to provide cable
service will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community,
including descriptions of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent
community needs assessment conducted by or for the Township, and how the proposal will
provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities, or
financial support to meet the community's needs and interests.
Pro forma financial projections for the proposed franchise term, including a statement of
projected income, and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant
assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules.
If an applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing
cable service franchisee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur, the
potential subscriber density in the area that would encompass the overbuild, and the ability of
the streets to accommodate an additional broadband system.
Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
Information that the Township may request of the applicant that is relevant to the Township's
consideration of the application.
An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and
accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application
commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and state law requirements.
In evaluating an application for an initial franchise seeking authority to provide cable service
and/or telecommunications service, the Township shall consider, among other things, the following
factors:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 66/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
E.
F.
The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with the applicable law and the
material terms of any existing franchise for the Township.
Whether the quality of the applicant's service under an existing franchise in Uwchlan,
including signal quality, response to customer complaints, billing practices, and the like, has
been reasonable in light of the needs and interests of the communities served.
Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal qualifications to provide cable
service.
Whether the applicant's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related needs and
interests of the community, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests.
Whether, to the extent not considered as part of Subsection D(4), the applicant will provide
adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities, or
financial support.
Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public interest considering the immediate
and future effect on the public rights-of-way and private property which would be used by the
broadband system, including the extent to which installation or maintenance as planned
would require replacement of property or involve disruption of property, public services, the
public rights-of-way; the effect of granting a franchise on the ability of the broadband system
to meet the cable-related needs and interests of the community; and the comparative
superiority or inferiority of competing proposals.
Whether the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant owns or controls any other broadband
system in the Township, or whether grant of the application may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service or telecommunications service in the Township.
If the Township finds that it is in the public interest to issue a franchise considering the factors set
forth above, it shall issue a franchise, subject to the applicant's entry into an appropriate franchise
agreement. If the Township denies a franchise, it shall issue a written decision explaining why the
franchise was denied. Prior to deciding whether to issue or not to issue a franchise, the Township
may hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from
the public on an applicant's proposal may be received. The Township also may grant or deny a
request for a franchise based on its review of an application without further proceedings and may
reject any application which is incomplete or fails to respond to an RFP.
If the Township grants a franchise subject to the applicant's entry into a franchise agreement, the
Township and the franchisee shall agree on the terms of a franchise agreement within 30 calendar
days from the date of the Township resolution granting the franchise. This period may be extended
for good cause by the Township. If agreement is not reached with the Township within 30 calendar
days from the date of the Township resolution granting the franchise, or if the period is not
extended by the Township, the franchise will be null and void without further action by the
Township. The Township shall approve or disapprove the proposed agreement by resolution or
may direct that it be subject to further negotiation.
§ 94-13. Application for grant of a renewal franchise.
Renewal franchise authorizing the provision of cable service shall be conducted in a manner consistent
with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546. If neither the franchisee nor the Township activates
or can activate the renewal process set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(c) (including, for example, if the
provisions are repealed), the provisions of § 94-12 shall apply, and a renewal request shall be treated
the same as a request for an initial franchise. The following additional requirements shall apply to all
applicants seeking renewal after the effective date of this chapter where the procedures set forth in 47
U.S.C. § 546(a)-(c) are activated:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 67/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
Within six months after receipt of notice from a franchisee that has invoked the renewal
procedures of Section 626 of the Cable Act, the Township shall undertake a proceeding, including
notice to, and opportunity for participation by, the public, for the purpose of: identifying future
cable-related community needs and interests, including the costs of meeting such needs and
interests, and reviewing compliance by the franchisee with the then-current franchise. Such
proceeding shall be completed within 12 months from the date begun. The Township shall submit
a copy of its findings, if any, in writing to the franchisee within said twelve-month period.
Upon the expiration of the twelve-month period set forth in Subsection A above, the franchisee
may submit to the Township a proposal for renewal.
Upon receipt of the renewal application, the Township shall publish a notice of its receipt once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Township and make copies available for review by the
public.
Within four months of the date it receives the proposal for renewal, and based on the standards
set forth in § 94-12D of this chapter, the Township will either pass a resolution agreeing to renew
the franchise, subject to the negotiation of a franchise agreement satisfactory to the Township and
the franchisee, or pass a resolution that makes a preliminary assessment that the franchise should
not be renewed, provided that, if the Township and a franchisee cannot reach a franchise
agreement within four months after the proposal is received, then the resolution agreeing to
renewal shall be deemed a resolution preliminary assessing that the franchise should not be
renewed.
If a preliminary assessment is made that a franchise should not be renewed, at the request of the
franchisee the Township will commence a proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of the
Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(c), to address the issues set forth in Section 626(c)(1)(A)-(D) of the
Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(c)(1)(A)-(D).
If renewal of a franchise is denied, the Township may acquire ownership of the broadband system
or effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another person upon approval of the Board. Any
such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value, determined on the basis of the broadband
system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself.
If renewal of a franchise is denied and the Township does not purchase the broadband system or
approve or effect a transfer of the broadband system to another person, the Township may require
the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If
the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the Township may have the
removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense.
To the extent that any of the substantive provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with Section
626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546, they shall not apply.
§ 94-14. Application for modification of a franchise.
An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall include, at minimum, the following
information:
The specific modification requested;
The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of the requested modification
on subscribers and others, and the financial impact on the applicant if the modification is approved
or disapproved, demonstrated through, inter alia, submission of financial pro formas;
A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Cable Act, 47
U.S.C. § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the standards set
forth in 47 U.S.C. § 545;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 68/620
D.
E.
[1]
A.
Any other information that the applicant believes is necessary for the Township to make an
informed determination on the application for modification; and
An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of
the information in the application, and certifying that the application is consistent with all federal
and state law requirements.
§ 94-15. Filing fees.
To be acceptable for filing, an application for the grant or modification of a franchise submitted after the
effective date of this chapter shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 94-16. Public hearings.
An applicant shall be notified of any public hearing held in connection with the evaluation of its
proposal and shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
Article V. Cable System Design
§ 94-17. System requirements.
Unless a review of future cable-related needs and interests (whether conducted prior to issuance of an
RFP or in evaluating an unsolicited proposal) shows that different standards should apply, every cable
system must at least satisfy the following requirements.
§ 94-18. Minimum capacity.
Any cable system constructed, upgraded, or reconstructed after the effective date of this chapter at a
minimum shall be designed to meet or exceed the capacity standards of the cable system with the
greatest capacity then in operation within the County of Chester. The franchisee shall comply with all
FCC standards and requirements pertaining to converters and cable-ready televisions as may be
amended from time to time.
§ 94-19. Description of system.
The franchisee shall provide the Township a full description of the system proposed for construction
and shall, upon completion of any system modification or upgrade, submit to the Township as-built
maps for the entire system, as modified or upgraded, to the extent such maps have not previously
been provided to the Township.
§ 94-20. Interconnection.
The franchisee and the Township shall evaluate at intervals no greater than once every five years
from the date of the franchise agreement the feasibility of interconnecting the cable system with
other cable systems.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 69/620
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
When feasible, the franchisee shall, at the request of the Township, interconnect with other cable
systems.
Nothing herein shall require franchisee to interconnect with another cable system without the
permission of such cable system. All costs of any interconnection required by this section are
external costs which may be passed through directly to basic subscribers. To the extent Township
approval is required for any such basic rate adjustment, franchisee shall be under no obligation to
perform such interconnection until such approval is granted.
§ 94-21. Provision of service.
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, after cable service has been established by
activating trunk distribution cable for an area specified in a franchise agreement, the franchisee shall
provide cable service to any household requesting cable service within that area, including each
multiple-dwelling unit in that area, except for multiple-dwelling units to which it cannot obtain access. At
a minimum, franchisee shall provide cable service within the Township whenever there is a minimum of
35 homes per linear mile into which the system can be extended. This construction will be completed
as soon as possible, but, in any case, within six months of attainment of said density for aboveground
facilities and within 12 months for underground facilities. Franchisee may apply to the Township for an
extension of the time limit, not to exceed an additional six-month period, provided that the franchisee
used due diligence in attempting timely completion and any delay was caused by circumstances
beyond the franchisee's control, in which case Township's agreement to said extension shall not be
unreasonably withheld. For new residential subdivisions, a franchisee shall install cable system
facilities in the public right-of-way to be dedicated to the Township concurrent with the installation of
other utilities in the public right-of-way.
§ 94-22. Technical standards.
Any cable system within the Township shall meet or exceed the technical standards set forth in 47
CFR § 76.601 and any other applicable technical standards, including any such standards as
hereafter may be amended or adopted by the Township.
A franchisee shall not design, install, or operate its facilities in a manner that will interfere with the
signals of any broadcast station, the facilities of any public utility, the cable system of another
franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast
signals.
At the times specified in the franchise agreement or as required by FCC rules, the franchise shall
perform at its expense proof of performance tests, and such other tests as may be specified in the
franchise agreement, designed to demonstrate compliance with this section, the franchise
agreement, and FCC requirements. The franchisee shall, upon the request of the Township, make
such test results available to the Township for inspection and copying at the franchisee's offices.
The Township shall have the right to inspect the cable system facilities during and after their
construction to ensure compliance with this section, the franchise agreement, and applicable
provisions of local, state and federal law, and may require the franchisee to perform additional
tests based upon its prior investigation of system performance or upon subscriber complaints.
Article VI. Minimum Facilities and Services
§ 94-23. Emergency Alert System.
A franchisee shall install and thereafter maintain an Emergency Alert System ("EAS"). This EAS shall
be designed and operated to meet or exceed all FCC standards and requirements as may be
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 70/620
A.
B.
A.
B.
amended from time to time.
§ 94-24. Access channels.
The franchisee shall reserve for the nonexclusive use by the Township and the Downingtown Area
School District, without charge, a minimum of one six-megahertz downstream channel for public,
educational, and governmental use, to subscribers delivering a signal the technical quality of
which is equivalent to the technical quality of other channels on the broadband system. The
franchisee shall provide all modulators, demodulators, laser transmitters/receivers and other
devices as may be required to permit use of the downstream capacity.
The franchisee and the Township shall evaluate at minimum intervals of no greater than once
every five years the need for the provision of additional access channels for use by the Township
and the Downingtown Area School District without charge. Each reevaluation shall consider, but
shall not be limited to, the reservation by the franchisee of the amount of capacity required to
transmit one six-megahertz channel upstream, for public, educational and governmental use, the
provision by the franchisee of all modulators, demodulators, laser transmitters/receivers, and other
devices as may be required to permit use of the upstream capacity, and such modifications as
may be required to use video compression technology and add such equipment in connection with
all or part of the upstream and downstream channel capacity for public, educational, and
governmental use. When additional access channels are deemed necessary by the Township after
an evaluation, the franchisee shall reserve the same for public, educational, and/or governmental
use.
§ 94-25. Studio and equipment.
The franchisee and the Township shall evaluate at minimum intervals of no greater than once every
five years the need for the provision of one public access facility located within the Township or at such
location designated by the Township, which facility shall include an adequate studio, editing suites,
control room, playback area, administrative and training space, tape, set, and equipment storage
space, and all property shall be secured, ventilated, air conditioned, heated, lighted, wired, and
accessible to the handicapped. It shall also provide equipment to fully equip the facility, including the
studio, separate portable equipment suitable for community use, automated playback equipment, and
control facilities, so that signals can be received on the upstream channels or originated from the
facility, and then routed from the facility to the broadband system headend and onto appropriate
channels on the broadband system. When the provision of the public access facility is deemed
necessary by the Township after an evaluation, the franchisee shall provide the same in accordance
with this section.
§ 94-26. Remote line telecasting.
The franchisee and the Township shall evaluate at minimum intervals of no greater than once
every five years the need for the provision of upstream channel capacity for live telecasts from
such public buildings as may be specified in the franchise agreement. When the provision of
upstream capacity is deemed necessary by the Township after evaluation, the franchisee shall
provide such capacity.
Upon the provision of remote live telecasting, the franchisee shall make available all devices
necessary to accomplish upstream telecasts through such public facilities.
§ 94-27. Recovery of external costs.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 71/620
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
The Township acknowledges that a franchisee is entitled to pass through to basic subscribers the
increased costs incurred in providing any of the foregoing facilities and services which may be required
by the Township in the future. To the extent Township approval is required for any such basic rate
adjustment, franchisee shall be under no obligation to provide such facilities or services until such
approval is granted.
Article VII. Construction Provisions
§ 94-28. System construction schedule.
The franchisee shall specify the construction schedule.
§ 94-29. Construction standards.
The construction, operation, maintenance, and repair of the broadband system shall be in
accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as
amended; the National Electrical Safety Code; the National Electric Code; FCC; the Standards of
Good Engineering Practices for Measurement of Cable Television Systems of the National Cable
Television Association; other applicable federal, state, or local laws and regulations that may apply
to the operation, construction, maintenance, or repair of a broadband system, including, without
limitation, local zoning and construction codes, and laws and accepted industry practices, all as
hereafter may be amended or adopted.
All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature, using durable components.
Without limiting the foregoing, antennas and their supporting structures (towers) shall be painted,
lighted, erected, and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the
Federal Aviation Administration; Uwchlan Township Ordinance No. 88-7[1] and all other applicable
state or local laws, codes, and regulations; all as hereafter may be amended or adopted.
Editor's Note: See now Ch. 265, the Township Zoning Ordinance.
Without limiting the foregoing, all the franchisee's plant and equipment, including, but not limited
to, the antenna sites, headend and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures,
poles, wires, cable, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, fixtures, and apparatuses shall be installed,
located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained, and
operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance
and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the Township
shall deem appropriate to make or to interfere in any manner with the rights-of-way or legal rights
of any property owner or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
A franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly
accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause
damage, injury, or nuisance to the public.
Any and all streets, public property, or private property which are disturbed or damaged during the
construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, or construction of the
broadband system shall be promptly repaired by the franchisee at its expense, and in strict
compliance with all applicable Township standards.
A franchisee shall, at its expense and by a time specified by the Township, protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its property when required by the Township by
reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, street resurfacing or widening,
change of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks,
or any other type of municipal, public utility improvements, street vacation, or for any other
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 72/620
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
purpose where the convenience of the Township would be served thereby; provided, however, that
the franchisee shall, in all such cases, have the privilege of abandoning any property in place.
If any removal, re-laying, or relocation is required to accommodate the construction, operation, or
repair of the facilities of another person that is authorized to use the public streets, a franchisee
shall, after 30 days' advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes requested
by the responsible entity. The Township may resolve disputes as to responsibility for costs
associated with the removal, re-laying, or relocation of facilities among those authorized to install
facilities in the public streets if the parties are unable to do so themselves.
In the event of an emergency, or where a broadband system creates or is contributing to an
imminent danger to health, safety, or property, the Township may remove, re-lay, or relocate that
broadband system subject to such prior notice to the franchisee as may be reasonable under the
circumstances giving rise to the emergency or danger involved.
A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the
Township, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of
such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting
same, and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance, except in
the case where the requesting person is the Township, in which case no such payment shall be
required. The franchisee shall be given not less than 10 days' advance notice to arrange for such
temporary wire changes.
A franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees that overhang a street or public right-of-way of
the Township so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires
and cables of the franchisee, provided that the franchisee provides reasonable prior notice to the
Township and complies with Township requirements. The Township shall have the right to
supervise such trimming.
A franchisee shall use, with the owner's permission, existing underground conduits or overhead
utility facilities whenever feasible and may not erect poles in public rights-of-way without the
express permission of the Township. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a franchisee
shall erect its facilities on existing power and telephone poles pursuant to pole attachment
agreements to be entered into between franchisee and the utility companies having ownership of
or otherwise having jurisdiction over such existing power and telephone poles. Copies of
agreements for use of conduits or other facilities shall be filed with the Township as required by
the franchise agreement or upon Township request. No new poles shall be set by franchisee
except where no poles exist or use of an existing utility pole is not practicable due to excessive
rearrangements or other conditions.
On streets where electrical and telephone utility wiring is located underground, either at the time of
initial construction of a cable system or at any time thereafter, a franchisee's cable shall also be
located underground at the franchisee's expense. Between a street and a subscriber's residence,
a franchisee's cable must be located underground if both electrical and telephone utility wiring are
located underground. If either electric or telephone utility wiring is aerial, a franchisee may install
aerial cable except where a property owner or resident requests underground installation and
agrees to bear the additional cost of such installation over and above the cost of aerial installation.
All wires, cable lines, and other transmission lines, equipment, and structures shall be installed
and located to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners,
and shall be constructed and maintained by a franchisee so as not to interfere with television and
radio reception by inhabitants not using the services of the franchisee. The Township may issue
such rules and regulations concerning the installation and maintenance of a broadband system
installed in, on, or over the streets, as may be consistent with this chapter and the franchise
agreement. The Township shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles
owned by the franchisee any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the
broadband system operations of the franchisee.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 73/620
O.
[2]
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
All safety practices required by law shall be used during construction, maintenance, and repair of
a broadband system. A franchisee shall not place facilities, equipment, or fixtures where they will
interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer, or other utility facilities, or obstruct or
hinder in any manner the various utilities serving the residents of the Township of their use of any
street or any other public right-of-way, and shall at all times fully comply with the requirements of
Act 287 pertaining to "Call One."
Prior to erection of any towers, poles, or conduits or the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of a
broadband system authorized under this chapter, the franchisee shall first submit to the Township
and other designated parties for approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be
erected or installed, including engineering drawings, as required, together with a map and plans
indicating the proposed location of all such facilities. For the erection of towers, the franchisee
shall in addition comply with the requirements of Uwchlan Township Ordinance No. 88-7[2] as may
be amended from time to time. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, underground conduit,
or fixture or any rebuilds or upgrading of the broadband system shall be commenced by any
person until approval therefor has been received from the Township.
Editor's Note: See now Ch. 265, the Township Zoning Ordinance.
Any contractor proposed for work or construction, installation, operation, maintenance, or repair of
broadband system equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the state and all applicable
local ordinances.
In the event the use of any part of a broadband system is discontinued for any reason for a
continuous period of 12 months, or in the event such broadband system or property has been
installed in any street without complying with the requirements of this chapter or a franchise
agreement, or the franchise is terminated or canceled or has expired, the franchisee, within 30
days after written notice by the Township, shall commence removal from the streets of all such
property as the Township may require.
The Township may extend the time for the removal of abandoned facilities for a period not to
exceed 180 days.
In the event of such removal or abandonment, the franchisee shall restore the area to a condition
satisfactory to the Township.
§ 94-30. Publicizing proposed construction work.
Except for emergency repair work, a franchisee shall publicize proposed construction work at least one
week prior to commencement of that work by causing written notice of such construction work to be
delivered to the Township Manager and by making reasonable efforts to notify those persons most
likely to be affected by the work in at least one of the following ways: by telephone, in person, by mail,
by distribution of flyers to residences, or in any other manner reasonably calculated to provide
adequate notice.
Article VIII. Operation and Reporting Provisions
§ 94-31. Open books and records.
The Township shall have the right to inspect and copy upon two weeks' written notice at any time
during normal business hours at the broadband system office or at such location as the Township and
the franchisee may agree, all books, receipts, maps, plans, financial statements, contracts, service
complaint logs, performance test results, records of requests for service and other like material of the
franchisee which the Township deems appropriate in order to monitor compliance with the terms of this
chapter, a franchise agreement, a rate regulation filing or applicable law.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 74/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
G.
H.
§ 94-32. Reports required.
The franchisee shall, upon the request of the Township, make the following reports available to the
Township for inspection and copying at the franchisee's office:
All reports required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including, but not limited
to any proof of performance tests and results, Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) reports, and
all petitions, applications, and communications of all types submitted by the franchisee to the FCC,
the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), or any other federal or state regulatory
commission or agency having jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of franchisee's
system.
An annual report setting forth the physical miles of plant construction and plant in operation during
the fiscal year shall be submitted to the Township. Such report shall also contain any revisions to
the broadband system as-built maps filed with the Township. The annual report shall be available
in February.
Construction reports shall be available to the Township bimonthly after the franchise is awarded
for any construction undertaken during the term of the franchise until construction is complete,
including any rebuild that may be specified in the franchise.
Proof of performance test results shall be available to the Township when sections of the
broadband system are rebuilt and as required in this chapter.
Technical tests required by the Township as specified in this chapter and the franchise agreement
shall be available to the Township promptly upon completion of such tests.
Ownership reports for the franchise area shall be available annually to the Township 90 days after
the end of the franchisee's fiscal year to reflect any changes from the preceding year in the
following:
Any persons who at any time during the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest
in the franchise of 5% or more.
All officers and members of the Board of Directors of the franchisee.
The following broadband system and operational reports shall be available annually to the
Township:
A report on the broadband system's technical tests and measurements.
A report on programs and services offered by the franchisee, including public, educational,
governmental, and leased access channels.
An annual summary of the previous year's activities, including, but not limited to, subscriber
totals for each category of service offered, including number of pay units sold, new services
offered, and the amount collected annually from other users of the broadband system and the
character and extent of the service rendered thereto.
An annual summary of complaints received and handled in addition to any reports required in
the franchise.
An annual projection of broadband system and service plans for the future.
The franchisee shall prepare and make available to the Township at the time and in the form
prescribed such additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions, or property as
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 75/620
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or
duties of the Township in connection with this chapter or the franchise.
§ 94-33. Records required.
The franchisee shall at all times maintain:
A record of all complaints received and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for
the preceding twelve-month period prior to a performance review.
A full and complete set of plans, records, and as-built maps showing the approximate location
of all broadband system equipment installed or in use in the Township, exclusive of subscriber
service drops.
Upon the request of the Township for specific locations in the Township, the franchisee shall mark
the exact locations of the broadband system equipment installed or in use at the specified
locations, in accordance with the Underground Utility Line Protection Law, the Act of December
10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287, 73 P.S. § 176 et seq., as amended by Act 38 of 1991, and as may be
amended from time to time.
The Township may impose reasonable requests for additional information, records, and
documents from time to time.
§ 94-34. Performance evaluation.
The Township may, at its discretion, hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions annually.
Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the
request of the Township.
All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general
circulation. Franchisee shall notify subscribers of all such evaluation sessions by announcement
on a local origination channel on the system between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. for
five consecutive days preceding each session.
Topics that may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not
be limited to, system performance and construction, franchisee compliance with this chapter and
the franchise, customer service and complaint response, subscriber privacy, services provided,
programming offered, service rate structures, if applicable, franchise fees, penalties, free or
discounted services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and line
extensions.
During the review and evaluation by the Township, the franchisee shall fully cooperate with the
Township and shall provide such information and documents as the Township may need to
reasonably perform its review.
§ 94-35. Proprietary information.
If this Article VIII or any request for information by the Township under this chapter requires the
production of proprietary information, the franchisee must produce the information. However, at
the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, the franchisee may request that
specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public
disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as
proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 76/620
B.
A.
B.
C.
if the Township determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is
consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552. If the Township
decides that information can be withheld, it will issue a written decision explaining the basis for
withholding the information, and place that decision in a public file for inspection. If the franchisee
requests confidentiality and the request is denied, the franchisee may seek review within five
working days of the denial in any appropriate forum.
Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the
Township. The Township shall weight the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the
reason cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly
notify the requesting entity and the franchisee that submitted the information as to the disposition
of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the franchisee
may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal in any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be
stayed pending resolution of any appeal.
Article IX. Consumer Protection Provisions
§ 94-36. Customer service requirements.
Every franchise agreement shall require a franchisee to comply with all applicable federal, state, and
local customer service requirements and shall specify the minimum customer service requirements the
franchisee must satisfy. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, every franchisee must satisfy the following
requirements whether or not specified in its franchise agreement.
A franchisee shall maintain a business office at a location where subscribers may readily visit and
may call without incurring toll charges that shall be open at least during normal business hours,
which shall include evening hours and some weekend hours.
A franchisee shall render sufficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for
good cause and for the shortest time possible. A franchisee shall generally respond to all service
calls within 24 hours and correct cable malfunctions as promptly as possible and shall maintain a
competent staff sufficient to provide adequate and prompt service to its subscribers. A franchisee
shall provide a pro rata credit to subscribers for periods of interruption of service in accordance
with applicable law.
A franchisee shall maintain adequate telephone lines and personnel to respond to subscriber
complaints or inquiries and schedule service calls in a timely manner. A franchisee shall respond
to written subscriber complaints in writing within five business days, with a copy to the Township. A
franchisee shall also respond to Township complaints in writing within five business days.
§ 94-37. Notice of programming changes.
A franchisee shall give at least 30 days' notice to subscribers and the Township of any change in
programming decisions or channel realignment.
§ 94-38. Reconnection.
A franchisee shall restore service to customers wishing restoration of service, provided customer shall
first satisfy any previous obligations owed including the full payment of previous balances, penalties
and interest.
§ 94-39. Disconnection.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 77/620
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Subscribers shall have the right to have cable service disconnected. A refund of unused service
charges shall be paid to the customer within 30 days from the date of termination of service.
§ 94-40. Parental control option.
A franchisee shall provide parental control devices to all subscribers who wish to be able to cut off any
objectionable channel or channels of programming from the cable service entering the subscriber's
home.
§ 94-41. Township Manager.
The Township Manager shall be responsible as the Township official for receiving and acting upon any
unresolved complaints. Written notice of this complaint procedure, including the identity of the
Township official responsible for receiving unresolved complaints, shall be given to each subscriber at
the time of initial subscription to the cable system.
Article X. Rate Regulation
§ 94-42. Rate charge and rate schedule.
Each franchisee shall state in its proposal to enter into an agreement for the award of a franchise
hereunder its initial monthly rates, installation charges, and all other charges, including but not
limited to equipment fees, late fees, and other administrative charges, if any.
A franchisee shall give subscribers at least 30 days' notice of its intention to change monthly rates,
equipment charges, and installation charges by mailing notices thereof to each of the current
subscribers to whom such charges will apply. The franchisee shall give the Township Manager or
his designee 45 days' advance notice of any rate change.
The franchisee shall not, as to rates, charges, services, or facilities, make or grant any undue
privilege or advantage to any party, nor subject any party to undue prejudice or disadvantage,
provided that the franchisee may establish reasonable classifications of customers. Nothing in this
chapter prohibits the reduction or waiver of charges in connection with temporary promotional
campaigns or providing a senior citizen discount, provided the same waivers are provided to all
similarly situated customers.
§ 94-43. Local regulatory framework.
The Township is a certificated franchising authority under the Cable Act, and empowered by the
FCC to regulate rates for basic tier service and customer service and equipment. The Township
shall regulate all rates and charges except to the extent it is prohibited from doing so by law, and
no rate or charge may be imposed without the prior approval of the Township except such rates
and charges that the Township is prohibited from regulating. Subject to the foregoing, any change
made without prior approval is an illegal change, and a franchisee is prohibited from requesting or
requiring a subscriber to pay an illegal rate as a condition of providing service.
All rates must be reasonable. The Township may adopt such regulations, procedures, and
standards as it deems necessary to implement rate regulation and may regulate rates by
amendment to this chapter, by a separate resolution or ordinance, by amendment to a franchise
agreement, or in any other lawful manner.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 78/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Article XI. Franchise Fee
§ 94-44. Finding.
The Township finds that the streets and public rights-of-way of the county, state, and Township to be
used by a franchisee for the operation of a cable television system are valuable public property
acquired and maintained by the county, state, and Township at great expense to the taxpayers. The
Township further finds that the grant of a franchise to use streets and public rights-of-way is a valuable
property right without which a franchisee would be required to invest substantial capital.
§ 94-45. Payment to Township.
The Township shall be paid a franchise fee in an amount no less than the greater of 5% of its
gross annual revenues, or the maximum amount permitted under applicable law. Every franchise
agreement shall specify the percentage the franchise is initially required to pay as a percentage of
gross revenues, but if the maximum amount permitted increases, franchisee shall, simultaneously
with the effective date of any change in any law or, if later, the effective date of any regulation
required to implement the law, increase the franchise fee to the maximum allowed by that law.
The franchise fee is in addition to all other taxes and payments that the franchisee may be
required to pay under any federal, state, or local law and to any other tax, fee, or assessment
imposed by utilities and cable operators for use of their services, facilities or equipment.
Payment of the franchise fee shall not be considered in the nature of a tax.
No acceptance of any payment by the Township shall be construed as a release or an accord and
satisfaction of any claim the Township may have for further or additional sums payable as a
franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the franchisee.
In the event any franchise fee payment or recomputation amount is not made on or before the
date specified herein, the franchisee shall pay additional compensation and interest charges
computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the
Township's primary depository bank during the period such unpaid amount is owed.
The franchise fee and any other costs assessed by the Township against a franchisee shall be
paid quarterly to the Township and shall commence as of the effective date of the franchise,
unless otherwise agreed in the franchise agreement. The Township shall be furnished at the time
of each payment with a statement verified by the franchisee's general manager reflecting the total
amount of semi-annual gross revenues for the payment period. Quarterly payments shall be made
to the Township no later than 45 days of March 30, June 30, September 30 and December 31.
Quarterly computation dates are the last days of the months of March, June, September and
December. An annual statement of gross revenues shall be furnished to the Township by an
independent, certified public accountant approved by the Township. A franchisee shall provide an
annual complete audit statement for each calendar year within 90 days from the end of that
calendar year.
The Township shall have the right to inspect and copy, subject to the provisions regarding
proprietary information in § 94-35 of this chapter, the franchisee's records and the right to audit
and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter for a period of three
years from the date of payment. Audits shall be at the expense of the Township unless the audit
discloses an underpayment in excess of 3%, in which case the costs of the audit shall be borne by
the franchisee as a cost incidental to the enforcement of the franchise. Any additional amounts
due to the Township as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to
the franchisee by the Township of the underpayment, which notice shall include a copy of the audit
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 79/620
H.
A.
B.
report, unless written notice of disagreement is filed by the franchisee with the Township within
such time period. In the case of a dispute, the issue shall be resolved through binding arbitration in
accordance with the procedures of the American Arbitration Association.
The franchisee shall maintain its fiscal and financial records in such a manner as to enable the
Board to determine the cost of assets of the franchisee which are used in providing cable services
within the Township.
Article XII. Insurance; Surety; Indemnification
§ 94-46. Insurance required.
A franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise specifically agrees that it will
maintain, throughout the entire length of the franchise period, at least the following liability insurance
coverage insuring the Township and the franchisee: worker's compensation and employer liability
insurance to meet all requirements of Pennsylvania law and comprehensive general liability insurance
with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of the broadband system, and the conduct
of franchisee's business in the Township, in the minimum amounts of:
One million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
Two million dollars for personal bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident.
§ 94-47. Qualifications of sureties.
All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; shall be with sureties with an A-1 or better rating of insurance by Best's Key Rating
Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; and in a form approved by the Township Manager.
§ 94-48. Policies available for review.
All insurance policies shall be available for review by the Township, and a franchisee shall keep on file
with the Township certificates of insurance.
§ 94-49. Additional insureds; prior notice of policy cancellation.
All insurance policies shall name the Township, its officers, boards, supervisors, agents, and
employees as additional insureds and shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction in
coverage shall not be effective unless 30 days' prior written notice thereof has been given to the
Township. A franchisee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that
the franchisee has obtained alternative insurance satisfactory to the Township which complies with this
chapter.
§ 94-50. Indemnification.
A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the Township,
its officials, boards, commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees, against any and all claims,
suits, causes of action, proceedings, and judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of the
construction, maintenance, or operation of its broadband system, the conduct of franchisee's business
in the Township, or in any way arising out of the franchisee's enjoyment or exercise of a franchise
granted hereunder, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 80/620
A.
B.
prohibited by this chapter or a franchise agreement. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the
Township's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit, or
proceeding; and claims arising out of copyright infringements or a failure by the franchisee to secure
consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or franchisees of programs to be delivered by the
broadband system.
§ 94-51. Indemnification for Cable Act claims.
A franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the
Township, and in its capacity as such, the officers, agents, and employees thereof, from and against
any and all claims, suits, actions, liability, and judgments for damages or otherwise subject to Section
638 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 558, arising out of or alleged to arise out of the installation,
construction, operation, or maintenance of its system, including but not limited to any claim against the
franchisee for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the
violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name, service mark, or patent, or of any
other right of any person, firm, or corporation. Nothing herein shall prohibit the Township from
participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at its own cost and expense.
§ 94-52. No limit of liability.
Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the Township shall be construed
to limit the liability of the franchisee for damages under any franchise issued hereunder.
Article XIII. Enforcement Remedies
§ 94-53. Available remedies.
In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, the Township may apply any one or a
combination of the following remedies in the event a franchisee violates this chapter, its franchise
agreement, or applicable state or federal law:
Revoke the franchise pursuant to the procedures specified in this chapter.
In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the Township may seek legal or equitable relief from
any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 94-54. Fines.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5[1]]
In addition to any other remedy available under this chapter, any person who violates or permits the
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township. Each twenty-fourhour
period that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. All fines and
penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township Treasury. If the
penalty imposed for the violation of this chapter is not voluntarily paid to the Township, the Township
shall initiate a civil enforcement proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge. Upon a finding of
liability for committing said violation, or permitting said violation, in such civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, the defendant shall pay the fine, together with additional daily penalties
for continuing violations, plus costs and attorneys' fees. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
determination of a violation by a Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of
Civil Procedure.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 81/620
[1] Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 94-55. Determination of appropriate remedies.
In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the Township shall take into consideration
the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the
remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the Township
determines are appropriate to the public interest.
Article XIV. Transfers
§ 94-56. Township approval required.
No transfer shall occur without prior approval of the Township.
§ 94-57. Application.
An application for a transfer shall provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including
details on the legal, financial, technical, and other qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential
impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service. At a minimum, the information required in § 94-
12C of this chapter shall be provided with respect to the proposed transferee. Within 30 days of
receiving an application for transfer, the Township shall notify the franchisee of the information it
requires to make the determination in § 94-58 of this chapter and shall take action on that application
within 120 days after receiving the requested information.
§ 94-58. Determination by Township.
In making a determination as to whether to grant, deny, or grant subject to conditions an application for
a transfer of a franchise, the Township shall consider the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of
the transferee to operate the system; whether the incumbent cable operator is in compliance with its
franchise agreement and this chapter and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such
noncompliance; whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable system in the Township, or
whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of cable
service in the Township; and whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer would
adversely affect subscribers, the Township's interest under this chapter, the franchise agreement, or
other applicable law, or make it less likely that the future cable-related needs and interests of the
community would be satisfied at a reasonable cost. The Township reserves the right to review the
purchase price of any transfer or assignment of a cable system. Any negotiated sale value which the
Township deems unreasonable will not be considered in the rate base for any subsequent request for
rate increases, if permitted by applicable law.
§ 94-59. Transferee's agreement.
No application for a transfer of a franchise shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that
it will abide by and accept all terms of this chapter and the franchise agreement and that it will assume
the obligations and liabilities known and unknown of the previous franchisee under this chapter and the
franchise agreement.
§ 94-60. Approval does not constitute waiver.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 82/620
A.
B.
Approval by the Township of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of
the rights of the Township under this chapter or the franchise agreement, whether arising before or
after the date of the transfer.
§ 94-61. Processing fee.
As a condition of considering a transfer, the Township may impose a fee upon the transferee to cover
its estimated out-of-pocket expenses in considering the application for transfer of a franchise. Any
amount collected in excess of the estimated amount shall be returned to the transferee.
Article XV. Revocation or Termination of Franchise
§ 94-62. Basis for revocation.
A franchise may be revoked by the Township for a franchisee's failure to construct, operate, or
maintain the broadband system as required by this chapter or the franchise agreement, for defrauding
or attempting to defraud the Township or subscribers, if the franchisee is declared bankrupt, or for any
other material violation of this chapter or material breach of the franchise agreement. To invoke the
provisions of this article, the Township shall give the franchisee written notice of the default in its
performance. If within 60 calendar days following such written notice from the Township the franchisee
has not taken corrective action or corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued to
the satisfaction of the Township, the Township may give written notice to the franchisee of its intent to
revoke the franchise, stating its reasons, provided that no opportunity to cure shall be provided where
the franchisee has defrauded or attempted to defraud the Township or its subscribers, or in the event
the franchisee is declared bankrupt. In the case of a fraud or attempted fraud, the franchise may be
revoked after the hearing required under § 94-63; revocation for bankruptcy shall be governed by § 94-
64.
§ 94-63. Procedure.
Prior to revoking a franchise, the Township shall hold a public hearing, upon 30 calendar days' notice,
at which time the franchisee and the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Following the
public hearing, the Township may determine whether to revoke the franchise based on the information
presented at the hearing, and other information of record. If the Township determines to revoke a
franchise, it shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its decision. A copy of such
decision shall be transmitted to the franchisee.
§ 94-64. Revocation after bankruptcy.
Any franchise may, at the option of the Township following a public hearing before the Township, be
revoked 120 calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a
receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding,
unless within that one-hundred-twenty-day period:
Such assignment, receivership, or trusteeship has been vacated; or
Such assignee, receiver, or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter
and the franchise agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by a court of competent
jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this chapter and
the franchise agreement, and such other conditions as may be established or as are required
pursuant to Article XIV.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 83/620
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
§ 94-65. Revocation after foreclosure.
In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment, or property of a
franchisee, the Township may revoke the franchise, following a public hearing before the Township, by
serving notice on the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the franchise and
all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked and will terminate 30 calendar days after
serving such notice, unless:
The Township has approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder; and
The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the Township to assume and be bound by
the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and this chapter, and such other conditions
as may be established or as are required pursuant to Article XIV.
§ 94-66. Rights on revocation.
If the Township revokes a franchise, or if for any other reason a franchisee abandons, terminates, or
fails to operate or maintain service to its subscribers, the following procedures and rights are effective:
The Township may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the
former franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of
time, the Township may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's
expense.
In the event of revocation, the Township, by resolution, may acquire ownership of the broadband
system at an equitable price.
If a broadband system is abandoned by a franchisee or the franchisee fails to operate or maintain
service to its subscribers or otherwise terminates the franchise, the ownership of all portions of the
broadband system in public rights-of-way shall revert to the Township, and the Township may sell,
assign, or transfer all or part of the assets of the system.
§ 94-67. Automatic forfeiture.
Notwithstanding § 94-63, where the Township has issued a franchise specifically conditioned in the
franchise agreement upon the completion of construction, system upgrade, or other specific obligation
by a specified date, failure of the franchisee to complete such construction or upgrade, or to comply
with such other specific obligation as required, will result in the automatic forfeiture of the franchise
without further action by the Township where it is so provided in the franchise agreement, unless the
Township, at its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by the franchisee, grants an extension of
time.
Article XVI. Rights of Individuals Protected
§ 94-68. Discriminatory practices prohibited.
A franchisee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers,
programmers, or residents of the Township on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, or
age. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a franchisee may offer price discounts to senior citizens. A
franchisee shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state, and Township laws, and all
executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 84/620
§ 94-69. Equal employment opportunity.
A franchisee shall not refuse to employ, discharge from employment, or discriminate against any
person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, or age. The franchisee shall comply with federal, state, and local laws and
regulations governing equal employment opportunities, as the same may be from time to time
amended.
§ 94-70. Subscriber privacy.
A franchisee shall at all times protect the privacy of all subscribers pursuant to the provisions of
Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551. A franchisee shall not condition subscriber service on
the subscriber's grant of permission to disclose information which, pursuant to federal or state law,
cannot be disclosed without the subscriber's explicit consent.
Article XVII. Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 94-71. Compliance with laws.
A franchisee shall comply with all laws and regulations which apply to the transmission and distribution
of audio, visual and video impulses and with all other applicable federal, state, and Township laws and
regulations as they become effective, unless otherwise stated.
§ 94-72. Severability.
If any term, condition, or provision of this chapter shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or
unenforceable, the remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be effective. In
the event of a subsequent change in applicable law so that the provision which had been held invalid is
no longer invalid, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect without further action by
the Township and shall thereafter be binding on a franchisee and the Township.
§ 94-73. Emergency use.
Upon request of the Township, a franchisee shall, at its sole expense, make available systems and
related facilities for emergency use during any emergency or disaster, in accordance with FCC
standards and requirements, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 94-74. Captions.
Captions and headings of this chapter are for convenience and reference purposes only and shall not
affect in any way the meaning and interpretation of any provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-75. Calculation of time.
Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, payment, or thing
is required hereunder and a period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed
and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 85/620
prescribed or fixed period of duration time. When the last day of the period falls on a Saturday, Sunday,
or a legal holiday, that day shall not be counted in the computation.
§ 94-76. Repealer.
Upon the effective date of this chapter, Ordinance No. 88-16 is hereby repealed.
§ 94-77. Effective date.
The chapter shall become effective five days from the date of enactment.
Article XVIII. Franchise Effective Date; Time of Acceptance
§ 94-78. Franchise effective date.
All franchises shall be signed by the Chairman of the Board and attested to by the Township Secretary.
The franchise shall take effect after it has been accepted by the franchisee and the franchisee and the
Township have signed a franchise agreement and satisfied all conditions precedent set forth therein.
§ 94-79. Franchisee bound.
Upon acceptance of a franchise, a franchisee shall be bound by all terms and conditions contained
herein, in the franchise agreement, and in its application, to the extent incorporated in the franchise
agreement.
Chapter 99. Brush, Grass, Weeds and Trees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 9-9-1985 by Ord. No. 85-
11. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 99-1. Weeds as nuisance.
Any weeds, such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, or other weeds of a like kind, found
growing in any lot or tract of land in the Township of Uwchlan are hereby declared to be a nuisance,
and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place.
§ 99-2. Height.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers,
or other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the Township of
Uwchlan; any such plants or weeds exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 99-3. Barberry bushes.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 86/620
[1]
A.
B.
A.
It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or permit the growth of the bush of the species of tall,
common or European barberry, further known as Berberis vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties within
the Township of Uwchlan.
§ 99-4. Trees in Township rights-of-way.
[Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06[1]]
It shall be unlawful for any tree or limbs of trees to remain if the tree and/or limbs pose a risk of harm to
the public.
Editor's Note: With this ordinance, former §§ 99-4 through 99-7 were also renumbered as §§ 99-5
through 99-8, respectively. The title of the chapter was also changed, from Brush, Grass and Weeds, to
Brush, Grass, Weeds and Trees.
§ 99-5. Removal; notice.
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or the Chief of Police to serve or cause to be served a notice
upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which the weeds, plants or trees are permitted to grow
in violation of the provisions of this chapter and to demand the abatement of the nuisance or safety
hazard within ten days.
§ 99-6. Abatement.
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance or safety hazard within 10 days, the Zoning
Officer of Uwchlan Township may proceed to abate such nuisance or safety hazard, keeping an
account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged and paid by such owner
or occupant.
§ 99-7. Lien.
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
Charges for such weed or tree/limb removal shall be a lien upon the premises. Whenever a bill for
such charges remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered, the Township Secretary or
Township Solicitor may file with the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County a statement of lien
claim. This statement shall contain a legal description of the premises, the expenses and costs
incurred and the date the weeds were cut or a tree was trimmed or removed, and a notice that the
Township of Uwchlan claims a lien for this amount.
Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known;
provided, however, that failure of the Township Secretary or Township Solicitor to record such lien
claim or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the
right to foreclose the lien for such charges as provided in the following section.
§ 99-8. Foreclosure of lien.
Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the
same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as
is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of
the Township of Uwchlan.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 87/620
B.
A.
The Township Solicitor is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name
of the Township of Uwchlan in any court having jurisdiction over such matter against any property
for which such bill has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered.
Chapter 106. Construction Codes, Uniform
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 260.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
ATTACHMENTS
106a Ex A Adopt Penn Uniform Construction Code
Article I. Building Construction
[Adopted 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-13]
§ 106-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as "the Uwchlan Township Basic Building Code."
§ 106-2. Adoption of Building Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Zoning Officer of the Township
of Uwchlan, being marked and designated as "The BOCA National Building Code, Twelfth Edition,
1993," as published by The Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby
adopted as the Building Code of the Township of Uwchlan in the State of Pennsylvania for the control
of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 106-4 of this article.
§ 106-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ordinance No. 89-4 of the Township of Uwchlan, entitled "Uwchlan Township Building Code," and all
other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 106-4. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Insertions.
Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the Township of
Uwchlan, Chester County, Pennsylvania herein referred to as "this code."
Section 112.3.1. Fee Schedule. A fee for each plan examination, building permit and inspection
shall be paid in accordance with the current schedule of fees, as amended from time to time by
resolution of the Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 88/620
[2]
[1]
[1]
[1]
A.
[Amended 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-01[2]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: See also Exhibit A at the end of the chapter.
§ 106-5. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this article or fails to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code Official or of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this article, shall, in addition to any other remedy available under law or equity, be
subject to a criminal fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for each violation or on default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, plus the
costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees, for each violation. Each twenty-four-hour
period that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Enforcement of this article shall be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure. The Township Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the
District Attorney.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 106-6. Unlawful continuance.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Any person who continues any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stopwork
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall, in addition to any other remedy available under law or equity, be subject to a criminal
fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys'
fees, for each violation. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each twenty-four-hour period during which failure to
comply continues shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement of this article shall be by action
brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor may
assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 106-7. Applicability.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05]
Structures existing prior to January 1, 1960, in which there is work involving additions, alterations or
changes of occupancy, shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section or the provisions
of Section 3403.0 through 3407.0.
Additions.
Section 407.4. Attached to rooms: Private garages attached side-by-side to rooms in
occupancies in Use Group R-1, R-2, R-3 or I-1 shall be completely separated from the interior
spaces and the attic area by means of 1/2-inch fire code drywall or the equivalent applied to the
garage side.
Section 407.6. Opening protectives: The door opening protectives shall comply with one of the
following.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 89/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(4)
B.
Add 3. Minimum 3/4 hour rated door.
Table 602-5. Dwelling unit separations: "2 hour" to replace "1 hour" in all building types.
Section 904.2. Use Groups A-1, A-3 and A-4: Where a Use Group A-1, A-3 or A-4 fire area
exceeds 1,000 square feet in area, an automatic fire suppression system shall be provided as
follows.
Section 904.3. Use Group A-2: Where a Use Group A-2 fire area is more than 1,000 square feet
in area or is located either above or below the level of exit discharge of exits that serve the Use
Group A-2 fire area, an automatic fire suppression system shall be provided as follows.
Section 904.7. Use Groups B, M, S-1 and F-1: Throughout all buildings with a Use Group B, M,
S-1 or F-1 fire area, an automatic fire suppression system shall be provided as follows:
Section 904.7.1. Use Groups B, M, S-1 and F-1: Where all Use Groups M regardless of size,
where any Use Group B exceeds 5,000 square feet or S-1 or F-1 exceeds 12,000 square
feet in fire area.
Section 1014.8.1. Egress door width:
Add 4. 27-3/4 inch clear width for bathrooms and closets up to 100 square feet in R-3 Use
Group Only where not required to be accessible or adaptable.
Section 1027.0 Access to Roof.
1027.1. Add: All nonresidential buildings over one story or 2,000 square feet in floor area
shall have a roof hatch with ladder. The size of the roof hatch shall be 3 feet by 4 feet.
Previous additions.
Fire walls. Fire walls shall be so located in buildings as to separate the individual tenants
and/or floor areas as below listed. Walls shall have a minimum fire rating of two hours. The
walls shall run through the roof for a minimum height of 12 inches, or where such construction
is impractical, the walls shall run tight against the underside of the sheathing material. In
cases not covered by the Building Code, the minimum requirements of the Department of
Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall prevail. Fire walls shall be
provided to separate: motel units, individual commercial tenants, apartment units, corridors
from tenants and/or apartments, stairwells from buildings. Fire walls in the above-mentioned
buildings shall be reduced to one-hour rating if building is equipped with a fire suppression
system unless more than a one-hour rating is required by use and construction classification.
This exception shall not apply to use Groups A, E, H and R. Buildings of one story in height
without a basement that are of 2-C construction type, as defined by BOCA, are under 36,000
square feet, are fully sprinklered and have all tenants of the same BOCA Use Group, may
utilize smoke partitions as tenant separations rather than fire walls.
[Amended 3-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-04]
Floor construction. In all commercial, industrial, multifamily dwellings or buildings housing the
public or catering to the public, the floors between the basement shall be constructed with a
minimum fire rating of two hours. If such basement and egress stairs and corridors are
sprinklered, the fire rating may be reduced to one hour unless the use and/or construction
classification requires more under BOCA 93. This exception shall not apply to any buildings in
Use Groups A, E, H or R.
Fire suppression system. A fire suppression system as determined by Section 904, BOCA 93,
shall be required in all buildings of more than two stories in height. A basement shall count as
a story if it cannot meet standards described in Section 502, BOCA 93, "Story Above Grade."
Alterations and repairs. Permits for alterations and repairs to structures shall be required for
all construction except for the following:
Exterior and interior painting.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 90/620
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
Installation, repair or replacement of any interior finish in a one- or two-family dwelling,
such as vinyl wall covering, plastering, or drywall on an existing wall. Paneling is not to
be included as ordinary repairs.
Wallpapering at any location.
The replacement of glass in any window or door. However, the replacement glass shall
be of the type and quality so as to comply with minimum requirements of the code.
The installation and replacement of any window or door, including garage doors, in the
same opening without altering the dimensions or framing of the original opening. This
shall include storm windows and storm doors. Any new door or window shall be of the
same type and operation as the existing and shall not reduce the minimum requirements
of the code for means of egress and emergency escape.
The repair of any nonstructural member such as a railing.
The repair or replacement of any interior or exterior trim, decoration or moldings.
The replacement or installation of any flooring material except carpeting with a new
material. However, installation of carpeting in one- and two-family dwellings will be
permitted under ordinary repairs.
The repair of existing roofing material with like material not exceeding 25% of the total
roof area within any twelve-month period.
The repair of existing siding with like material not exceeding 25% of the total building
exterior wall area within any twelve-month period.
The repair of any part of a porch or stoop which does not structurally support a roof
above.
The replacement or installation of screens.
The installation of any roll or batt insulation when installed adjacent to or not more than
1 1/2 inches from an interior finish.
Replacement of exterior rainwater gutters and leaders.
Repairs involving only working parts of a faucet, valve or plumbing fixture.
The clearance of stoppages or the repair of leaks, provided such repairs do not require
any change in the piping arrangement.
Replacement of any faucet or valve, provided no rearrangement of the connecting piping
system is required.
The replacement of any receptacle, switch or lighting fixture rated at 20 amps or less and
operating at less than 150 volts to ground with a like or similar item.
Repairs to any installed electrically operated equipment, such as doorbell,
communication system, elevators and any motor-operated device.
The replacement of any sprinkler or smoke detector or heat detector head with a like
device.
The repair or replacement of any component of a fire alarm or smoke- and heat-detection
equipment.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 91/620
(v)
(w)
(x)
(y)
(z)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
C.
Replacement of motors, pumps and fans of the same capacity.
Repair and replacement of heating supply and return piping and radiation elements which
does not require rearrangement of the piping system.
Repair and replacement of ductwork.
Repair and replacement of packaged air-conditioning equipment and systems with a like
capacity that are listed by a nationally recognized testing agency.
Repairs or replacement of control devices for heating and air-conditioning equipment.
Deletions.
Section 310.5. Use Group R-3 structures: Delete Exceptions 1 and 2.
Section 421.10.1(9). Outdoor swimming pools: Delete.
Section 709.6.4. Ducts: Delete exception (3).
Section 711.1. Fire Partitions - General: Delete exception.
Section 713.1. Floor/Ceiling Assemblies - General: Delete exception.
Section 904.2. Use Groups A-1, A-3 and A-4: Delete exception (1) and (3).
Section 904.4. Use Group E: Delete exception.
Section 904.6. Use Group I: Delete exception.
Section 904.8. Use Group R-1: Delete exception.
Section 904.9. Use Group R-2: Delete exception.
Section 918.4.2. Use Group I-2: Delete exception.
Section 919.3.2. Use Groups R-2 and R-3: Delete exception (2).
Section 919.5. Battery backup: Delete exception.
Section 923.1. Fire suppression systems: Delete (3) and exception (6).
Section 923.2. Fire protective signaling systems: Delete exception (1).
Section 1011.4. Enclosure: Delete exception (1).
Section 1011.4.1. Corridor walls as separation walls: Delete exception.
Section 1813.5.1. Floor base: Delete exception.
§ 106-8. Repealing existing regulations.
Ordinance No. 89-04, dated February 27, 1989, of Uwchlan Township is hereby repealed.
§ 106-9. Saving clause.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 92/620
Nothing in this article or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes
of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in § 106-4 of this
article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
article.
Article II. Plumbing Standards
[Adopted 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-14]
§ 106-10. Short title.
This article shall be known as "the Uwchlan Township Plumbing Code."
§ 106-11. Adoption of Plumbing Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Zoning Officer of the Township
of Uwchlan, being marked and designated as "The BOCA National Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition,
1993," as published by The Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby
adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Township of Uwchlan in the State of Pennsylvania for the control
of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Plumbing Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 106-13 of this article.
§ 106-12. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ordinance No. 90-17 of the Township of Uwchlan, entitled "Uwchlan Township Plumbing Code," and all
other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 106-13. Additions, insertions and changes.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05]
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Insertions:
§ P-101.1. Title: These regulations shall be known as the Plumbing Code of Uwchlan Township
hereinafter referred to as "this code."
§ P-113.2. Fee schedule: The fees for all plumbing work shall be as set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.[1]
§ P-116.4. Violation penalties: Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair
plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Code Official, or
of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall, in addition to any other remedy
available under law or equity, be subject to a criminal fine not to exceed $1,000, plus the costs of
prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees, for each violation. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term no exceeding 90 days. Each twenty-four-hour
period during which failure to comply continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a
separate offense. Enforcement of this ordinance shall be by action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 93/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township's Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without
the consent of the District Attorney.[2]
§ P-117.2. Unlawful continuance: Any person who continues work in or about the structure having
been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove
a violation or unsafe condition, shall, in addition to any other remedy available under law or equity, pay
a criminal fine in an amount not less than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, for each violation. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term no exceeding 90 days. Each twenty-four-hour period during which failure to
comply continues shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement of this ordinance shall be by action
brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township's Solicitor may
assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney.[3]
§ P-304.3. Public systems available: A public water main or public sewer system shall be considered
available to a structure where the structure is located within 150 feet of the public water man or sewer.
§ P309.4. Freezing. Water service piping shall be installed below recorded frost penetration but not
less than four feet by zero inch below grade. In climates with freezing temperatures, plumbing piping in
exterior building walls or areas subjected to freezing temperatures shall be protected against freezing
by insulation or heat or both.
§ P-309.5. Sewer depth: Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a
minimum of 36 inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers
shall be a minimum of 36 inches below grade.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 106-14. Repealing existing regulations.
Ordinance No. 90-17, dated November 12, 1990, of Uwchlan Township is hereby repealed.
§ 106-15. Saving clause.
Nothing in this article or in the Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes
of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in § 106-12 of this
article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
article.
Article III. Mechanical Standards
[Adopted 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-15]
§ 106-16. Short title.
This article shall be known as "the Uwchlan Township Basic Mechanical Code."
§ 106-17. Adoption of Mechanical Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Zoning Officer of the Township
of Uwchlan, being marked and designated as "The BOCA National Mechanical Code, Eighth Edition,
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 94/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
1993," as published by The Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby
adopted as the Mechanical Code of the Township of Uwchlan in the State of Pennsylvania for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Mechanical Code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in § 106-19 of this article.
§ 106-18. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ordinance No. 90-16 of the Township of Uwchlan, entitled "Uwchlan Township Mechanical Code," and
all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 106-19. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Insertions:
Section M-101.1. Title: These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the Township of
Uwchlan, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Section M-113.2. Periodic inspections: The fees for all periodic inspections shall be as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.[1]
Section M-113.3. Fee Schedule: The fees for all mechanical work shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.[2]
Section M-116.4. Violation penalties: Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision
of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect install, alter or
repair mechanical equipment or systems in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, in
addition to any other remedy available under law or equity, shall, be subject to a criminal fine in an
amount not to exceed $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees, for
each such violation. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each twenty-four-hour period during which failure to comply
continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement of this
ordinance shall be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The
Township's Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District
Attorney.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[3]]
§ M-117.2. Unlawful continuance: Any person who continues work in or about the structure having
been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove
a violation or unsafe condition, in addition to any other remedy available under law or equity, shall pay
a criminal fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, for each such violation. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each twenty-four-hour period during
which failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement of this ordinance
shall be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The
Township's Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District
Attorney.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[4]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 95/620
[4] Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 106-20. Repealing existing regulations.
Ordinance No. 90-16, dated November 12, 1990, of Uwchlan Township is hereby repealed.
§ 106-21. Saving clause.
Nothing in this article or in the Mechanical Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes
of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in § 106-18 of this
article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
article.
Article IV. Fire Prevention
[Adopted 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-16]
§ 106-22. Short title.
This article shall be known as "the Uwchlan Township Fire Prevention Code."
§ 106-23. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Zoning Officer of the Township
of Uwchlan, being marked and designated as "The BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Ninth
Edition, 1993," as published by The Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is
hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the Township of Uwchlan, Chester County, in the State
of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 106-25 of this article.
§ 106-24. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ordinance No. 90-15 of the Township of Uwchlan, entitled "Uwchlan Township Fire Prevention Code,"
and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 106-25. Additions, insertions and changes.
[Amended 11-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-16; 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05]
That the following sections are hereby revised as follows:
The Uwchlan Township Fire Prevention Code is hereby amended by deleting Section F-108.1 and
inserting the following:
F-108.1. Inspection: The Code Official shall annually inspect all structures and premises (except
single-family dwellings and dwelling units in two-family and multiple-family dwellings), for the
purposes of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Uwchlan Township and the
general public, and for the purposes of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 96/620
[1]
[2]
to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with fire-fighting operations, endanger life or
any violations of the provisions or intent of this code or any other ordinance affecting fire safety.
The Fire Protection Code shall be amended by inserting a new Section F-108.5 as follows:
F-108.5. Inspection Fees: The owner, tenant and/or operator of the premises or structure subject to
the inspection required by Section F-108.1 shall be responsible for the payment of an inspection fee
as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.[1]
Upon completion of the annual-inspection, the Township shall invoice the owner, tenant and/or
operator of the structure or premises for the amount of the fee as set forth above. In the event the fee
is not paid, the amount will be collected as a municipal claim in the manner authorized by law.
Section F-112.3, concerning violation penalties, is deleted in its entirety and in place thereof it is
hereby substituted with the following:
F-112.3. Penalty for violations. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of
this code or fails to comply with any order issued pursuant to any section thereof, in addition to
any other remedy available under law or equity, shall be subject to a criminal fine in an amount not
to exceed $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees, for each
violation. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days. Each twenty-four-hour period during which failure to comply
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement of this ordinance shall be by action
brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township's Solicitor
may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney.[2]
Section F-301.1, "Scope," is hereby deleted and the following is inserted:
F-301.1. Scope. The provisions of this article are to provide a reasonable degree of safety to
persons occupying existing buildings that do not conform with the minimum requirements of the
Building Code listed in Appendix A by requiring the following alterations to such existing buildings
(a) when a use and occupancy permit is sought or required pursuant to the Uwchlan Township
Zoning Ordinance or Ordinance No. 95-13 of Uwchlan Township; or (b) when any permit is sought
or required for an addition or alteration to the existing building pursuant to Ordinance No. 95-13.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 106-26. Establishment of limits.
The limits referred to in Section F-3003.2 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/1993 in which
the storage of explosive materials is prohibited are hereby established as follows: "within the
jurisdictional boundaries of Uwchlan Township."
§ 106-27. Repealing existing regulations.
Ordinance No. 90-15, dated November 12, 1990, of Uwchlan Township is hereby repealed.
§ 106-28. Saving clause.
Nothing in this article or in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any
suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 3
of this article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected
by this article.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 97/620
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Article V. Administration and Enforcement of Uniform
Construction Code
[Adopted 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-06]
§ 106-29. Adoption of code.
The Uniform Construction Code set forth in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401, 403 and 405, as amended
from time to time, and as supplemented by Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof, is
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of Uwchlan
Township and shall be known as the "Uwchlan Township Building Code of 2004" (the "Building Code").
[1]
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 106-30. Election to administer and enforce.
Uwchlan Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Uniform Construction
Code, as supplemented and enacted by this article.
§ 106-31. Manner of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Building Code within Uwchlan Township shall be undertaken in
any of the following ways, as determined by the Township Board of Supervisors from time to time by
resolution:
By the designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the municipal code official to act
on behalf of the Township.
By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party agencies to act on behalf
of the Township.
By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint administration and enforcement of
this Act through an intermunicipal agreement.
By entering into a contract with another municipality for the administration and enforcement of this
Act on behalf of Uwchlan Township.
By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry for plan
review, inspections and enforcement of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling
units and utility and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 106-32. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors in
conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of the Building Code, as amended from
time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by
joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 106-33. Continuation of previously adopted code.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 98/620
The Uniform Construction Code is hereby supplemented and amended by including the provisions set
forth in Exhibit A which were adopted by Uwchlan Township before July 1, 1999 and equal or exceed
the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code. To the extent there is a conflict with a provision or
requirement in the Uniform Construction Code and in Exhibit A, the provision or requirement in Exhibit
A will prevail and control. All references in Exhibit A to terms, requirements, and sections of the 1993
BOCA Building Code shall be interpreted as applicable to corresponding equivalent terms,
requirements, and sections of the Uniform Constriction Code.
§ 106-34. Effect on other ordinances.
All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Uwchlan Township not governed by the Building
Code enacted hereby shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 106-35. Fees.
Fees assessable by Uwchlan Township for the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to
this article and the code shall be established by the Board of Supervisors by resolution from time to
time.
Chapter 112. Curfew
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 5-11-1992 by Ord. No.
92-05. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 112-1. Curfew established.
[Amended 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-02]
It shall be unlawful for any minor who has not attained the 18th anniversary of the date of his birth to
remain in or upon any street, public place or any establishment in the Township of Uwchlan between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, official Township time. This section shall not
apply to any minor accompanied by a spouse 18 years of age or older, a parent, a legal guardian or
any adult 21 years of age or others designated by the parent or legal guardian to be responsible for the
care and custody of the person of such minor, or to a minor upon an errand or other legitimate
business directed by such minor's parent or legal guardian, or to any minor who is engaged in gainful,
lawful employment during the curfew hours, provided that the minor carries identification and evidence
in writing to this effect.
§ 112-2. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of a minor knowingly to permit any minor under the
age of 18 years to remain in or upon any public place, street or any establishment between the hours
specified under § 112-1 hereof, unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or any adult 21 years
of age or over designated by the parent or legal guardian to be responsible for the care and custody of
the minor or unless such is engaged in gainful employment during the curfew hours.
§ 112-3. Establishment operators' responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any operator of any establishment or his agents or employees knowingly to
permit any minors under the age of 18 years to remain upon the premises of said establishment during
the hours restricted under § 112-1.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 99/620
[1]
§ 112-4. Enforcement.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05]
Any police officer who discovers a minor under the age of 18 years violating the provisions of this
chapter shall obtain information from such minor as to his name, address, age and the name of his
parent(s), legal guardian, or other person having legal custody of the minor. The minor shall thereupon
be instructed to proceed to his home forthwith. The information obtained from the minor shall be
transmitted to the Chief of Police, who shall cause a written notice by registered mall to be sent to the
parent(s), legal guardian or other person having legal custody of the minor advising them of the
violation of the Township ordinance and that any subsequent violation of this Township chapter shall
result in prosecution under § 112-5 hereof.
§ 112-5. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Any person who violates or commits the violation of any provision of this chapter after once having
been notified pursuant to § 112-4 of the prior violation hereof shall be subject to a criminal fine in an
amount not to exceed $1,000, for each separate offense, plus the costs of prosecution, including
reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Enforcement of this chapter shall be by action brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor may assume
charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 112-6. Intent.
It is declared to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors by enactment of the Township ordinance
that its provisions shall be liberally construed so as to curb or reduce juvenile delinquency.
§ 112-7. Severability.
If any section, provision or part of this Township ordinance shall be held unconstitutional, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, provisions or parts of this
chapter. The Board of Supervisors hereby declares that it would have enacted and ordained the
remaining provisions or parts of this chapter if it had known that such sections, provisions or parts
thereof would be declared unconstitutional.
Chapter 119. Emergency Communications Systems
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 5-9-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-03. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 82.
§ 119-1. Findings; purpose.
The Board of Supervisors finds that the ability of police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency
providers and personnel to communicate with each other within buildings and structures, and to
communicate from within structures and buildings to personnel and locations outside the building and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 100/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
structure, is of vital public importance. A breakdown in communications among emergency providers
and personnel creates a serious risk of harm to and is a serious threat to the safety and welfare of
emergency personnel, the citizens of Uwchlan Township and the public in general. Therefore, pursuant
to the police power, the Board enacts this chapter to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
§ 119-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this
chapter, have the meanings shown herein.
APCO
Association of Public Safety Communication Officials International.
CCDES
Chester County Department of Emergency Services.
FCC
Federal Communications Commission.
NABER
National Association of Business and Education Radio.
NPSPAC
National Public Safety Planning Advisory Committee.
PCIA
Personal Communications Industry Association.
§ 119-3. General provisions.
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall erect, construct, alter, refit, change the use of or
provide an addition of more than 20% of the existing floor area to any building or structure or a
part thereof or cause the same to be done which fails to support adequate radio coverage for
CCDES, the fire companies serving Uwchlan Township, and the Uwchlan Township Police
Department. For the purposes of this section, adequate radio coverage shall include all of the
following:
A minimum signal strength of -95 dBM available in 90% of the area of each floor of the
building when transmitted from the closest CCDES radio communications system site.
A minimum signal strength of -95 dBM received at the closest CCDEES radio
communications site when transmitted from 90% of the area of each floor of the building.
The frequency range, which must be supported from 806.0125 MHz - 868.9875 MHz or
current frequencies used by CCDES.
A ninety-percent reliability factor.
Signal strength measurements, for the purpose of measuring the performance of a
bidirectional amplifier, shall be based on one input signal adequate to obtain a maximum
continuous operating output level.
The provisions of this section shall become applicable upon notification to the property owner that
unacceptable levels exist. The property owner shall have 90 days from date of notification to
enhance radio coverage and bring it within the acceptable limits of these provisions.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 101/620
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
§ 119-4. Amplification systems allowed.
Buildings and structures which cannot support the required level of radio coverage shall be equipped
with either a radiating cable system or an internal multiple antenna system with or without FCC-type
accepted bidirectional eight-hundred-megahertz amplifiers, as needed. If any part of the installed
system or systems contains an electrically powered component, the system shall be capable of
operating on an independent battery and/or generator system for a period of at least 12 hours without
external power input. If used, bidirectional amplifiers shall include filters to reduce adjacent frequency
interference at 35 dB below the NPSPAC band. Settings used should not attenuate the NPSPAC
frequencies, and further provided that they are not more than one megahertz from the NSPAC
frequencies.
§ 119-5. Testing procedures.
Acceptance test procedure.
When an in-building radio system is required, and upon completion of installation, it will be the
building owner's responsibility to have the radio system tested to ensure that two-way
coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of 90%. Each floor of the building shall be
divided into a grid of approximately 20 equal areas. A maximum of two nonadjacent areas will
be allowed to fail the test. In the event that three of the areas fail the test, in order to be more
statistically accurate, the floor may be divided into 40 equal areas. In such event, a maximum
of four nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test. After the 40 area tests, if the system
continues to fail, the building owner shall have the system altered to meet the ninety-percent
coverage requirement. The test shall be conducted using the most current E. F. Johnson
portable radio, or current manufacturer of communications equipment used by CCDES, or its
equivalent, available to the Uwchlan Township Police and/or Fire Department, talking through
the CCDES as specified by the authority having jurisdiction. A spot located approximately in
the center of a grid area will be selected for the test, then the radio will be keyed to verify twoway
communications to and from the outside of the building through the CCDES. Once the
spot has been selected, prospecting for a better spot within the grid area will not be permitted.
The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test measurement results shall be
kept on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be verified each year
during the annual tests. In the event that the measurement results became lost, the building
owner will be required to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values.
Annual tests. When an in-building radio system is required, the building owner shall test all active
components of the system, including, but not limited to, amplifiers, power supplies and backup
batteries, a minimum of once every 12 months. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is
the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup batteries and power supplies
shall be tested under load for a period of one hour to verify that they will properly operate during
an actual power outage. If within the one-hour test period, in the opinion of the testing technician,
the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional one-hour periods
until the testing technician confirms the integrity of the battery. All other active components shall
be checked to determine that they are operating within the manufacturer's specifications for the
intended purposes.
Five-year tests. In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall perform a radio coverage
test a minimum of once every five years to ensure that the radio system continues to meet the
requirements of the original acceptance test. The procedure set forth above shall apply to such
tests. A copy of accepted tests shall be provided to the Chester County Emergency Services
Engineering Department.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 102/620
D.
[1]
Qualifications of testing personnel. All tests shall be conducted, documented and signed by a
person in possession of a current FCC technical license or a current technician certification issued
by the APCO, NABER, or the PCIA. All test records shall be retained on the inspected premises
by the building owner and a copy submitted to officials of the fire companies serving Uwchlan
Township and the Uwchlan Township Police Department.
§ 119-6. Field testing.
Police and fire personnel, after providing reasonable notice to the owner or his representative, shall
have the right to enter onto the property to conduct field testing to be certain that the required level of
radio coverage is present.
§ 119-7. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to structures in Use Groups R-3 and R-4 of the International Building
Code, any building constructed of wood frame, any building 35 feet high or less, as long as none of the
aforementioned buildings make use of any metal construction or any underground storage or parking
areas. For purposes of this section, parking structures and stairwells are included in the definition of
"building" and stair shafts are included in the definition of "all parts of a building," but elevators may be
excluded.
§ 119-8. Existing buildings and structures.
Any nonexempt building or structure existing, under construction or for which a building permit
application is pending or has been provided as of the effective date of this section, shall comply with
the requirements of this section if the CCDES, the fire companies serving Uwchlan Township or
Uwchlan Township Police Department determines that adequate radio coverage as defined in § 119-
3A does not exist in the building or structure. The owner of the building or structure shall be notified, in
writing, of the inadequacy of the coverage and shall have a period of 90 consecutive calendar days
from the date of the notice to comply with this section, including, but not limited to, enhancing radio
coverage and bringing it within the acceptable limits of this section.
§ 119-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or commits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees. In
default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive, mandamus or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 126. Fees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 260.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
Article I. Transportation Improvements Impact Fee
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 103/620
[Adopted 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-07]
§ 126-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Uwchlan Township Transportation Impact Fee Ordinance."
§ 126-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a Uwchlan Township Transportation improvements impact fee
in compliance with Article V-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 805, as amended by Act of December 19, 1990, No. 209, 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq., ("Act 209").
The purpose of the impact fee, which is payable to the Township at the time of building permit
issuance, is to provide funds necessary to make transportation capital improvements to support
existing volumes of traffic and traffic projected to be generated by new growth and development in the
Township.
§ 126-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless
another meaning is plainly intended. Other capitalized terms used herein and not expressly defined
below shall have the meaning set forth in Act 209.
BUILDING PERMIT
The permit required for new construction and additions pursuant to Article 1 of the current edition
of the Uwchlan Township Building Code. The term "building permit," as used herein, shall not be
deemed to include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation or other improvements to an
existing structure or rebuilding a damaged or destroyed structure, provided there is no increase in
gross floor area or number of dwelling units resulting therefrom.
CHANGE OF USE
Any use which increases p.m. peak-hour trips generated by an approved development. A change
of use request will require a reassessment of impact fees.
DE MINIMUS APPLICATION
A development which proposes the creation of two or fewer new single-family residential lots
containing one dwelling unit per lot.
[Added 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-06]
DEVELOPER
Any person, partnership or corporation, landowner, subdivider or applicant responsible for any
undertaking which requires a building, zoning or conditional use permit.
DEVELOPMENT
That which is to be done pursuant to a building, zoning, conditional use or occupancy permit
including but not limited to a subdivision or land development as defined by the Uwchlan Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.[1]
FUND
The Transportation Improvement Fund established by the Township in which impact fees are
deposited.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT
Any permit required for occupancy of structures pursuant to the current edition of the Uwchlan
Township Building Code and/or the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance of 1977, as amended.[2]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 104/620
[1]
[2]
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 265, Zoning, respectively.
§ 126-4. Adoption by reference of Roadway Sufficiency Analysis
and Capital Improvements Plan.
[Amended 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-06]
The Roadway Sufficiency Analysis and Capital Improvements Plan dated June 1992, as amended
March 1995, prepared pursuant to Act 209 by the Uwchlan Township Impact Fee Advisory Committee,
in consultation with Orth-Rodgers and Associates, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference. A copy of the Roadway Sufficiency Analysis and Improvements Plan is attached hereto as
Appendix A.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township office.
§ 126-5. Establishment of transportation service area.
A single transportation service area is hereby established as shown on the Transportation Service
Area Map included as Figure Number 1 in the Roadway Sufficiency Analysis.
§ 126-6. Applicability of impact fee.
[Amended 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-06]
Except as provided in § 126-11 hereof, this article shall be uniformly applicable to all development
which occurs within the designated transportation service area.
§ 126-7. Imposition of impact fee.
No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for a development in the designated
transportation service area as herein defined unless the applicant therefore has paid the impact
fee imposed by and calculated pursuant to this article.
At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township, the Township may accept
payment of the impact fee by way of a contribution of real property to be used for public purposes
or a contribution of improvements to public property. The value of such a contribution shall be
equivalent to the total amount of the impact fee imposed upon all new development and changes
of use as required by § 126-8 hereof. The value shall be determined by obtaining a fair market
value appraisal of the real property and/or improvements to be contributed or by other generally
accepted valuation methodology.
[Added 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 93-02]
§ 126-8. Calculation and establishment of impact fee.
The impact fee in the designated transportation service area shall be an amount as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors per p.m. peak-hour trip as set forth in the Capital
Improvements Plan.
[Amended 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-06; 9-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-06[1]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The amount of the impact fee may be amended from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the
Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township in accordance with procedures set forth in Act 209.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 105/620
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
[Amended 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-06]
The impact fee imposed by this article is hereby imposed upon all new development and change
of use and shall be determined as of the date of preliminary land development or subdivision
approval by multiplying the per-trip cost established for the designated transportation service area
by the estimated number of trips to be generated by the new development in accordance with the
Trip Generation Manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Fifth Edition 1991,
and any amendments and all future additions thereof ("ITE Manual"). Alternatively, the impact fee
may be calculated pursuant to a special transportation study pursuant to § 126-9 of this article. In
the event there is a change of use, the impact fees will be recalculated and reassessed.
§ 126-9. Special situations.
In the event that the trip generation characteristics of a new development are not sufficiently
documented in the ITE Manual, the applicable impact fee shall be determined by the Township staff
following review of a special transportation study submitted by the developer. Such study shall
document projected p.m. peak volumes at the subject site based on completion and occupancy of the
proposed development.
§ 126-10. Administration of impact fee.
Collection and deposit of impact fees. Impact fees due pursuant to this article shall be collected by
the Township in the manner prescribed herein prior to issuance of a building permit. Impact fees
shall be held and deposited by the Township into an interest-bearing fund account designated
solely for impact fees and shall be collected, held, utilized and disbursed by and through the office
of the Township Manager in accordance with Act 209 and, specifically, Section 505-A thereof, 53
P.S. § 10505-A.
Advisory Committee's role. The Uwchlan Township Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall monitor
and evaluate the implementation of the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan as adopted by
the Board of Supervisors and report at least annually on the assessment of impact fees. In
addition, the Advisory Committee shall make recommendations to the Township on the need to
update or revise the adopted Land Use Assumptions, Transportation Capital Improvements Plan
or impact fees at the request of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 126-11. Credits and exemptions.
[Added 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-06]
Credits. The Board of Supervisors, within its discretion, may grant a credit of up to 100% of the
applicable impact fees for growth and development which is proposed and undertaken by a
developer who is a municipality, public school district, public authority or other governmental entity,
and such development is for a governmental purpose and in the public interest. In order to claim
the credit provided by this Subsection A, the developer must make a request for the credit upon
application for preliminary subdivision or land development approval or a building, zoning,
conditional use or occupancy permit if no subdivision or land development approval is required.
The developer shall have the burden of establishing that its proposed development serves an
overriding public interest.
De minimus applications. A de minimus application for development as defined herein shall be
exempt from the imposition of impact fees as required by this article.
§ 126-12. Liberal construction.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 106/620
(1)
(2)
[1]
A.
The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes, which are
hereby found and declared to be in furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
§ 126-13. Effective date.
This article shall be effective in accordance with applicable law. In accordance with Section 505-A(c)(2)
of Act 209, this article shall have retroactive application for a period of 18 months after the adoption of
the resolution creating the Impact Fee Advisory Committee, Resolution No. 91-13 of the Uwchlan
Township Board of Supervisors, dated January 14, 1991, to all preliminary applications for land
development or subdivision within Uwchlan Township.
Chapter 132. Fire Insurance Proceeds
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
95-07. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 132-1. Statutory requirement; compliance with procedure.
No insurance company, association or exchange doing business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
Uwchlan Township under the terms of Section 508(a) of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as
amended, 40 P.S. § 638(a), unless the insurance company, association or exchange is furnished with a
certificate pursuant to § 132-2 of this chapter and unless there is compliance with the procedures set
forth in §§ 132-3 and 132-4 of this chapter.
§ 132-2. Fire loss certificate.
The Township Treasurer shall, upon the written request of the named insured specifying the tax
description of the property, name and address of the insurance company, association or exchange
and the date agreed upon by the insurance company, association or exchange and the named
insured as the date of the receipt of a loss report of the claim, and the payment of a certification
fee in the amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for the
administrative expense of processing the request and copying, furnish the insurance company,
association or exchange either of the following within 14 working days of the request:[1]
A certificate or, at the discretion of the Township, a verbal notification which shall be
confirmed in writing by the insured to the effect that, as of the date specified in the request,
there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the property
and that, as of the date of the Treasurer's certificate or verbal notification, the Township has
not certified any amount as total costs incurred by the Township for the removal, repair or
securing of a building or other structure on the property; or
A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property as of the date specified in the request that have not been paid
as of the date of the certificate and also showing, as of the date of the Treasurer's certificate,
the amount of the total costs, if any, certified to the Treasurer that have been incurred by the
Township for the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property.
For the purposes of this subsection, the Township Manager shall certify to the Treasurer the
total amount, if any, of such costs. For the purposes of this chapter, a tax, assessment,
penalty or user charge becomes delinquent at the time and on the date a lien could otherwise
have been filed against the property by the Township under applicable law or ordinance.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 107/620
(1)
(2)
B. Action upon receipt of certificate.
Upon receipt of a certificate pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section, the insurance
company, association or exchange shall pay the claim of the named insured in accordance
with the policy terms, unless the loss agreed to between the named insured and the company,
association or exchange equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building or other structure. In the case of such a loss, the insurance
company, association or exchange, the insured property owner and the Township shall follow
the procedures set forth in §§ 132-3 and 132-4 of this chapter.
Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to Subsection A(2) of this section, the
insurance company, association or exchange shall return the bill to the Treasurer and transfer
to the Treasurer an amount from the insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes,
assessments, penalties, charges and costs shown on the bill. In the case of a loss subject to
§§ 132-3 and 132-4 of this chapter, the insurance company, association or exchange shall
transfer to the Treasurer the amount from the insurance proceeds shown on the bill by
separate draft from the amounts transferred under § 132-3 of the chapter. The Township shall
receive the amount and apply or credit it to payment of the items shown in the bill.
§ 132-3. Establishment of municipal fire insurance escrow.
When the loss agreed to between the named insured and the company, association or exchange
equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or
other structure, the insurance company, association or exchange shall transfer from the insurance
proceeds to the Township Treasurer the amounts required by and in accordance with the procedures
set forth in 40 P.S. § 638(c). Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the Township shall be
disbursed in accordance with the policy terms. The named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure after the transfer,
and the Township Treasurer shall return the amount of the fund in excess of the estimate to the named
insured if the Township has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other structure.
The Township Treasurer shall carry out the duties of this section.
§ 132-4. Disposition of escrow proceeds.
Upon receipt of the proceeds by the Township as authorized by § 132-3, the Township Treasurer shall
place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as security against the total cost of removing,
repairing or securing incurred by the Township. When transferring the funds as required in § 132-3, an
insurance company, association or exchange shall provide the Township with the name and address of
the named insured, whereupon the Township shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds
have been received by the municipality and notify the named insured that the procedures under this
section shall be followed. The fund shall be returned to the named insured when repairs, removal or
securing of the building or other structure have been completed and the required proof received by the
Township Treasurer if the Township has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing. If the
Township has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure, the
costs shall be paid from the fund, and if excess funds remain, the Township shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the ability of
the Township to recover any deficiency. Further, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
the Township and the named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds
to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been
negotiated.
§ 132-5. Charges allowed.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 108/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
The total costs incurred by the Township for the removal, repair or securing of a building or other
structure under this chapter shall include, but not be limited to, all administrative, personnel and
overhead costs incurred by the Township in accordance with generally accepted accounting
procedures.
§ 132-6. Filing.
Upon the enactment of this chapter, the Township Secretary shall file an exact copy of the ordinance
with the Department of Community and Economic Development together with the name, position and
phone number of the municipal official responsible for compliance with Section 508 of the Insurance
Company Law of 1921, as amended.
Chapter 137. Fire Lanes
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 9-25-1989 by Ord. No.
89-15. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Parking — See Ch. 174.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 260.
§ 137-1. Requirements.
The owners of all commercial, industrial or multifamily residential uses located more than 50 feet
from a public street shall provide fire lanes extending to within 30 feet or less of said use;
provided, however, that owners of said uses lawfully developed and in existence as of the effective
date hereof shall be required to provide said fire lanes only when so required in accordance with
Subsection G hereof.
Fire lanes shall extend from existing and improved public streets and shall have a minimum
unobstructed right-of-way width of 25 feet, within which there shall be constructed an all-weather
paved and well-drained cartway not less than 20 feet in width.
Fire lanes which curve from or change direction shall have a minimum radius of 55 feet and a
minimum tangent length of 50 feet between curves.
Dead-end fire lanes shall not exceed 400 feet in length and shall be terminated with an
unobstructed vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum surface radius of 35 feet.
Fire lanes shall be shown on all site plans and must be reviewed by the Township's Engineer,
Building Code Officer, Fire Marshal and Chief of Police.
Signage and pavement markings designating fire lanes are required in accordance with standards
set forth in the Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices ("Manual"). Where physical
characteristics of the site dictate a need to vary from the Manual's recommendations, the Board of
Supervisors shall have discretion to waive strict compliance with the Manual's recommendations
in order to adapt them to the site, provided that the changes will promote the public safety and
welfare.
The Township Fire Marshal and the Chief Fire Officer shall have the power to investigate existing
sites, and the Fire Marshal may recommend to the Township Building Code Officer that a fire lane
be established or that an existing fire lane be changed when such establishment or change is
determined by the Fire Marshal to be in the best interests of the safety and welfare of the public in
light of the existing emergency access(es) to the site. The establishment of such a fire lane or the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 109/620
H.
I.
J.
[1]
K.
L.
M.
[1]
change of an existing fire lane shall be completed in conformity with the provisions of the chapter
within 90 days of receipt by the affected property owner of a notice from the Building Code Officer
requiring such establishment or change. However, where such notice requires the application of
paving materials and the notice is received at a time which would require paving during winter
conditions, then said owner shall have until May 31 following receipt of said notice to comply with
said paving requirement. Property owners aggrieved by such notice of the Building Code Officer
may appeal said notice to the Board of Supervisors within 30 days of the property owners' receipt
of said notice.
Fire lanes shall at all times remain unobstructed except for emergency vehicles and equipment
used in emergency situations as provided in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all proposed uses defined in Subsection A above
and shall further apply to all uses as set forth in Subsections A and G hereof which are existing
uses as of the effective date hereof.
Applications for permits for the construction of fire lanes as set forth in this chapter shall be made
to the Building Code Officer on forms supplied by the Township.
Except as provided in Subsection L below, any person who violates or permits the violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a criminal fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000, plus
the costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each twenty-fourhour
period during which a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the
consent of the District Attorney.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The parking of vehicles in fire lanes, officially posted as such, shall be subject to the criminal
proceedings, fines and penalties set forth in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3352, 3353 and
3354.
Nothing herein shall preclude the Township from seeking enforcement of this chapter in any action
at law or in equity.
§ 137-2. Effect on Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
The Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance[1] shall be amended so as to require
compliance with this chapter.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260.
Chapter 140. Fireworks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-01. Amendments noted where applicable.
§ 140-1. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 110/620
[1]
[1]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FIREWORKS
Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect for
entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, or detonation.
FIREWORKS, CLASS B, SPECIAL FIREWORKS
Large firework devices, which are explosive materials, intended for use in fireworks displays and
designed to produce audible or visible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Such
fireworks include, but are not limited to, firecrackers containing more than 130 milligrams (2
grains) of explosive composition and aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic
composition.
FIREWORKS, CLASS C, COMMON FIREWORKS
Small firework devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition designed
primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion.
§ 140-2. Manufacture or sale of certain fireworks prohibited.
The manufacture, sale, exposure for sale and the exposure for any purpose whatsoever, within
Uwchlan Township, of any fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, roman candles, skyrockets, and all other
articles of the nature or character of fireworks or for pyrotechnic display is hereby prohibited. Provided,
however, that the term "fireworks" used herein shall not include sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy
guns, or other devices in which paper caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compound
are used. Items complying with "nonfireworks" description may be sold in any permanent business
location in the Township.
§ 140-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter, shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 146. Junk and Junkyards
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 6-6-1967 by Ord. No. 67-
04[1]. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste collection and recycling — See Ch. 205.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ord. No. 2, adopted 6-3-1957.
§ 146-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following words shall, for purposes of this chapter, have the
following meanings:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 111/620
[1]
JUNK
Any and all forms of waste and refuse of any type of material, including scrap metal, junked motor
vehicles, glass, industrial waste and other salvageable material.
AUTOMOBILE
Any and all types of motor vehicles, including self-propelled machinery of all kinds, with the
exception of usable machinery.
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, firm, corporation or other legal entity, including singular and
plural, male and female.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
BOARD
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
JUNKYARD
Any place where junk, as herein defined, is stored or accumulated. Any premises, as herein
defined, having two or more automobiles unlicensed and/or not bearing current Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code inspection sticker thereon shall in any event be deemed a junkyard.
PREMISES
Any parcel of land situate in Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania, having a separate
Tax Map parcel number for county assessment purposes.
JUNK DEALER
Any person who buys, sells, salvages, stores or in any way deals in junk or owns, leases,
operates or maintains a junkyard within the Township.
§ 146-2. License.
No person shall be a junk dealer or own, lease, operate or maintain a junkyard, as herein defined,
within the Township without first obtaining a license to operate a junkyard as a junk dealer. The annual
fee for such a license shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors; the
license shall be effective for one calendar year only, each license terminating on December 31 of the
year for which it is issued subject to renewal upon application. Application for a license or any renewal
thereof shall be filed in writing with the Secretary of the Board and shall contain the applicant's sworn
statement setting forth the applicant's name and address, together with the names and addresses of
all other persons interested in the business, an accurate description of the premises upon which the
business is to be conducted and the junkyard located, including the Chester County Tax Map parcel
number, and a statement that the applicant will comply with the ordinance and any regulations adopted
pursuant to the ordinance. Upon receipt of the application and license fee by the Township, if the
application complies with the provisions hereof, the Secretary of the Board or the Board shall, within 10
days, issue its license authorizing the operation and maintenance of a junkyard upon the premises by
the junk dealer, Such license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed upon the junkyard premises.
The license shall be nontransferable both as to the junkyard premises and junk dealer.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 146-3. Restrictions.
No person licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license, keep more than one place of
business or operate more than one place of business or maintain or operate more than one junkyard
within the Township of Uwchlan, nor shall any person engage in business as a junk dealer or operate
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 112/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
or maintain a junkyard in any place other than the place designated upon his license, nor shall any
person operate upon any of the roads or highways in the Township of Uwchlan, whether from a vehicle
or upon foot, as a scavenger or an itinerant buyer or seller of junk, except a junkyard operator licensed
hereunder or under any other appropriate Township ordinance.
§ 146-4. Requirements.
Every junk dealer licensed under the chapter shall maintain the licensed junkyard and conduct
business as hereinafter provided:
All junk shall be stored behind a fence, as specified in Subsection B below, which fence shall be
set back at least 50 feet from all lot lines of the premises occupied by the junkyard. Whenever
such fence or any part of such fence is visible from a public road or from a residence of any
adjoining property, a landscaped screen of trees and/or shrubs of varieties capable of attaining a
continuous height of six feet within two years shall be planted a maximum of four feet apart along
such fence or section of fence. All required open areas between fence and lot lines shall be
maintained continuously in good order and free of woods and scrub growth.
Every junkyard shall be completely fenced with a heavy-duty chain-link or wire mesh fence at least
six feet in height with gates of similar fencing material, which gates shall at all times be securely
looked except during business hours when an adult attendant employed as such is on the
premises. Such fence shall have maximum openings of four square inches, and the wire mesh
shall be of a minimum size and strength of No. 10 gauge steel wire.
No junkyard shall cover an area in excess of five acres.
All junk shall be stored and set back at least 50 feet from any adjoining premises and at least 75
feet from the nearest edge of the cartway of any public road or highway.
No junkyard shall operate on Sunday nor between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except to
remove any wrecked automobile from any public highway.
All junk shall be stored and arranged so as to permit access by fire-fighting equipment and to
prevent accumulation of stagnant water. Junked automobiles shall be spaced in rows with at least
15 feet between each double row to permit movement of fire equipment. Junk shall not be piled to
a height of more than six feet from the ground.
All gasoline and oil shall be drained from any junked automobile into containers and removed from
the junkyard premises within 12 hours from arrival on the said premises of the junked automobile;
provided, however, that gasoline or oil shall be stored at only one location on the licensed
premises and no more than 100 gallons in aggregate of gasoline and oil shall be stored above
ground.
All weeds on any junkyard shall be kept mowed and shall not be permitted to go to seed.
An adult attendant shall at all times during business hours remain on the junkyard premises.
No garbage or organic waste shall be permitted to be deposited or stored in any junkyard.
No burning or melting of any junk shall be permitted in any junkyard nor in the Township.
Paper, rags, plastic materials and rubbish shall not be stored outside and shall not be
accumulated or remain on any junkyard premises for more than one month.
Junkyards shall at times be maintained in such a manner as to cause no public or private
nuisance nor to cause any menace to health or safety of any persons off the premises nor to
cause any excessive or offensive or noxious sounds or odors nor to cause the breeding, harboring
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 113/620
N.
O.
[1]
or infesting of rats, rodents or vermin, nor to cause a violation of any health or sanitation law,
ordinance or regulation of any governmental body.
Permanent records of all junk received or removed from any junkyard shall be kept by the junk
dealer on the premises, containing the name and address from whom received or delivered and
the date thereof and a description of the junk, which records shall at all times be open to
inspection by any member of the Board or its authorized agent or any law enforcement officer.
No junk shall be removed from any junkyard nor broken up, reduced or altered in shape or form
for a period of 48 hours after the same is placed or the junkyard premises.
§ 146-5. Inspection.
Any member of the Board or a duly authorized agent thereof may at any time enter upon and inspect
any premises, in the presence of the operator or attendant, for which there is a pending application for
a junkyard license or which holds a current junkyard license. Periodic inspections, as determined by
the Board, of all junkyards licensed pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be made and a written
report filed of each such inspection. In making such inspections, the Board shall ascertain whether the
provisions of this chapter are being complied with, shall note any violations thereof, shall check the
licensee's records of junk received and removed with his inventory, shall examine the titles to all junked
automobiles on the premises and shall check into such other matters as come within the scope of this
chapter.
§ 146-6. Regulations may be adopted.
The Board may, from time to time, adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of this chapter upon
giving notice to the licensees affected by such regulations.
§ 146-7. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine for each violation in an amount not to exceed $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, including
reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have
been committed for each day that said violation exists. Enforcement of this chapter shall be by action
brought before a District Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor may assume
charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 146-8. Nuisance
Any accumulation of garbage, rubbish or junk in violation of the terms of this chapter shall be deemed
a nuisance and shall be removed by the owner of the property on which such accumulation exists
within 10 days of the receipt of a notice sent to the property owner by United States certified mail by
the Board or its duly authorized agent, in default of which said accumulation may be removed by or at
the direction of the Board and the costs of such removal shall be collected from the owner, together
with the above-mentioned penalty by summary proceedings.
§ 146-9. Enforcement.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 114/620
The Board or any person may take any appropriate action at law or in equity, civil or criminal, to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, and this chapter shall in no way restrict any remedies otherwise
provided by law.
§ 146-10. Initial licensing period.
Junk dealers and junkyards operating and existing in the Township on the effective date of this chapter
shall not be required to obtain a license nor comply with the licensing provisions prior to July 1967, and
the license fee for the period ending December 31, 1967, shall be $50 only.
Chapter 153. Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 7-13-1970 by Ord. No.
70-04. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 153-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HEALTH AUTHORITY
The legally designated health authority of the Pennsylvania Department of Health, Chester County
Department of Health or the authorized representative of Uwchlan Township.
LICENSE
Written approval, in whatever form, as issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Health and
Uwchlan Township authorizing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of
assembly contained in one unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable
of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed
so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.[1]
MOBILE HOME LOT
A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the
park owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.[2]
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement
of mobile homes for nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.[3]
PERSON
Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation, or other entity.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle without motive power which may be towed on the public highways by a passenger
automobile without a special hauling permit, and which is designed for human occupancy under
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 115/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
transient circumstances, such as camping, travel, or other recreation, sometimes variously known
as "travel trailer" or "camping trailer."
SERVICE OR RECREATIONAL BUILDING
A structure housing operational, office, recreational, park maintenance and other facilities built to
conform to required local standards.
SEWER CONNECTION
The sewer connection consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the
mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE
The sewer riser pipe is that portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to the ground
elevation and terminates at each mobile home space.
WATER CONNECTION
The water connection consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to
the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE
The water riser pipe is that portion of the water service pipe which extends vertically to the ground
elevation and terminates at a designated point at each mobile home lot.
WATER SERVICE PIPE
The water service pipe consists of all pipes, fittings, valves and appurtenances from the water
main of the park distributing system to the water outlet of the distribution system within the mobile
home.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 153-2. Permits.
Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home
park within the limits of Uwchlan Township unless he holds a valid permit issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health in the name of such person for the specific construction,
alteration or extension proposed, and also a permit issued by this municipality hereunder.
Application to Pennsylvania Department of Health. All applications for permits shall be made by
the owner of the mobile home park or his authorized representative in accordance with the Rules
and Regulations, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Health, Chapter 4, Article 415,
Regulations for Mobilehome Parks, adopted October 30, 1959, as amended.
Application to Uwchlan Township. A copy of the said Department of Health application shall be
concurrently filed with the Uwchlan Township Zoning Officer, and the applicant shall also submit
an application to the Uwchlan Township Zoning Officer, using a form furnished by Uwchlan
Township, for a permit to operate a mobile home park in Uwchlan Township.
Inspection and issuance of permit. Upon receipt of such application, the Zoning Officer shall
forthwith inspect the applicant's plans and proposed park to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. After favorable determination of same, and upon being furnished a copy
of the permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Health to the applicant, said Officer shall
issue a mobile home park permit to the applicant, which shall be valid for a period of one year
thereafter.
Renewal permits. Renewal permits for a like period shall be issued by said Officer upon furnishing
proof by applicant that his park continues to meet the standards prescribed by the Pennsylvania
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 116/620
[1]
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Department of Health and this chapter.
Fees. Each application for a new or renewal permit hereunder shall be accompanied by payment
of an inspection fee in the amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. In the event that the Building Inspector is required to perform additional or unusual
service in determining said application, the cost of such additional service shall be borne by the
applicant. Such charges shall be levied whether or not the application is approved.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Applicability to existing parks. Mobile home parks in existence upon the effective date of this
chapter shall be required to meet, where it is possible for the permittee to comply, the standards of
the Pennsylvania Department of Health as a prerequisite to issuance of a permit and to meet,
where it is possible, the standards prescribed herein to the extent allowable under law.
§ 153-3. Registration.
Department of Health permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park
within the limits of Uwchlan Township unless he holds a certificate of registration issued annually
by the Pennsylvania Department of Health in the name of such person for the specific mobile
home park. Proof of registration shall be furnished to the Uwchlan Township Zoning Officer no
later than February 1 each year.
Transfer of ownership. Every person holding a certificate shall file notice in writing to the
Pennsylvania Department of Health and the Uwchlan Township Zoning Officer within 10 days after
having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile
home park. If the certificate of registration is transferred by the Pennsylvania Department of
Health, proof of such transfer shall be furnished to the Zoning Officer forthwith.
Suspension. Whenever upon inspection of any mobile home park it is determined that conditions
or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter or of any regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, the Uwchlan Township Zoning Officer shall give notice in writing in
accordance with § 153-16A to the person to whom the certificate was issued, advising him that
unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in
the notice the license to operate in Uwchlan Township shall be suspended. At the end of such
period, such mobile home park shall be inspected and, if such conditions or practices have not
been corrected and the licensee has not requested a hearing as provided in § 153-16B, the
Zoning Officer shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the
person to whom the certificate is issued.
§ 153-4. Inspection of mobile home parks.
Inspections. A representative of Uwchlan Township may inspect a mobile home park at
reasonable intervals and at reasonable times to determine compliance with this chapter.
Inspector. The Uwchlan Township Zoning Officer is hereby designated as the person to make such
inspections. Another or additional inspectors may also be authorized to make inspections or
additional inspections at the discretion of the Township Supervisors.
Authorization to act. The Zoning Officer may, in his discretion, give notice for violations of this
chapter and issue notice thereof without express authority from the Township Supervisors in each
instance.
§ 153-5. Park construction requirements.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 117/620
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
Minimum park area. A mobile home park shall have a gross area of at least five contiguous acres
of land.
Site location. The location of all mobile home parks shall comply with the following minimum
requirements:
Free from adverse influence by swamps, marshes, garbage or rubbish disposal areas or other
potential breeding places for insects or rodents.
Not subject to flooding.
Not subject to any hazard or nuisance, such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic
matter, radiation, heat, odor or glare.
Site drainage requirements.
The ground surface in all parts of every park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface
water in a safe, efficient manner.
Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water capable of breeding mosquitoes
and other insects shall be eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health.
Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer line shall not be deposited upon the
ground surface in any part of a mobile home park.
Soil and ground cover requirements.
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved, or covered with stone
screenings or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of
preventing soil erosion and the emanation of dust during dry weather.
Park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetation growth which is poisonous or which may
harbor rodents, insects, or other pests harmful to man.
Park areas for nonresidential uses.
No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are
required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for the management and
maintenance of the park.
Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a mobile home
located on a mobile home lot and connected to utilities.
Required setbacks, buffer strips and screening.
All mobile homes shall be located at least 20 feet from any park property boundary line
abutting upon a public street or highway and at least 10 feet from other park property
boundary lines.
There shall be a minimum distance of 10 feet between an individual mobile home, including
accessory structures attached thereto, and adjoining pavement of a park street or common
parking area or other common areas and structures.
All mobile home parks located adjacent to industrial or commercial land uses may be required
to provide screening such as fences or natural growth along the property boundary line
separating park and such adjacent nonresidential use.
Erection and placement of mobile homes.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 118/620
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(5)
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
J.
Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by
at least 15 feet on all sides.
An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected around the entire base of
each mobile home. Such enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and
deterioration of the structure.
Park street system.
General requirements. A safe and convenient vehicular access shall be provided from
abutting public streets or roads.
Access. The entrance road or area connecting the park with a public street or road shall have
a minimum pavement width of 34 feet.
Internal streets. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated
traffic and in any case shall meet the following minimum requirements:
Where parking is permitted on both sides, a minimum width of 34 feet will be required.
A minimum road pavement width of 28 feet will be required where parking is limited to
one side.
Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside
roadway diameter of at least 60 feet.
Required illumination of park street systems. All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so
spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide average
levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night.
Street construction and design standards:
Streets. All streets shall be surfaced in accordance with Uwchlan Township specifications
applicable to streets in conventional residential developments.
Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate surface drainage but
shall be not more than 8%. Short runs with a maximum grade of 15% may be permitted,
provided traffic safety is assured by appropriate surfacing and adequate leveling areas.
Intersections. Within 100 feet of an intersection, streets shall be at approximately right
angles. A distance of at least 150 feet shall be maintained between center lines of offset
intersecting streets. Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided.
A plan of the streets shall be provided with the application for the park permit.
Off-street parking areas. Off-street parking for at least one motor vehicle shall be provided at each
mobile home lot and off-street parking areas for additional vehicles of park occupants and guests
shall be provided where street rights-of-way are of insufficient width for such purposes.
Walks.
General requirements. All parks may provide safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian access
of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between individual
mobile homes, the park streets and all community facilities provided for park residents.
Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.
Common walk system. Where pedestrian traffic is concentrated, and a common walk system
is provided, such common walks shall have a minimum width of 3 1/2 feet.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 119/620
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
K.
L.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
(1)
D.
Individual walks. All mobile home lots shall be connected to common walks, or to streets, or to
driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall have a
minimum width of two feet.
Construction of mobile home lots.
Mobile home lots within the park shall have an average gross area of 5,000 square feet; if a
portion of the park is designed for the transient accommodation of recreational vehicles, lots
constructed for this purpose shall have an average gross area of not less than 800 square
feet.
The total number of lots in a park shall not exceed an average density of seven per acre.
Each mobile home lot shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for the placement
of the mobile home, and in such position as to allow a minimum of 10 feet between the mobile
home and the right-of-way of the park street which serves the lot.
Recreational area. A recreational area or areas with suitable facilities shall be maintained within
the park for the use of all park residents.
§ 153-6. Water supply.
General requirements. An adequate supply of water shall be provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other accessory facilities as required by this chapter. Where a public water supply
system of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto
and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where a satisfactory public water supply system is not
available, the development of a private water supply system shall be approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health or other authorities having jurisdiction.
Source of supply.
The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of 150 gallons per day per mobile
home.
The well or suction line of the water supply system shall be located and constructed in such a
manner that neither underground nor surface contamination will reach the water supply from
any source.
No well casings, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be placed in any pit, room
or space extending below ground level, nor in any room or space above ground which is
walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether above or below ground, have
free drainage by gravity to the surface of the ground.
Water supply treatment, if necessary, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Health.
Water storage facilities. All water storage reservoirs shall be covered, watertight and constructed
of impervious material. Overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened,
Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the entrance of
contaminated material. Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge through an acceptable air gap.
Water distribution system.
All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with state and local regulations.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 120/620
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water
supplies and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or backsiphonage.
The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a pressure of not less than 20
pounds per square inch, under normal operating conditions, at service buildings and other
locations requiring potable water supply.
Individual water-riser pipes and connections.
Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the mobile home stand
at a point where the water connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby ensuring
the shortest water connection possible and decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
The water-riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 1/2 inch and terminate at least
four inches above the ground surface. The water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipe
and to protect risers from heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing weather.
Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water-riser pipe on each mobile
home lot. Underground stop-and-waste valves are prohibited unless their type of
manufacturer and their method of installation are approved.
§ 153-7. Sewage disposal.
General requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all parks for
conveying and disposing of sewage from mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory
facilities. Such system shall be designed, construction and maintained in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Health or local health regulations.
Individual sewer connections.
Each mobile home lot shall be provided with at least a three-inch-diameter sewer riser pipe.
The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the
mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
The sewer connection (see definition) shall have a nominal inside diameter of not less than
three inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least 1/4 inch per foot. All joints
shall be watertight.
All materials used for sewer connections shall be semi-rigid, corrosive-resistant,
nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a mobile home does not
occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser
pipe shall extend at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation.
Sewer lines. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to be free of breakage
from traffic or other movements and shall be separated from the park water supply system. All
sewer lines shall be constructed of approved materials by the Pennsylvania Department of Health
and shall have watertight joints.
Sewage treatment and/or discharge. Where the sewer lines of the mobile home park are not
connected to a public sewer, all proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health prior to construction.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 121/620
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
§ 153-8. Electrical distribution system.
General requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring,
fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
local electric power company's specifications regulating such systems.
Power distribution lines.
Main power lines not located underground shall be suspended at least 18 feet above the
ground. There shall be a minimum horizontal clearance of three feet between overhead wiring
and any mobile home, service building or other structure.
All direct burial conductors or cable shall be buried at least 18 inches below the ground
surface and shall be insulated and specially designed for the purpose. Such conductors shall
be located not less than one foot radial distance from water, sewer, gas or communications
lines.
Individual electrical connections.
Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved disconnecting device and
overcurrent protective equipment. The minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC,
100 amperes.
Required grounding. All exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of mobile homes and all other
equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding conductor run with branch
circuit conductors or other approved method of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral conductor
shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile homes or other equipment.
§ 153-9. Service buildings and other community service facilities.
Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings
and other community service facilities when constructed, such as:
Management offices, repair shops and storage area;
Laundry facilities;
Indoor recreation areas; and
Uses supplying essential services for the exclusive use of park occupants.
Structural requirements for buildings.
All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and by
decay, corrosion, termites and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such
materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of
moisture and weather.
All rooms containing laundry facilities shall:
Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female sanitary
facilities. Walls and partitions in lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be
constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof material or covered with moistureresistant
material.
Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum
aggregate gross area of windows for each required room shall be not less than 10% of
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 122/620
(c)
(3)
(1)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
B.
the floor area served by them.
Have at least one window which can be easily opened or a mechanical device which will
adequately ventilate the room.
Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors.
§ 153-10. Refuse handling.
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be so conducted as to
create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air
pollution and shall comply with the Pennsylvania Department of Health regulations governing mobile
home parks.
§ 153-11. Insect and rodent control.
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and
infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform
with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Health regulations governing mobile home
parks.
§ 153-12. Fuel supply and storage.
Natural gas system.
Natural gas piping systems when installed in mobile home parks shall be maintained in
conformity with accepted engineering practices.
Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an approved shutoff valve installed
upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent
accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
Liquified petroleum gas systems.
Liquified petroleum gas systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings or other
structures when installed shall be maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of
the authority having jurisdiction and shall include the following:
Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures and shall
be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe location.
Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off gas. Such means shall
be located outside the mobile home and shall be maintained in effective operating
condition.
All LPG piping outside of the mobile homes shall be well supported and protected against
mechanical injury. Undiluted liquified petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed
through piping equipment and systems in mobile homes.
Vessels of more than 12 gallons and less than 60 U.S. gallons gross capacity may be
securely but not permanently fastened to prevent accidental overturning.
No LPG vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport,
mobile home or any other structure unless such installations are specially approved by
the authority having jurisdiction.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 123/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
A.
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
Fuel oil supply systems.
All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings and other structures
shall be installed and maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the authority
having jurisdiction, when provided.
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall be securely, but
not permanently, fastened in place.
All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings and other structures
shall have shutoff valves located within five inches of storage tanks.
All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and shall not be less than five feet
from any mobile home exit.
Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against physical damage.
§ 153-13. Fire protection.
Local regulations. The mobile home park area shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the
Uwchlan Township fire prevention authority, where provided.
Litter control. Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable
materials.
Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention authority
shall be kept in public service buildings under park control, and a sufficient number shall be
maintained throughout the park in readily accessible and well marked positions.
Fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be installed if their water supply source is capable of serving them in
accordance with the following requirements:
The water supply source shall permit the operation of a minimum of two one-and-onehalf-
inch hose streams.
Each of two nozzles, held four feet above the ground, shall deliver at least 75 gallons of
water per minute at a flowing pressure of at least 30 pounds per square inch at the
highest point of the park.
Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within 600 feet of any mobile home, service
building or other structure in the park and shall be installed in accordance with Uwchlan
Township specifications.
§ 153-14. Erection of single mobile homes.
Installation requirements. If a mobile home is erected and maintained as a single-family dwelling
house outside a mobile home park, the following requirements shall be met:
The tract upon which the mobile home is installed shall conform with the minimum lot size
requirement of the district or zone where located.
The mobile home shall be installed so as to conform with all front yard, side yard and rear
yard setback lines applicable to immobile housing in that district or zone.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 124/620
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[1]
(7)
(8)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
The mobile home shall be installed upon, and securely fastened to, a frost-free foundation or
footer, and in no event shall it be erected on jacks, loose blocks, or other temporary materials.
An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected around the entire base of the
mobile home. Such enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and
deterioration of the structure.
The mobile home shall be connected to public water and sewer systems, if available. If not,
the owner shall provide a potable water supply from his own or an adjacent well and shall
provide a septic system that shall meet the standards of the local health department and/or
the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
The tract shall be attractively seeded, landscaped and shrubbed.
Any garage, utility shed, or other outbuilding constructed on the tract shall conform with the
standards applicable to such structures as contained in the Uwchlan Township Building
Ordinance and/or Zoning Ordinance[1] and other applicable ordinances.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 265, Zoning, respectively.
Any single on-lot mobile home shall meet the specifications for manufacture of mobile homes
as set forth in United States Standards, Institute Standards for Mobile Homes, USA Standard
A 119.1-1969, NFPA No. 501B-1968, and any subsequent modification or amendment of such
standards.
Building permit. No mobile home shall be erected on a single lot unless a building permit is first
obtained in accordance with the Uwchlan Township zoning and building ordinances and other
applicable ordinances.
Recreational vehicles. No recreational vehicle shall be erected and maintained for living purposes
in Uwchlan Township except in a duly licensed mobile home park. Unoccupied recreation vehicles
may be parked or stored in a private garage, carport, or rear or side yard, but same shall not be
stored or parked on a public street or in the front yard of a residential dwelling.
§ 153-15. Miscellaneous requirements.
Responsibilities of the park management.
The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall operate the park in
compliance with this chapter and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile
home lot, which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections.
The park management shall give the Health Officer free access to all mobile home lots,
service buildings and other community service facilities for the purpose of inspection.
The management shall maintain a register containing the names of all park occupants. Such
register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the park. The management
shall notify the appropriate officer, in accordance with state and local taxation laws, of the
arrival and departure of each mobile home.
Removal of mobile homes. No mobile home, whether installed on a single lot or in a mobile home
park, shall be removed from Uwchlan Township without first obtaining a permit from the Uwchlan
Township Tax Collector, as required by Act No. 54 of 1969 of the Pennsylvania General Assembly.
Such permit shall be issued upon payment of a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 125/620
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
Board of Supervisors and of any real estate taxes assessed against the home and unpaid at time
the permit is requested.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 153-16. Notices, hearings and orders.
Notice of violation. Whenever the Uwchlan Township Zoning Officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter or of
any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, such authority shall give notice of such alleged violation
to the person to whom the permit or certificate was issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notice
shall:
Be in writing;
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
Be served upon the owner or his agent, as the case may require; provided, however, that
such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required by the laws of this state; and
Contain an outline or remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions
of this chapter or any part thereof and with the regulations adopted pursuant thereto
Hearing. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Uwchlan Township Board of
Supervisors, provided that such person shall file in the office of the Uwchlan Township Board of
Supervisors a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing
shall operate as a stay of the notice and the suspension. Upon receipt of such petition, the
Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give
the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to
be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be
commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that,
upon application of the petitioner, the Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors may postpone the
date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when in its judgment the
petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for such postponement.
Findings and order. After such hearing, the Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors shall make
findings as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued thereunder
and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice which shall be
served as provided in Subsection A(4). Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or
modifying a notice, the license of the mobile home park affected by the order shall be revoked.
Record; appeal. The proceedings at such a hearing, including the findings and decision of the
Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors, together with a copy of every notice and order related
thereto, shall be entered as a matter of public record in the office of Uwchlan Township, but the
transcript of the proceedings need not be transcribed unless judicial review of the decision is
sought as provided by this section. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Uwchlan
Township Board of Supervisors may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 153-17. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 126/620
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
Summary offense. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be required to pay a penalty for the use of Uwchlan
Township of no more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, and in default of such payment, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been
committed for each day that said violation exists.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Revocation or suspension of permit. Upon repeated violations by the same permittee, his right to
the issuance of a permit or to continued operation under a permit may be suspended for a fixed
term or permanently revoked, after notice and hearing by the Uwchlan Township Board of
Supervisors, subject to the right of appeal to the Chester County Common Pleas Court.
Chapter 158. Motorcycles and Minibikes
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 2-14-1972 by Ord. No.
72-01; amended in its entirety 9-9-1985 by Ord. No. 85-07. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 179.
§ 158-1. Permission to operate on property.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a motorcycle, minibike, snowmobile, or any other type of
motor vehicle on the sidewalks, footpaths, parks or property belonging to anyone other than the
operator or driver of such motor vehicle unless said operation is upon property of another with the
written permission of said owner.
§ 158-2. Authority to allow use.
The Chief of Police, Township Manager or their designates may authorize use of such motor vehicles
when so determined to be in the best interests of the Township.
§ 158-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the operation of lawn-cutting equipment or snow-removal equipment.
§ 158-4. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Any person who violates any provision of § 158-1 of this chapter shall be subject to a criminal fine in an
amount not to exceed $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees. In
default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Enforcement of this chapter shall be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in
the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent
of the District Attorney.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 166. Noise
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 127/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 10-10-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-07. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 82.
Barking dogs — See Ch. 87, Art. II.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 184.
Solid waste collection — See Ch. 205.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 166-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Uwchlan Township Noise Control Ordinance."
§ 166-2. Purpose.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that public health, safety and welfare shall not be abridged by
the making and creating of noise pollution or of public nuisances from disturbing, excessive or
offensive noises in the Township. The Board of Supervisors of the Township recognizes that
uncontrolled noise represents a danger to the health and/or welfare of the Township's residents and
businesses and that each person in the community is entitled to live and work in an environment in
which the level of impulsive and amplified noise is minimized for the community good. It is the purpose
and scope of this chapter to provide regulations to prevent excessive noise and excessive vibration
and to limit, control and eliminate excessive noise and excessive vibration in general from whatever
source; control sound levels that vehicles, appliances and equipment shall be allowed to produce, and
also to provide for the prohibition of other kinds of offensive noises. These regulations and provisions
are intended to protect the physical, mental and social well-being of persons living, working and visiting
in Uwchlan Township.
§ 166-3. Legislative findings.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
The Board of Supervisors finds that failure of individuals, businesses, industries, persons maintaining
animals, social gatherings and other activities to regulate the noise emanating from their premises
constitutes a violation of the peace and enjoyment of the residents, employees and other occupants of
the Township and a public nuisance. The Board of Supervisors further finds that no one has the right to
create excessive noise or excessive vibration that intrudes into or onto the property of others.
Specifically, such noise emanating from homes, occupations, businesses, industries, soundamplification
equipment, radios, electronic sound recording equipment, vehicles, persons maintaining
animals, social gatherings, and other activities:
Creates a nuisance in that residents are deprived of the enjoyment of their homes, disturbed in
their sleep, and otherwise prevented from the quiet enjoyment of their residential premises;
Is harmful and detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the Township's inhabitants;
Affects the property values of real estate in the Township;
Affects the public welfare by reflecting negatively on the quality of life in residential areas of the
Township;
Interferes with the conduct and operation of business and industry;
Disturbs the peace and good order of the Township; and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 128/620
G.
A.
B.
C.
Creates noise pollution.
§ 166-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context
clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
NOISE
Any sound emitted by a person, animal, appliance, equipment, instrument or other device.
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Township Building Official, Zoning Officer, Manager, Solicitor and/or police officer.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
PERSON
An individual, partnership, corporation, association, or any other entity or organization.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
§ 166-5. Prohibitions; violations.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
The making, creation or permitting of any noise in the Township of such character, intensity or duration,
when heard or detected over the property line of the property within which the noise is generated, as to
be detrimental to the life, health or welfare of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or which
either steadily or intermittently annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or
safety of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities is prohibited and is a violation of this chapter.
§ 166-6. Restricted noises enumerated.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
Without in any manner intending to limit or restrict the generality of the restrictions, prohibitions and
violations identified in § 166-5 above, the following acts, among others, are declared to be loud or
disturbing or unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter and are prohibited or restricted as set forth
in this § 166-6.
Animals and birds. The owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or controlling of any animal or bird
which makes any noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of five minutes or makes such
noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of the day or
night, regardless of whether the animal or bird is situated in or upon private property. Such noise is
determined to be prohibited noise as described in § 166-5 above, provided that, at the time the
animal or bird is making such noise, no person is trespassing or attempting to trespass upon
private property in or upon which the animal or bird is situated.
Defect in vehicle or noisy load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of
repair or loaded in such a manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or
other noise, or those being operated contrary to manufacturer's specifications and/or without all
standard noise-reducing equipment used, or with noise-reducing equipment that has been
modified and is not in proper working condition.
Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give
notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 129/620
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorcycle engine except through a muffler or other device
which meets the standards established for such devices by applicable laws and regulations or
manufacturer's specifications.
Mechanical devices. The operation of machinery, equipment or other devices by compressed air
unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced.
Other devices. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of
any radio, tape player, cassette player, compact disc player, phonograph or other device which
amplifies sound, or singing, shouting or playing of musical instruments in such a manner and at
such a time which is generally considered to be inappropriate and which excessively or
unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of the immediate neighborhood or surrounding area.
Parties. Acting in a noisy, loud, boisterous and unseemly manner so as to create noise that
disturbs the peace and quiet of the community and the surrounding neighborhood.
Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any loud or excessive noise on any street
adjacent to any school or institution of learning or judicial court while the same are in session, or
on any street adjacent to a church or religious institution while worship services are being
conducted, or on any street adjacent to any hospital; this noise shall be a violation of this chapter
only if signs are displayed on such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court
street or quiet zone.
Loading or unloading of vehicles; opening or destruction of boxes. The creation of a loud or
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening or destruction
of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
Devices attached to buildings. The sounding of any bell, gong, siren or device attached or
adjacent to any building or premises, particularly during the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., which disturbs the quiet or repose of any persons in the vicinity of the devices. This
prohibition shall not apply if the bell, gong or device is sounded as a warning of danger but shall
apply in the case of a false alarm or a malfunctioning device.
Trains, vehicles and buses. The unnecessary or prolonged blowing or sounding of any horn,
whistle, bell or other device attached to any train, locomotive, motor vehicle, bus or truck while
passing through the Township or while loading or unloading passengers or freight within the
Township.
Loudspeakers and amplifiers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on
trucks or other vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes, except where a specific
license or permit is received from the Township.
Construction activities. Building construction, demolition, excavation, trenching, grading, filling,
grubbing, paving and all activities associated with land disturbance, land development and the
construction, maintenance, repair and replacement of utilities, pipelines, streets, buildings and
structures, including the operation, running, idling or moving of vehicles and equipment of any kind
associated with the foregoing activities, when conducted from 7:00 p.m. or 30 minutes after
sunset, whichever is earlier, until 7:00 a.m. the following day, prevailing time, Monday through
Thursday; when conducted on Friday, from 7:00 p.m. or 30 minutes after sunset, whichever is
earlier, until 9:00 a.m. the following day, prevailing time; and when conducted on Saturdays from
7:00 p.m. or 30 minutes after sunset, whichever is earlier, prevailing time. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this § 166-6M, the activities set forth herein are prohibited anytime on Sundays or
state or federal legal holidays, except that the construction, repair, replacement and maintenance
of residential structures (but excluding land disturbance activities) is permitted on residential
properties by the owners of the residential property and their contractors on Sundays and state
and federal holidays between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing time.
[Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-04; 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 130/620
N.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
Property maintenance. The use and operation of power lawn mowers, chain saws, trimmers,
chippers, weed-whackers and other equipment for building and ground maintenance, when
operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day, prevailing time, any day
of the week, except on Sunday, when such operation shall not commence until 9:00 a.m.
§ 166-7. Exemptions.
The following noises are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
Emergency construction, repair, paving, demolition or alteration of a street or building. Permission
of the Township Manager, or his designee, or the Zoning Officer, when practical, shall be proof that
such emergency exists.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
Emergency activities of municipal, county, state or federal government agencies and emergency
activities of public utilities when they are seeking to provide electricity, water or other public utility
services and the public health, safety or welfare are involved, including sirens and warning
devices on or adjacent to facilities operated by governmental entities and agencies, and
emergency service providers.
All safety signals and warning devices (e.g., intrusion alarms, backup alarms on trucks) except
false alarms and malfunctioning devices; authorized vehicles when responding to emergencies
(e.g., police, fire, ambulance sirens or any other device used to alert persons to an emergency or
used during the conduct of emergency or traffic work).
Power lawn mowers, chain saws, trimmers, weed-whackers, snow-removal equipment and other
equipment for building and ground maintenance, when operated between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays and 9:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. on Sundays,
provided that such are operated within the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard
noise-reducing equipment in use, unmodified, and in proper operating condition.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
Generators and snow removal equipment during emergencies, provided such are operated within
the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard noise-reducing equipment in use,
unmodified and in proper operating condition.
Window or through-the-wall heating, ventilation and air-conditioning units and fans not exceeding
a rating of 25,000 BTUs, and individual heating, ventilation and air-conditioning condensers,
compressors and fans serving single-family detached or single-family attached dwellings, provided
that they are operated within the manufacturer's specifications, properly maintained and operated,
and used with noise-reducing equipment installed by the manufacturer unmodified and in proper
working condition.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
Vehicles collecting solid waste and recyclables when operated during hours as authorized by the
Township.
All motor vehicles being operated in Uwchlan Township on any street (as defined in Chapter 265,
Zoning), provided that such are operated within the manufacturer's specifications and with all
standard noise-reducing equipment in use, unmodified and in proper working condition.
[Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-04]
Parades, bands and other musical, recreational and athletic events conducted by or permitted by
schools or local government or with Township approval.
Bells, chimes and carillons used for religious purposes or in conjunction with national celebrations
or public holidays.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 131/620
K.
L.
[1]
M.
A.
B.
C.
A.
Weapons firing ranges existing as of June 13, 2016.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
Farm animals and farm-related operations and activities on properties where agricultural uses are
permitted by the Township Zoning Ordinance, provided that such activities are normal and
customary agricultural practices.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
Activities permitted by special waiver as provided by § 166-8 below.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection N, regarding existing legitimate or licensed businesses, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02.
§ 166-8. Special variances; permits.
Any person may request a special variance to any of the prohibitions of this chapter by filing a
written request with the Township Manager, with such information that the Manager may
reasonably require. In determining whether to grant or deny the request, the Manager shall
balance the hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons of not granting the
variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of the persons affected, the
adverse impact on the property affected, and any other adverse impact.
If the Township Manager determines that the requested variance will not cause an adverse impact
on the health, safety or welfare of the community, a permit may be issued specifying the noise
permitted, the hours and days authorized and the duration of the permit. In granting the permit, the
Township Manager may attach such other reasonable conditions and safeguards as he may deem
necessary to carry out the legislative findings and intent and purposes of this chapter. The permit
shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant.
Noncompliance with any of the conditions of the permit shall terminate it without further notice to
the applicant; the noise activity shall immediately cease, and the applicant shall be subject to all of
the provisions of this chapter.
[Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
§ 166-9. Prevailing standards.
Whenever any provision of this chapter conflicts with any other applicable municipal, county, state or
federal ordinance or statute, the stricter standard shall prevail.
§ 166-10. Nuisance, injunction.
Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by administrative
or judicial proceedings, fines and penalties as provided in this chapter. In addition to any other relief
provided by this chapter, the Township Solicitor or any resident or taxpayer of the Township may apply
to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this
chapter. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, preliminary
injunction and permanent injunction.
§ 166-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
Any Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer may issue an order requiring the immediate
abatement of any source of sound in violation of this chapter. If a person does not comply with the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 132/620
B.
C.
abatement order upon its issuance, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer is authorized to enforce
the provisions of the chapter by any available legal remedy, including the issuance of a summary
citation for any violation of this chapter.
Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by a
Magisterial District Judge in a summary proceeding shall be ordered to pay a penalty as set forth
herein, and a each day a violation occurs or continues shall be a separate offense. A person, firm
or corporation shall be fined not more than $1,000 for each separate offense. For any offense, a
person shall also pay all court costs including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township
in the enforcement of this chapter. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any cause of action or legal remedy of any
person or the public for injury or damage arising from the generation from whatever source of
noise which may give rise to such cause of action.
Chapter 174. Parking
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 1-13-1992 by Ord. No.
92-02. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 137.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 174-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Uwchlan Township Parking Ordinance."
§ 174-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated except where the
content or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BUILDING AND ZONING OFFICER
An individual duly appointed as such by the Township Board of Supervisors.
DWELLING UNIT
A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, which normally include provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation; each room in a rooming house; also as defined in the Uwchlan Township Zoning
Ordinance.[1]
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Fire companies and emergency service organizations performing services in the Township.
FIRE LANE
As described in § 174-3 hereof.
FIRE MARSHAL
An individual duly appointed as such by the Township Board of Supervisors.
HANDICAPPED PARKING
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 133/620
[1]
A.
B.
Parking spaces as prescribed by the Building and Zoning Officer, in accordance with ANSI
standards and requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, and shall be
marked with the proper sign in front of the space and like markings in the confines of the parking
space itself, as is detailed in the Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices ("UMTCD").
MOTOR VEHICLE
A vehicle which is self-propelled, except one which is propelled solely by human power or by
electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
PARCEL PICKUP/LOADING ZONE
A momentary stopping area that has been designated by the Building and Zoning Officer and
marked for use by vendors or the general public for the loading or unloading of goods,
merchandise or the like. Vehicles may not be parked in a parcel pickup/loading zone for longer
than five minutes.
PARKING AREA
An area used for the express purpose of parking or standing of a vehicle and/or motor vehicle,
whether on private property or a public street.
POLICE CHIEF
An individual duly appointed as such by the Township Board of Supervisors.
STREET
A way intended for general public use to provide means of travel for vehicles and pedestrians. The
word shall include words such as: "alley," "road," "highway" and "thoroughfare."
TOWNSHIP
Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
An individual or firm duly appointed as such by the Township Board of Supervisors.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Zoning.
§ 174-3. Fire lanes.
Whenever the Fire Marshal, in conjunction with the Police Chief and Building and Zoning Officer,
shall determine that the parking of motor vehicles upon any public or private street, lane, alley or
any private parking area, including but not limited to commercial and industrial complexes,
apartment and multifamily residential areas, schools, institutions, shopping centers, or other
private areas, is liable to interfere with the operation of the Fire Department or seriously hamper
egress of occupants from a building in case of fire, they shall designate the area to be established
as a fire lane, which designation shall be finally approved by the Building and Zoning Officer. Fire
lanes shall be of sufficient width (as provided in this chapter) to permit the ingress, egress and
mobility of fire and emergency equipment. In the case of private property, within 90 days (weather
conditions permitting) from the notice of such designation of a fire lane or lanes to the property
owner or the owner of any building located within the property, the owner shall, at his expense,
install the fire lane (where applicable) and post the area(s) so designated with signs identifying the
areas as a fire lane (as detailed within Subsection F hereof) and specifically prohibit all stopping,
standing or parking within these fire lanes. Such signs shall be of specifications as described
within this chapter and/or as shown in any nonconflicting provisions of the UMTCD, and shall read:
"NO PARKING, STANDING OR STOPPING at any time." Parking lines and signs identifying the
area as a fire lane shall be provided by the owner.
For structures with building setbacks greater than 30 feet, fire lanes shall extend from existing and
improved public streets, and shall have a minimum unobstructed right-of-way width of 24 feet,
within which there shall be constructed an all-weather, well-drained cartway not less than 20 feet
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 134/620
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(6)
A.
in width. The Building and Zoning Officer may authorize variations in the fire lane design
standards for existing sites and structures that cannot practically comply with the design
standards.
Fire lanes which curve from or change direction shall have a minimum radius of 55 feet and a
minimum tangent length of 50 feet between curves.
Dead-end fire lanes shall not exceed 400 feet in length and shall be terminated with an
unobstructed vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum surface radius of 40 feet, for all
new sites.
Fire lanes shall be shown on all subdivision and land development plans and must be reviewed by
the Township Engineer, Building and Zoning Officer, Fire Marshal and Police Chief.
Signage and pavement markings designating fire lanes are required in accordance with standards
set forth in the UMTCD. Where physical characteristics of the site dictate a need to vary from the
Manual's recommendations, the Building and Zoning Officer shall have discretion to waive strict
compliance with the Manual's recommendations and adapt them to the site, provided that the
changes will promote the public safety and welfare. Generally, signs shall be of red letters on a
white reflective background. The wording will be as stated in Subsection A hereof. Placement will
be at individual parking spaces or along lanes at intervals not exceeding 50 feet. Double-faced
signs shall be installed where deemed necessary.
Fire lanes shall at all times remain unobstructed except for emergency vehicles and equipment
used in emergency situations as provided in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all existing and proposed uses described in
Subsection A above.
The design for the construction of fire lanes will be as set forth in this chapter and shall be finally
approved by the Building and Zoning Officer.
§ 174-4. General parking procedures and regulations.
No person shall be permitted to park a motor vehicle in or along the side of any Township street:
After a snowfall of one or greater inches in depth.
As posted by the Uwchlan Township Road Department for cleaning.
During the time of a declared local emergency.
During adverse weather conditions that require the salting/cindering of roadways.
During special events as provided for and authorized by the Police Chief and the Township
Board of Supervisors.
Exception. The only persons exempt from the provisions of this § 174-4A shall be:
Owners and operators of emergency vehicles.
Medical doctors on house calls.
Service vehicles, clearly labeled as such and performing said service at the property in
question.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 135/620
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Parking, stopping and standing of vehicles on a street shall comply with the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code and all applicable Township ordinances.
Placement of trash containers, dumpsters and utility-construction trailers shall be permitted as
approved by the Building and Zoning Officer prior to installation.
All containers/trailers will have proper reflective markings on all sides and corners.
No such unit shall be within 30 feet of an intersection.
No such unit shall restrict or obstruct the normal flow of traffic on the street.
§ 174-5. Private/public parking areas and fire lanes.
No person or entity shall park, stop or stand any type of motor vehicle:
In a fire lane.
In a handicapped zone unless authorized by law.
Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
Restricting or blocking a means of egress.
Where signs prohibit parking.
Obstructing a Fire Department connection.
Where prohibited by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
Exception. Emergency vehicles, as defined in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, shall not be
prohibited from parking, standing or stopping as proscribed in § 174-5A hereof.
§ 174-6. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
An owner or operator of a motor vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be subject to a criminal fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000, payable to
Uwchlan Township within 14 calendar days of issuance of such notice, plus all costs of
prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees. Enforcement of this section shall be by action
brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor
may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney. Upon failure to
pay the fine, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal and police officers of Uwchlan Township to report all
violations of any provision of this chapter, indicating in each case the section thereof violated, the
location of the violation, the time of such violation and any other facts necessary to secure a clear
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. Each officer/official shall also place
on such vehicles such notice of violation to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has
been parked, stopped or standing in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
Any vehicle parked, stopped or standing in violation of this chapter shall be subject to being
towed, at the owner's expense, by the order of the Fire Marshal or a police officer of Uwchlan
Township in addition to any penalties imposed by any other section of this chapter. Payment of
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 136/620
D.
E.
[1]
A.
B.
storage and towing charges, set by the private contractor used by the Township, shall be the sole
responsibility of the registered owner/operator of the vehicle. Accumulation of fees related to
storage, regardless of time, shall be the responsibility of the registered owner of the vehicle.
Neither the Township or private contractor have any obligation to contact the owner of the vehicle
that has been towed.
Any person who violates the requirements of § 174-3 hereof shall be subject to a criminal fine in
an amount not to exceed $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys'
fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to a term not exceeding 90
days. Each twenty-four-hour period that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Enforcement of this section shall be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the
consent of the District Attorney.
Nothing herein contained shall preclude the Township from seeking enforcement of this chapter in
any action at law or in equity.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 174-7. Scope of jurisdiction.
The regulations and standards of this chapter shall be applicable within the political boundaries of
Uwchlan Township.
§ 174-8. Conflicts.
In the event any provision of the chapter conflicts with any other ordinance of Uwchlan Township, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
Chapter 179. Parks and Recreation Areas
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 4-12-1976 by Ord. No.
76-06; amended in its entirety 7-10-1995 by Ord. No. 95-10. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 112.
§ 179-1. Title; term defined.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "the Park Ordinance." Whenever, in this chapter the
term "park" is used, it shall be deemed to include playgrounds.
§ 179-2. Park regulations and prohibitions.
No person or persons shall be allowed in a park except between dawn and dusk unless a permit
has been obtained from the Township Secretary. Any child under seven years of age must be
accompanied by an adult or responsible teenager.
No person shall deface, destroy, or remove any public signs, notices, equipment, or other property
of the park.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 137/620
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
No person shall disturb, injure, or kill any wildlife within the park.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in a park is prohibited.
No gambling, or any obscene or indecent act, or any abusive, threatening, indecent or profane
language, or any conduct that may annoy others, shall be allowed in the park.
No person shall park any vehicle in any portion of a park except in spaces definitely set aside and
marked for parking purposes. No go-carts, minibikes, or like vehicles shall be permitted in a park.
No person (except law enforcement officials) shall carry or use any firearms or weapon within a
park.
No person shall litter within a park.
No person shall light or permit a fire to burn in a park except in fireplaces provided for such
purpose.
The playing of golf in any park is prohibited.
The use of a park for commercial purpose is prohibited.
§ 179-3. Activities requiring permit.
The use of a park for overnight camping, parties, or gatherings in excess of 25 persons may be
permitted when a permit is obtained from the Township Secretary as hereinafter provided.
The fee for a permit to occupy a pavilion shall be established by resolution of the Township
Supervisors. In order for a permit to be approved, the applicant must meet all the requirements
including residency and give all the information indicated in the permit application.
Any individual or organization who or which wishes to reserve any Township athletic facility,
including but not limited to basketball courts, volleyball courts, football fields, soccer fields,
baseball fields and the like, shall, prior to use of the facility, make an application to the Township
through the Uwchlan Township or its designee for a permit. The applicant shall comply with all
procedures listed in § 179-5 referring to requirements to make an application for a permit. Such
permit shall indicate the date(s) and time(s) the athletic facility shall be reserved.
The application for such permit shall be in the name of a person who shall be responsible for
seeing that all refuse left by the group shall be placed in a proper container or removed from the
grounds before leaving the park. The application for permit shall also indicate the sponsoring
person(s) or organization(s), the approximate number of persons attending the planned event, the
hours for which the planned event is scheduled, equipment to be used and such other pertinent
information.
§ 179-4. Enforcement.
The Police Department shall enforce the regulations hereinabove set forth and shall exercise general
supervision over persons and property in all parks.
§ 179-5. Maintenance of parks and park property.
The Board of Supervisors shall have general custody of all parks and all maintenance, repairs, and
replacements of property and equipment therein, and shall be chargeable with the duty of keeping the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 138/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
A.
B.
parks in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. In view of the fact that the parks and playgrounds of
the Township have been acquired and are maintained primarily for the use of the residents of the
Township, the Board of Supervisors, or any person or persons designated by it, shall have the right to
exclude therefrom any person who is not a resident of the Township.
§ 179-6. Application for permit.
Special permits for the use of parks shall be issued by the Township Secretary upon application
therefor. No charge shall be made for such permits.
The application for such permit shall be made at least 30 days prior to the time of the planned use
for which permission is being requested. The person or organization making application for a
permit pursuant to this subsection must be a resident of Uwchlan Township or an owner of a
business located within the Township and must provide a street address and telephone number
within the Township.
Any person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by
any person by reason of the negligence or fault of the applicant, his servants, agents or
employees. Before issuing a permit, the Township Secretary shall obtain the advice of the Chief of
Police and the Park and Recreation Board.
The Township Manager shall have the right to waive the permit fee and/or requirements of
advanced notice of 30 days for spontaneous public gatherings or meeting within the parks and
playgrounds intended to celebrate events of importance to the Township, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the nation, including celebrations of the accomplishments of local sports teams
and the ends of wars or other conflicts of national significance.
The Township Manager shall have the right to waive the permit fee and/or the requirement of
advanced notice of 30 days for groups or organizations of religious, charitable or nonprofit nature
or for any group or organization if there are circumstances unique to that group or organization
which justify the waiver to assure the public safety and welfare of the Township or the Township's
best interest. Nonprofits must supply a copy of their 501-C federal tax exempt document and meet
insurance requirements.
§ 179-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine in an amount not to exceed $600, for each and every offense, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township. If the penalty imposed for the violation of
this chapter is not voluntarily paid to the Township, the Township shall initiate a civil enforcement
proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge. Upon a finding of liability for committing said
violation or permitting said violation, in such civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, the defendant shall pay the fine, together with additional daily penalties for continuing
violations, plus costs and attorneys' fees. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
determination of a violation by a Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of
Civil Procedure. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees collected for the violation of
this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Parents and/or legal guardians of persons under 18 years of age will be held liable for penalties
incurred by and for damages to park properties of the Township caused or committed by their
children.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 139/620
A.
B.
Chapter 184. Peddling and Soliciting
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. General Provisions
[Adopted 7-8-1985 by Ord. No. 85-05; amended in its entirety 1-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-01]
§ 184-1. Requirements.
[Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
From and after the enactment hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person who is not the holder of a valid
and unexpired Uwchlan Township solicitor's permit card, issued pursuant to Ordinance No. 95-01, as
amended, to engage in selling, purchase or soliciting the sale or purchase of food, printed matter,
services, goods, wares or merchandise of any description, or in soliciting contributions, gifts or pledges
of money, or any other thing of value, or to engage in making surveys, or to distribute samples by
visitation to private homes, residences or businesses, or on public streets or highways of Uwchlan
Township, provided that minor persons being under 18 years of age engaged in selling merchandise or
soliciting contributions as part of their school, athletic or service organization activities shall be
exempted from all the requirements of this article. Nothing in this section shall preclude the distribution
of political or religious flyers, pamphlets, or tracts at no cost, or require that individuals merely
engaging in religious or political speech be required to register under this chapter.
§ 184-2. Application.
Any person desiring to obtain a Uwchlan Township solicitor's permit card to engage in the
activities described in § 184-1 hereof shall make application therefor, in person, to the Township
Secretary. The applicant shall supply, over his/her signature, the following information: 1) true
name; 2) place and date of birth; 3) temporary address; 4) residence address; 5) the address at
which he/she will receive notices under this article; 6) the name and address of his/her employer
or principal, if any, and the nature of the business activity thereof; 7) the name, address and
drivers' license numbers (if applicable) of everyone who will engage in soliciting if said permit is
issued; 8) the nature of business or activity in which the applicant wishes to engage within the
Township; 9) a true statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted in any jurisdiction of
any crime other than minor traffic violations and, if so, what crime or crimes; and 10) a request for
a Pennsylvania State Police criminal background check and the results of said background check
for each individual who will engage in soliciting if said permit is issued. No background check may
be older than 30 days prior to the date the application is filed. The applicant shall, together with
his/her application, submit to the Township Secretary his/her photograph and a written description
of the applicant, all recorded by the Uwchlan Police. Unless exempted by § 184-6 hereof, at this
time a fee in the amount set from time to time by the Board of Supervisors shall be paid to defray
the cost of administering this article.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
Between the date that the application is received by the Township Secretary and the date of
issuance of the Uwchlan Township solicitor's permit card, if in fact such card is to be issued, the
Uwchlan Township Police Department shall have 10 working days, excluding holidays and
weekends, to verify the information as provided on the application form. Upon approval of the
application, payment of the fee, unless exempted by § 184-6 hereof, stated herein, and verification
of the information as required, a license may be issued permitting the activity specified for a period
of one year from the date of issuance, provided that the Township Manager may refuse to issue a
license if he/she has reasonable grounds for such action. If approved, the applicant and everyone
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 140/620
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
listed on said application who will be soliciting, shall be issued a Uwchlan Township solicitor's
permit card, each card to be issued to each particular individual and to be used only by that
individual.
Licenses may be renewed annually upon payment of a fee as set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors, unless exempted by § 184-6 hereof, provided that an amendment to
the original application is submitted which reflects any changes in information contained in the
original application.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
§ 184-3. Regulations.
Every person to whom a license has been issued shall, in the carrying on of his/her business or
activities in the Township, comply with the following rules of conduct:
The individual shall carry and exhibit the Uwchlan Township solicitor's permit card at all times.
The licensee shall not permit any other person to have possession of the permit card and shall
immediately notify the Township Secretary of its loss. This person shall not cause or permit the
permit card to be altered or defaced.
He/she shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling house, business or industry without
invitation or permission of the occupant and shall leave the property upon request.
[Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
The individual shall not represent the Uwchlan Township solicitor's permit card to be an
endorsement of himself/herself or of his/her goods or of the goods or services of his/her principal
or employer.
The approved vendor, employees or agents thereof shall not engage in any business or activity
authorized under § 184-1 except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of the then current
prevailing time.
The approved vendor shall not permit the throwing or discarding of any paper, debris or other such
items upon the public streets, highways or other places of Uwchlan Township.
All mobile vehicles for the purpose of vending food products shall have suitable trash and
recycling containers clearly marked as such, and the vehicle shall clearly bear the markings and
identifications of the licensed vendor. The vehicle must clearly display any and all required
licenses from any federal, state, county and/or local agency.
The approved vendor shall not conduct his/her business activity at any geographical location
within Uwchlan Township that is deemed to be unsafe due to traffic hazards or other similar
situations by the Township Manager, Chief of Police or other designate as authorized by Uwchlan
Township.
The approved vendor shall immediately surrender his/her Uwchlan Township solicitor's permit card
and all permit cards of his/her employees or agents upon revocation and notification of revocation
of said license as herein provided.
The approved vendor shall notify the Uwchlan Township Police Department on a daily basis of the
times and locations of any and all activities being conducted in the Township.
A permit card issued pursuant to this chapter is not transferable to any other person or entity. A
permit card issued pursuant to this chapter is not transferable to any employee or agent of a
licensee who is not listed in the licensee's permit card application. A separate application shall be
filed and a separate permit fee shall be paid by each person who shall actually conduct the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 141/620
L.
(1)
(2)
M.
A.
B.
C.
soliciting or peddling and shall apply where an employer desires to secure permit cards for his
employees or agents.
[Added 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
A permit card issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only for engaging in the specific
business, activity, or purpose provided in the permit card application. A licensee shall not engage
in any business, activity, or purpose authorized under § 184-1 other than that which was provided
in the permit card application.
[Added 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
The licensee shall not engage in peddling or soliciting in a manner that:
[Added 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
Is intended to or is likely to intimidate a person into responding affirmatively to the peddling or
soliciting activity; or
Is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a
criminal act upon a person's property.
§ 184-4. Revocations.
[Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
Any license hereafter issued may be immediately revoked by the Uwchlan Township Police or the
Township upon the failure of the licensee to comply with the standards of conduct established by
§ 184-3 hereof or upon ascertainment that the licensee has made any false statement in the
application for license. Notice of revocation shall be given by written notice personally served or sent
by registered mail to the address designated for this purpose in the application for license.
§ 184-5. Appeals.
Any person whose application has been denied or whose license has been revoked shall be entitled to
appear with counsel, if he/she so desires, before the Board of Supervisors at a regular or special
meeting and be heard in behalf of a request for approval of a license or for reinstatement of the
license.
§ 184-6. Exemptions.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
The following persons are exempted from the licensing fee and renewal fee requirements of § 184-2 of
this article, provided that such persons shall comply with all other provisions of this article, including
but not limited to the requirement to carry and exhibit the Uwchlan Township solicitor's permit card at
all times:
Persons soliciting contributions on behalf of charitable organizations exempted from the provisions
of, or duly registered pursuant to, the Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, as
amended, Act of December 19, 1990, P.L. 1200, No. 202, 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq.
Farmers engaged in selling only the produce of their own farms from a truck or other vehicle only
while selling such on his/her own property.
Persons who have been licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to engage in an activity
described in § 184-1 hereof, when so engaged, including, with limitation, real estate, insurance or
securities brokers and salesmen.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 142/620
D.
A.
B.
Authorized persons engaged in making surveys or collecting information for the federal, state,
county or Uwchlan Township government or any agency thereof. Also exempt shall be authorized
persons engaged in making surveys or collecting information for bona fide educational or quasigovernmental
agencies if each activity has been previously approved by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 184-7. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05; 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to a criminal fine in an amount
not to exceed $1,000, plus the cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees, for each such
violation. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each sale or offer to sell shall constitute a separate violation. Each intentionally
falsified application form submitted shall constitute a separate violation of this section. Enforcement of
this article shall be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The
Township Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney.
§ 184-7.1. List of homes not wishing to be solicited.
[Added 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
Any resident of Uwchlan Township may register with the Uwchlan Township Police Department by
signing a registration application indicating that such owner or resident of such home does not
wish to be solicited.
Any person seeking a permit card under the provisions of this chapter shall, in signing the
application to obtain the same, agree that he or she will not solicit homes whose owners or
residents have signed a registration list which indicates that such owner or resident of such home
does not wish to be solicited. Such a list shall be held by the Police Department, and a copy
thereof shall be given to each person obtaining a license and identification card under the
provisions of this chapter. In the event that such person soliciting within the boundaries of the
Township shall fail to recognize the wishes of the homeowner or the resident of such home
expressed in the notice, then any such attempt to solicit such home shall result in a revocation of
the solicitor's license and identification card.
Article II. Transient Retail Merchants
[Adopted 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-02]
§ 184-8. Permit required.
Any person desiring to engage in the business of door-to-door sales in Uwchlan Township shall, prior
to engaging in said business, register with the Uwchlan Township Municipal Office and apply for and
obtain a transient retail merchant's permit.
§ 184-9. Licensing period; fee.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
The transient retail merchant's permit shall be valid for a period of no more than 30 days. A fee as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors per permit shall be due and payable from
the applicant at the time of issuance of the permit.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 143/620
[1]
[1]
§ 184-10. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in
an appropriate proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a fine of no more than $600 plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township.
Chapter 191. Rental Occupancy Permits
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-05.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
Editor's Note: this chapter also repealed former Ord. No. 2003-04, adopted 12-8-2003.
§ 191-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following words shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have
the following meanings:
CODE OFFICIAL
The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the
Township codes and this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.
DWELLING UNIT
A building or portion thereof providing one or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit and having no cooking or sanitary
facilities in common with any other dwelling unit.
OWNER
An individual, corporation, partnership or other entity having a legal ownership interest in a
residential property.
RENTAL PROPERTY
Any occupied residential property or dwelling unit that is non-owner-occupied; a residential
property or dwelling unit where individuals other than the owner reside on the property.
TENANT
An individual or entity who occupies a rental property.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan.
TOWNSHIP CODES
The Uwchlan Township Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Fire Codes, as amended from time to
time.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 191-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all rental properties within the Township.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 144/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
§ 191-3. Certificates required.
Initial and five-year inspection.
Within one year of the effective date of this chapter, all dwelling units in every rental property
shall be inspected and shall require a certificate of compliance in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
After the initial inspection, every dwelling unit in every rental property shall be inspected every
five years and shall require a certificate of compliance in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
Notwithstanding § 191-1A and B above, dwelling units in rental properties that have been
newly constructed and issued an initial use and occupancy permit within two years prior to the
effective date of this chapter and new dwelling units constructed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be inspected and shall require a certificate of compliance in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter within five years of the initial occupancy date.
New tenant. After the effective date of this chapter, a dwelling unit in a rental property shall not be
occupied by a new tenant until an inspection has been performed and a certificate of reoccupancy
has been issued by the Code Official in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
Common area. Within one year of the effective date of this chapter and on a yearly basis
thereafter, all common areas of rental properties shall be subject to inspection and shall require a
certificate of compliance in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 191-4. Permit application procedure.
All dwelling units in rental properties shall be inspected and a certificate of compliance will be
issued, valid for five years. The fee for this inspection shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors for each dwelling unit in a rental property to be paid prior to
the inspection. All such inspections shall be arranged by the Code Official. The Code Official shall
mail the owner written notice of the date and time of the inspection at least 10 days prior to said
date and time.
An application for a certificate of reoccupancy shall be filed with the Code Official by the owner 10
days prior to reoccupancy of a dwelling unit in a rental property. The application shall contain such
information as the Township may require on a Township form. A fee in the amount as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for each dwelling unit in a rental property to be
inspected shall accompany the application.
All common areas of rental properties shall be inspected on a yearly basis and a certificate of
compliance will be issued, valid for 12 months. The fee for this inspection shall be as set from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors per building to be paid prior to the inspection. All
such inspections shall be arranged by the Code Official. The Code Official shall mail the owner
written notice of the date and time of the inspection at least 10 days prior to said date and time.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 191-5. Inspection requirements.
Unless an exception is permitted by the Code Official pursuant to § 191-8 of this chapter, the following
requirements shall be met prior to the issuance of a certificate of reoccupancy or a certificate of
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 145/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
[1]
compliance. The Code Official shall conduct an inspection to determine compliance with the following
requirements:
Street numbers. Each house, building or structure shall have the assigned address number
displayed in a position easily observable and readable from the public or private street or right-ofway.
All numbers shall be in Arabic figures at least three inches high and reflective.
Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be in good repair and in a safe condition. Sidewalks with a horizontal
crack or a difference in elevation of more than 1/2 inch vertical or one inch horizontal shall be
deemed not in a safe condition and shall be replaced.
Exterior walls, roofs, doors and windows. Every exterior wall, roof, door and window shall be free
of holes or breaks. The roof shall be weathertight.
Handrails. Every flight of stairs which is more than three risers high shall have a handrail and
guard, and every open portion of a stair, landing or balcony which is more than 30 inches above
floor or grade shall have guardrail installed in accordance with the Building Code. All decks more
than 30 inches above finished grade shall have a guardrail installed in accordance with the
Building Code.
Electrical service and receptacles. Every habitable room in a dwelling unit shall contain at least
two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every bathroom shall contain at least one G.F.C.I.
receptacle.
Smoke detectors. Every residential dwelling unit shall have a minimum of one one-hundred-andten-
volt AC-powered, with battery backup, smoke detector near the sleeping area.
Plumbing. Floor drains shall not be permitted. Sump pumps are not permitted to be connected to
the sanitary sewer. All illegal connections shall be removed and discharged to an approved
location. All plumbing fixtures shall be clean, operating properly and in a sanitary condition. All
traps and fixtures shall be operational at all times.
Exit signs and emergency lighting must be present and operational as required.
Any other item that violates the Township codes and is a condition that endangers the health or
safety of the tenant or the general public.
§ 191-6. Issuance of certificate.
After inspection of the residential property, a certificate of reoccupancy or certificate of compliance
shall be issued if the property complies with the minimum requirements set forth in § 191-5 above.
§ 191-7. Reinspections.
If the Code Official determines after the initial inspection that a property does not meet the minimum
requirements set forth in § 191-5 above, upon correction of all violations, the owner shall notify the
Code Official in writing that the violations are corrected. A reinspection shall be performed by the Code
Official. A certificate of reoccupancy or certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Code Official if
the property is in compliance. The fee for reinspection shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 191-8. Exceptions.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 146/620
[1]
[1]
Where the Code Official determines, due to unique circumstances or weather conditions, that exterior
violations such as sidewalks and roofs cannot be replaced or repaired to comply with the minimum
requirements set forth in § 191-5 before occupancy, the owner shall submit a time schedule for repairs,
to be approved by the Code Official. As a condition to issuing the certificate of reoccupancy, sufficient
funds shall be escrowed with the Township in order to ensure completion of the required work.
§ 191-9. Waivers.
The Code Official may waive compliance with the five-year requirement of § 191-3A of this chapter if
the subject dwelling unit has been inspected and a certificate of reoccupancy has been issued within
the five-year period. The Code Official may waive compliance with § 191-3B of this chapter if the
dwelling unit being reoccupied has been inspected and a certificate of reoccupancy has been issued
within the twelve-month period immediately preceding the proposed reoccupancy date.
§ 191-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon
conviction thereof by a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 200. Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 106, Art. II.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 214.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 260.
ATTACHMENTS
200a Ex 1 Local Discharge Limits
Article I. Sewer Rates and Charges
[Adopted 10-13-1970 by Ord. No. 70-06; amended in its entirety 5-29-1990 by Ord. No. 90-09]
Editor's Note: These regulations are applicable to the DARA service area.
§ 200-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated. The word "shall" is
mandatory, while the word "may" is permissible.
AUTHORITY
The Uwchlan Township Municipal Authority.[1]
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any structure intended to be used wholly or in part for the purpose of carrying on a trade,
business, or profession or for social, amusement, religious, educational, charitable or public uses.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 147/620
[1]
[2]
[2]
DARA
The Downingtown Area Regional Authority, a political subdivision of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.[3]
GARBAGE
The solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and disposal of food, and
from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any structure intended to be used wholly or in part for the manufacturing, fabricating, storage or
warehousing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling of any product, commodity or article.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Any solids, liquids or gaseous substance or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development, recovery or
processing of natural resources and distinct from sanitary sewage.[4]
PERSON
Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association, group or society, including the
state and agencies, districts, commissions and political subdivision created by or pursuant to state
law and federal agencies, departments or instrumentalities thereof.[5]
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
PRIVATE DWELLING
Any structure intended to be occupied as a whole by one family.[6]
SANITARY SEWAGE or SEWAGE
The normal waterborne waste from a household, and toilet wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, commercial and industrial establishments.
SEWER SYSTEM
The DRWPCC and any pipe, conduit or other equipment, which carries wastewater to the
DRWPCC.[7]
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
SURCHARGE
The additional charge for the treatment of extra-strength wastewater in excess of the basic charge
for treatment of wastewater.[8]
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
WASTEWATER
The combined flow of sanitary sewage and industrial waste, together with such quantities of
infiltration and inflow as may be present.
WATER COMPANY
The private water company or the public agency or municipal authority that provides water service
to customers connected to the sewer system.
Editor's Note: The definitions of "average daily flow," "biochemical oxygen demand" and "center," which
immediately followed this definition, were deleted 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04.
Editor's Note: The definition of "compatible pollutant," which immediately followed this definition, was
deleted 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 148/620
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[1]
Editor's Note: The definitions of "Downingtown Regional Water Pollution Control Center" and
"engineer," which immediately followed this definition, were deleted 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04.
Editor's Note: The definition of "National Categorical Pretreatment Standard," which immediately
followed this definition, was deleted 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04.
Editor's Note: The definitions of "pH," "PPM" and "pretreatment," which immediately followed this
definition, were deleted 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04.
Editor's Note: The definition of "regulatory agency," which immediately followed this definition, was
deleted 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04.
Editor's Note: The definitions of "significant industrial user" and "standard methods," which immediately
followed this definition, were deleted 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04.
Editor's Note: The definition of "total suspended solids (TSS)," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04.
§ 200-2. Connections.
[Added 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-10]
Upon applications filed with and approved by the Township customers in the Township may be
connected to the sewer system. Except for the Marsh Creek State Park and the Shryock Paper
Company, no customer outside the Township may be connected to the sewer system.
§ 200-3. Imposition of sewer rent or charge.
There is hereby imposed upon each property located within the Township, served by the sewer system
and having the use thereof, sewer rents or charges payable as hereinafter provided, for the use,
whether direct or indirect, of the sewer system, based on the schedules of classifications and rates
hereinafter set forth.
§ 200-4. Flat rates for certain classifications in the DARA service
area.
[Amended 6-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-15; 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-01; 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-
01; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-05; 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01; 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-
06[1]]
Customer Classification Rental
a. Each private dwelling or living unit (including each mobile
home space, row house, townhouse, semidetached
house, but excluding multiple-dwelling buildings)
$93 per 3-month period
b. Each unit in a multiple-dwelling building (whether owned
by a single owner or as a condominium) except as
described in "c" below
$93 per 3-month period.
c. Each unit in a multiple-dwelling building (whether owned
by a single owner or as a condominium) which has no
rooms other than a living room, dining room, kitchen,
bathroom and one or two bedrooms
$93 per 3-month period.
d. Each firehouse, church or municipal building $93 per 3-month period.
Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2016.
§ 200-5. Meter rates for industrial, commercial and institutional
users in the DARA service areas.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 149/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
A.
[Amended 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-01; 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-05; 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01; 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01; 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-
06[1]]
Meter rates. Except for those customer classifications enumerated in § 200-4 hereof, the quarterly
sewer rents or charges shall be based on the quantity of water used as evidenced by the meter
readings of water meters installed by the water company and such other meters or measuring
devices as may be installed pursuant to any provisions of this article, and shall be at the rate of
$6.29 per thousand gallons of water used.
Minimum rates. Regardless of water consumption, the minimum charge for sanitary sewage from
industrial, commercial and institutional establishments shall not be less than $93 for each such
establishment for each three-month period.
Multiple use. In each case of a combination of one or more commercial, industrial or institutional
establishments in one property, all having the use of the sewer system through one sewer
connection, then each such establishment shall be charged the above-mentioned minimum rate
as though each were separately connected to the sewer system, and if there is only one water
meter for any such combination, the Township may estimate the amount of water used by each
individual establishment if necessary.
Schools. Schools (public or other daily schools) shall be charged based upon the quantity of water
used by them, at the rates and in the manner provided by the § 200-5A hereof for industrial,
institutional and commercial establishments, except that, notwithstanding Subsection B of this
section, the charge for each school for each quarterly billing period ending September 30 will be
subject to a minimum charge equal to the average of the three bills issued for such school next
preceding the period ending September 30 in each year.
Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2016.
§ 200-6. Measuring volume for the purpose of § 200-5.
Methods of measuring volume.
Whenever a person purchasing all water used from the water company discharges sanitary
sewage and/or industrial waste into the sewer system, the volume of water used, as
determined from meter readings of the water company, shall be used in computing the sewer
rentals.
In cases where a person has a source of water supply in addition to or other than from the
water company and discharges sanitary sewage and/or industrial waste into the sewer
system, such person shall permit the Township to install a meter on such additional or other
source of supply. The total amount of water consumed as shown by these meter readings will
be used in computing the sewer rentals.
In cases where a person uses water from the water company and/or from an independent
supply such that all or any part of the water so used is not discharged into the sewer system,
the quantity of water used to determine the sewer rentals shall be computed by one of the
following methods as determined by the Township:
Method No. 1. By placing a meter or measuring device on the sewer connection. The
readings from this meter or measuring device shall be used in computing the sewer
rentals.
Method No. 2. By placing a meter or measuring device on the effluent not discharging
into the sewer system. The reading from this meter or measuring device will then be
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 150/620
(c)
B.
C.
(1)
A.
deducted from the total water meter readings and the remainder will be used in
computing the sewer rentals.
Method No. 3. When it is not practical to install measuring devices to determine
continuously the quantity of water not discharged into the sewer system, the Township
will determine, in such manner and by such method as it may prescribe, the percentage
of metered water discharged into the sewer system, and the quantity of water used to
compute the sewer rental shall be the percentage so determined of the quantity
measured by the water meter or meters. Any dispute as to the estimated amount shall be
submitted to the Board of Supervisors of the Township, after notice of the estimate,
whose decision on the matter shall be final.
Measuring devices. All meters or measuring devices required to be used under the provisions of
this article [except those provided by the water company or those provided by the Township under
§ 200-6A(2) above] shall be furnished and installed by the Township at the expense of the
property owner. All such meters or measuring devices (except those provided by the water
company) shall be under the control of the Township, and may be tested, inspected or repaired by
Township employees whenever the Township shall deem necessary. The owner of the property
upon which such measuring device is installed shall be responsible for its maintenance and
safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made by the Township at the property owner's
expense, whether such repairs are made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other causes.
Bills for such installation and repairs shall be due and payable at the same time and collected in
the same manner as are the bills for sewer services; such bills from and after their due date shall
constitute a lien upon the property upon which such measuring device is installed.
Meter readings. The Township shall be responsible for the reading of all meters or measuring
devices (except to the extent the water company's readings are used), and they shall be made
available to Township employees for meter reading at any reasonable time.
§ 200-7. Changes in classification, additional classifications and
modifications.
If use or classification of any property should change within any quarterly period, the difference in the
sewer rental, prorated on a monthly basis to the nearest calendar month, will be charged or credited,
as the case may be, on the bill for the succeeding quarterly period. Additional classifications and
additional sewer rentals may be established by the Township from time to time.
§ 200-8. Time and methods of payments.
Sewer rentals or charges shall be paid quarterly, and billings for sewer rentals shall be made by bills
dated, and on, the first days of January, April, July and October of each year, for the three-month
period immediately preceding the date of the bill. The bills for sewer rentals under §§ 200-4 and 200-5
for the quarterly period during which a property is first connected to the sewer system will be prorated
on the basis of the applicable rate. All bills shall be due and payable on their respective dates.
§ 200-9. Penalties for delinquent sewer rentals and liens.
[Amended 6-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-15; 6-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-04; 2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-02]
Penalties, interest, costs and attorney's fees for delinquent accounts.
[Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-04]
All sewer charges not paid in full by the due date shall be deemed to be delinquent. A penalty
of 10% of the amount of the quarterly sewer charge shall be added to the quarterly charge if
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 151/620
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
[2]
(6)
(7)
(8)
[3]
B.
A.
B.
C.
not paid by the due date.
The amount of the quarterly sewer charge and penalty shall bear interest form the due date at
the rate of 10% per annum until paid.
Collection procedures shall be commenced for all accounts delinquent over six months or
exceeding $500. The Township shall charge an administrative fee as set by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors for starting collection procedures, which shall be added as costs to the
amount of the delinquent account.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The Township may terminate sewer service to any property where the payment of sewer
charges has not been paid by the due date. Sewer service shall not be restored until all
delinquent charges, penalties, costs, interest, attorney's fees, and the cost of shutting off and
restoring service have been paid in full.
The penalties, interest, costs and charges set forth above shall be in addition to all other legal
and equitable remedies available to the Township to collect delinquent accounts, including but
not limited to municipal lien and assumpsit remedies. The amounts of the penalties, interest,
costs and charges set forth above may be changed from time to time by resolution of the
Township Board of Supervisors.
All sewer rentals not paid by the due date, and all penalties, interest, costs, charges and
attorney's fees thereon, shall be a lien against the delinquent property and shall be filed as a
lien in the office of the Prothonotary of Chester County and shall be collected in the manner
provided by law for filing and collection of such liens. The Township shall charge a lien fee as
set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors when the account is referred to the Township
Solicitor for collection, which shall be added as costs to the delinquent account.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The delinquent account holder shall also be responsible for all legal fees incurred by the
Township in collecting the account in accordance with a schedule enacted from time to time
by Township ordinance.
All liens for delinquent accounts filed as of the effective date of this article shall be amended
to include interest at the statutory rate of 10% per annum beginning on the date of the
delinquency until paid.
All persons connected to the sewer system shall give the Township their correct address. Failure
to receive bills will not be considered an excuse for nonpayment nor permit an extension of the
period during which bills are payable at face.[3]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection c, regarding delinquent sewer rentals, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-04.
§ 200-10. Segregation of sewer revenues.
The funds received by the Township from the collection of the sewer rentals and charges and all
penalties thereon, as herein provided for, and any fines collected by the Township in connection
with the sewer system shall be segregated, earmarked and deposited in a separate fund, to be
designated "Sewer Revenue Account."
The funds received by the Township from payment of tapping fees imposed by the Authority and
collected by the Township, as its agent, shall be deposited in the Sewer Revenue Account.
Said funds shall be used only for the purposes specified in any lease or agreement the Township
may enter into for and of, or in connection with, said sewer system, with the Authority, in
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 152/620
[1]
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
[1]
(1)
B.
accordance with the provisions of 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., as amended.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Sections 10 through 16, which immediately followed this section, were
superseded by Ord. No. 2007-02. See Art. VII, Industrial Users, of this chapter.
§ 200-11. Miscellaneous service regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all users of the sewer system:
A garbage disposal unit with a motor of 1/2 horsepower or less may be installed in any singlefamily
dwelling or unit without a permit.
Floor drains used for washing and cleaning will be permitted only on application to the Township
and only after provisions have been made for the removal of sand, grit, oil, grease, garbage or any
other materials.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, enter, uncover, deface or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the sewer system.
§ 200-12. Information required; reimbursement of Township
expenses; inspection charges.
Information required by all persons discharging wastewaters:
The Township may, from time to time, request or require the submission of information
certifying the sources, nature, characteristics, quantity or quality of wastewater discharged to
the sewer system.
Any person discharging wastewater into the sewer system shall furnish and verify to the
Township the information set forth in § 200-12A(1) above in order to be permitted to continue
discharging into the sewer system.
Any person who fails or refuses to provide the information set forth in § 200-12A(1) above in
the form and manner prescribed by the Township, or within the time specified by the
Township, shall be in violation of this article.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, questionnaire, or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this article or pursuant to the conditions of any permit or agreement required by
this article shall be in violation of this article. This provision shall be deemed to be concurrent
with the provisions of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4903 (relating to false swearing) or § 4904 (relating to
unsworn falsification to authorities).
Reimbursement of Township expenses. Expenses incurred by the Township, which are directly
attributable to one or more identified dischargers into the sewer system or to persons planning to
connect one or more properties to the sewer system, shall be paid to the Township by such
discharger or person within 30 days of receipt of an invoice from the Township. All such expenses
shall be collected by the Township in the same manner as, and subject to the same penalties for
nonpayment thereof, including interest, discontinuance of service, municipal lien, and assumpsit
remedies, set forth in § 200-9 of this article. Examples of such expenses include, but are not
necessarily limited to, the following:
All Township expenses, including engineering and legal fees, for the review of preliminary and
final site plans, sewer plans and profiles, sewage facilities planning modules, permit
applications, questionnaires, industrial waste discharge permits or agreements.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 153/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
All Township expenses, including laboratory costs, or the sampling and monitoring of
wastewater quantity or quality of wastewater discharged to the sewer system.
All surcharges billed by DARA.
All fines or monetary penalties imposed by or passed on by DARA which are directly
attributable to a discharge to the sewer system.
Additional inspection charges. Any connection to any exterior main from a building other than the
original connection shall necessitate an hourly inspection fee to cover inspection and
administrative costs related to such a connection. Such inspection fee shall be determined by a
yearly resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 200-13. Enforcement; penalties; abatement of nuisances.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be served by the Township with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a ten-day period within which any
such violation shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the Township.
In addition to any other remedies set forth in this article, any person who continues any violation
beyond the ten-day period shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days. Each twenty-four-hour period that a violation of this article continues
beyond the ten-day period shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement of this article shall be
by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The
Township Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District
Attorney.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
All fines and penalties collected for the violation of any provision of this article shall be paid to the
Treasurer of the Township for the use of the Township.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall also be liable to the Township for any
expense, loss or damage caused to the Township by reason of such violation. A continuing
violation may also be cause for the Township to disconnect service to the property. Such
disconnection shall only take place after the affected party shall have received written notification
of such possible action by certified mail. In the certified letter it will again be explained exactly
what violation is existing.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of this article shall constitute
a nuisance and may be abated by the Township by seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief
from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 200-14. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on June 4, 1990, and shall be applicable to all properties connected
to the sewer system. The Township reserves the right to make such changes from time to time as in its
opinion may be desirable or beneficial, and to amend this article or to change the rates or charges in
such manner and at such times as in its opinion may be advisable, or as may be required by any lease
referred to in § 200-10 hereof.
Article II. Sewer Connections
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 154/620
[1]
A.
B.
[Adopted 10-13-1970 by Ord. No. 70-07]
Editor's Note: These regulations are applicable to both the DARA and Eagleview service areas.
§ 200-15. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this article shall
be as follows:
OCCUPIED BUILDING
Each single dwelling unit, household unit, flat or apartment unit, store, shop, office, business,
commercial or industrial unit, or family unit contained within any structure, erected and intended
for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from
which structure sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, or either thereof, is or may be discharged,
located in the Township.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
SANITARY SEWER
A sewer which is part of the sewer system and which carries sanitary sewage and/or treated
industrial wastes and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE
Any combination of water-carried wastes from residences, buildings, industrial establishments,
institutions, manufacturing plants, processing plants, commercial establishments, or other places
in which such wastes are produced, together with such groundwater, surface water, stormwater or
other water as may be present.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
An engineer employed by the Township or an authorized member of his staff.
§ 200-16. Use of public sewers required.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of property who is required to connect to the sewer system
pursuant to Subsection B below, to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, or cesspool or
septic tank, intended or used for the disposal of sewage within the Township.
Each owner of any occupied building situate on property abutting on any street, alley or right-ofway
in which there has been constructed a sanitary sewer and where any part of such building is
within 150 feet of said sewer shall at his own expense install suitable sanitary facilities therein and
connect such facilities directly with such sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article
within 60 days after the date of official notice to do so, given in the manner provided by law. In the
event any such owner shall refuse or neglect to so connect within said sixty-day period, he shall
be deemed to be in violation of this article, and the Board of Supervisors of the Township or their
agents may enter upon such property and construct such connection. In such case, the Board of
Supervisors shall forthwith, upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill of the cost of the
construction of such connection to such owner, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of
neglect or refusal by such owner to pay said bill, within 30 days thereafter, it shall be the duty of
the Board of Supervisors to file municipal liens. The above regulations shall not apply to the owner
of any property who is operating under a permit from, or with the approval of, the Department of
Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no owner
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 155/620
[1]
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
of an occupied building shall be required to connect such building to a sanitary sewer if the Board
of Supervisors determines that connecting such building would result in an overloading of sewage
treatment facilities.
Each owner of any property to which Subsection B above applies shall forthwith make application
in writing to the Township, in such form as may be prescribed by the Township Engineer, for a
permit to make the required connection to the sanitary sewer. Upon submission of the abovementioned
application and payment of (1) an administrative and inspection fee in accordance with
the then applicable Township resolution with respect to administration and inspection fees and
payment of (2) a tapping fee or fees (imposed by the Authority for collection by the Township as its
agent) in accordance with the then applicable Authority resolution with respect to tapping fees.
The application shall be entitled to a permit to make such connection, and the applicant, at his
own expense, shall construct a connecting sewer lateral from the sanitary sewer trunk line in the
street into the applicant's structure according to the standard specification guidelines composed
by the Authority for such actions. All work involved here, including street restoration, shall be done
in compliance with the above stated guidelines and also the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance No. 79-2, Appendix C.
[Amended 9-4-1973 by Ord. No. 73-08; 4-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-02[1]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
All connections made to any sanitary sewer shall be constructed in compliance with standard rules
and regulations hereafter adopted by the Township governing the making of connections.
§ 200-17. Permission required to open or to enter into the sewer
system.
[Added 4-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-02]
No person shall uncover, shall connect with, shall make any opening into or shall use, shall alter or
shall disturb, in any manner, any sewer or any part of the sewer system without first obtaining a
permit, in writing, from the Township.
No person shall open or enter into any manhole, pumping station, metering chamber, or other
structure of the sewer system or enter into such facility without first having obtained the approval
of the Township Sanitation Superintendent or his authorized representative.
Any person who intends to open any manhole, pumping station, or metering chamber or who
intends to open or excavate around any portion of the sewer system must first satisfy the
Township Sanitation Superintendent or his authorized representative that adequate protective
measures and procedures will be employed.
§ 200-18. Powers and authority of inspectors.
The Township Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the Township bearing proper
credentials and bearing proper identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 200-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article other than § 200-18 shall be served by
the Township with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. (The notice provided in § 200-16B above being
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 156/620
[1]
B.
C.
D.
deemed to be notice of a violation for this purpose in respect of violations of such section). The
offender shall within the period of time (if any, otherwise forthwith) stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit fixed as provided in Subsection A
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of
payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days. A new and separate violation shall be deemed to have been committed for each day any
violation continues beyond such time limit. Enforcement of this article shall be by action brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor may
assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
All fines and penalties imposed for violation of any provision of this article shall be paid to the
Treasurer of the Township for the use of the Township.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, in addition to becoming liable for a fine
and penalty, shall become liable to the Township for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by
the Township by reason of such violation.
Article III. Eagleview Drainage Basin Sewer Use
[Adopted 2-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-04]
§ 200-20. Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Eagleview Drainage Basin Sewer Use
Ordinance of 1994."
§ 200-21. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this
article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. Words in the present tense include the future.
The singular number includes the plural number. The plural number includes the singular number. The
word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, also known as the "Clean Water Act."
AGREEMENT
The agreement dated February 14, 1994, by and between the Township, the Authority and the
Hankin Group, pertaining to the expansion and operation of the EWTP.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY
The Administrator or the Regional Administrator of EPA.
AUTHORITY
The Uwchlan Township Municipal Authority.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF USER
An authorized representative of a user is:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 157/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the user is a corporation;
A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
A principal executive officer or a person having responsibility for the overall operation of the
user's facility if the user is a governmental agency, unincorporated organization, or other
similar entity; or
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the facility with respect to which action hereunder is
required.
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW
The wastewater discharge volume from the most recent calendar quarter divided by 91.25.
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)
The quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C. The
standard laboratory procedure shall be found in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage" published by the American Public Health Association.
BYPASS
The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's facility for
pretreatment.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRY
Any industry subject to pretreatment standards as specified in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N,
establishing quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be
discharged or introduced to a treatment plant by existing or new industrial users in specific
industrial subcategories.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)
The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, required to chemically oxidize the organic and
inorganic matter in a water or wastewater sample under the standard laboratory procedure. The
standard laboratory procedure shall be that in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage" published by the American Public Health Association.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT
BOD , total suspended solids, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, total phosphorus, and fecal coliform
bacteria.
CHRONIC VIOLATION
A violation of a wastewater discharge limit in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six-month period exceeded (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average
limit for the same pollutant.
DISCHARGE PERMIT
A permit issued by the Township authorizing the discharge of tank truck or hauled waste at the
EWTP.
ENGINEER
The Township's consulting engineer, as appropriate.
EPA
The United States Environmental Protection Agency, including, where appropriate, the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
5
5
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 158/620
EWTP
The Eagleview Wastewater Treatment Plant.
GARBAGE
Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and
from the commercial handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE
An individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes.
INDUSTRIAL USER
Any person discharging industrial wastewater to the sewerage system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT
A permit authorizing a person to deposit or discharge industrial wastewater into the sewerage
system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE OR WASTEWATER
Any water which, during a manufacturing or processing operation, including those regulated under
Sections 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product, or
any other water contaminated by an industrial process, and distinct from sanitary sewage.[1]
INTERFERENCE
The inhibition or disruption of the EWTP processes or operations which contributes to a violation
of any requirement of the Township's NPDES permit or a decrease in treatment efficiency. The
term includes inhibition or disruption of sewage sludge use or disposal from the EWTP in
accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) or any criteria, guidelines, or
regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method
of disposal or use employed by the EWTP.
LOCAL DISCHARGE LIMITS
Numerical limitations on the concentration, mass or other characteristics of wastes or pollutants
discharged to the sewerage system by industrial users, and which are developed by the Township.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (MG/L)
The ratio of weight to volume expressing the concentration of a specified component in
wastewater. Also known as parts per million (ppm).
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) and which are defined in 40 CFR Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT
A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITED DISCHARGE
Any regulation developed under the authority of 40 CFR Section 403.5.
NEW SOURCE
Any building, structure, facility, or installation for which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Categorical
Standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
Categorical Standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section. Determination
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 159/620
of the applicability of new source standards shall be made as provided in the Act and 40 CFR
Section 403.3.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property, or his agent.
PASS THROUGH
Discharge through the EWTP which exists in quantities or concentrations, alone or with
discharges from other sources, which causes a violation of any condition of the Township's
NPDES permit.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP)
The Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
department or agency of the Commonwealth succeeding to the existing jurisdiction or
responsibility of the Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association, group or society, including the
state and agencies, districts, commissions and political subdivisions created by or pursuant to
state law and federal agencies, departments or instrumentalities thereof.
pH
The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed as moles per liter.
POLLUTANT
Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, sewage sludge, garbage, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
PRETREATMENT
The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging
or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewerage system. The reduction or alteration
may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other
means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT
Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, prohibited discharge limits, and local discharge limits.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL
Registered professional engineer skilled in the field of wastewater treatment.
SANITARY SEWAGE or SEWAGE
The normal waterborne waste from a household, and toilet wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, commercial and industrial establishments.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM
The EWTP and any pipe, conduit or other equipment which carries wastewater to the EWTP.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER
Any industrial user that:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 160/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards;
Discharges 10,000 gallons or more per day of industrial wastewater;
Contributes a waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the dry weather compatible
pollutant capacity of the EWTP; or
Has a reasonable potential, as determined by the Township or EPA, to adversely affect the
EWTP by interference, pass through of pollutants, sludge contaminations, to endanger
collection system and EWTP personnel, or to violate any applicable pretreatment standard.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
When a quarterly evaluation of significant violations of the pretreatment standards, or this article,
determines either a chronic (66% of discharge parameters in violation during a six-month period)
or technical review criteria violations of wastewater discharge limit; interference or pass through at
the EWTP; a failure to accurately report noncompliance; a failure to provide, within 30 days after
the due date, reports required by this article; a failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled
date, a compliance schedule milestone; which results in the Township taking action to halt a
discharge of pollutants; or which the Township determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
SLUG LOAD
Any discharge of wastewater having a concentration of pollutants or flow greater than five times
that of the average twenty-four-hour discharge from a user, over the immediately preceding
calendar quarter, which is discharged continuously for a period longer than five minutes.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC)
A classification pursuant to the latest Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.
STANDARD METHODS
The latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," a manual
published by the American Public Health Association specifying analytical procedures for testing
and analysis of wastewater.
STATE
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SURCHARGE
An additional charge for the treatment of extra-strength wastewater in excess of the basic charge
for treatment of wastewater.
TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOLATION
Any violation of a discharge limit in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for any
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by 1.4 for BOD and TSS and 1.2 for all other
pollutants.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN)
The sum of the organic nitrogen and ammonia nitrogen present in wastewater, as measured by
standard laboratory procedure as described in Standard Methods.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS)
The total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water or
wastewater and is removable by laboratory filtration as prescribed in Standard Methods.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan.
5
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 161/620
[1]
[2]
[1]
A.
(1)
B.
TOWNSHIP USERS
Potential users of the EWTP identified on the Capacity Allocation Exhibit attached hereto as
Appendix A, and incorporated herein, other than the Hankin Group or the successors or assigns of
the Hankin Group.[2]
TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR COMPOSITE SAMPLE
A sample that is collected over time, formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete
samples collected at regular intervals not exceeding one hour, during a twenty-four-hour time
span. The sample may be composited either as a time composite sample (composed of discrete
sample aliquots collected in one container at constant time intervals providing representative
samples irrespective of discharge flow) or as a flow proportional composite sample (collected
either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to stream flow, or collected by
increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time
interval between aliquots).
USER
Any person who contributes wastewater into the sewerage system.
WASTEWATER
The combined flow of sanitary sewage and industrial wastewater, together with such quantities of
infiltration and inflow as may be present.
WATER COMPANY
The private water company or the public agency or municipal authority that provides water service
to customers connected to the sewerage system.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 200-22. Allocation and reservation of treatment capacity.
Allocation of capacity. Allocation of treatment capacity in the EWTP to Township users to be
consumed in connection with the development of land within the Eagleview drainage basin shall
be in accordance with the Capacity Allocation Exhibit attached hereto as Appendix A,[1] and
incorporated herein, and the provisions of this article. The availability of such capacity in terms of
gallonage and timing shall be on a first-come, first-served basis, subject to the terms of the
agreement with respect to the construction of the first expansion, second expansion and third and
subsequent expansions.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
Reservation/tapping fee.
[Amended 10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-09]
The Township shall, from time to time, establish by ordinance a reservation or tapping fee, on
a per gallon per day of capacity basis, to be paid to the Township by Township users to obtain
or reserve an allocation in the first expansion and future expansions of the EWTP. In no event
shall the reservation fee, on a per gallon per day of capacity basis, be an amount less than
100% of the base per gallon per day cost of treatment capacity for the applicable expansion.
In the event the applicable reservation or tapping fee is based on an engineer's estimate,
such reserve capacity shall be sold to the Township users under the condition that the fee
shall be subject to a supplemental reservation or tapping fee following completion of the
applicable expansion. The reservation or tapping fee and any supplemental reservation or
tapping fee shall be deemed to constitute the entire capacity and/or reimbursement related
tapping fees associated with such expansion of the EWTP. In addition, the Township shall,
from time to time, establish by ordinance a connection fee, a customer facilities fee and
similar fees, to be paid to the Township by Township users upon connection to the sewerage
system.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 162/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
The reservation or tapping fee, on a per gallon per day of capacity basis, to be paid to the
Township by Township users to obtain or reserve an allocation in the Eagleview Treatment
Plant is $21.16 per gallon per day. Where any building connected to the sewerage system
shall be converted, enlarged or remodeled or additional buildings shall be constructed on a
property and connected indirectly to the sewerage system so as to create or establish
additional uses, or where a user increases usage beyond the capacity reserved, a
supplemental tapping fee per gallon of additional capacity required shall be paid by the owner
of the property to the Township.
[Amended 11-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-14]
The connection fee to be paid to the Township for the connection of the property from the
main to the property line or curb stop is $165 per connection.
The customer facilities fee to be paid to the Township for the connection of the property from
the property line or curb stop to the building to be served is $590 per connection.
Payment of reservation fees to reserve capacity.
No sewage treatment capacity shall be reserved for a developer or landowner or in
connection with a development unless the applicable reservation/tapping fees as established
by the Township in accordance with § 200-22B of this article have been paid in full.
Reservations of capacity shall be made in accordance with the Capacity Allocation Exhibit,
provided that a Township user must reserve, at one time, all of the capacity allocated to the
parcel to which the reservation pertains prior to any approvals by the Township, or certification
by the Township of any sewage planning modules for new land development or the
subdivision thereof.
The reservation of capacity shall be deemed effective upon payment to and acceptance by
the Township of the appropriate fees.
Each reservation of capacity shall remain in full force and effect so long as such capacity is
used in accordance with the following schedule:
During first year: 25% of reserved capacity.
During second year: 50% of reserved capacity.
During third year: 75% of reserved capacity.
During fourth year: 100% of reserved capacity.
In the event the reservation is not actually used in conformity with the above schedule (as
measured by the largest quarter usage for the year in question), such reservation shall be
reduced by the difference, to the nearest 100 gallons per day, between the usage required by
the above schedule for the year in question and the actual usage (as measured by the largest
quarter usage for the year in question). The first year shall commence with the first day of the
Township's first full billing quarter following payment of the appropriate fees.
Payment of minimum sewer rates preserve capacity.
A Township user shall have the right to preserve its full reservation indefinitely by continuing
to pay to the Township, on a quarterly basis, an amount equal to the minimum user charges
that would have been due if the reserved capacity had been fully used, which computation will
be based on the schedule appearing in § 200-22C(4) of this article during the first four years
following a reservation of capacity.
On the 30th consecutive day on which minimum sewer rates have been billed and are due
and owing but have not been paid, the reservation of sewage treatment capacity shall be
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 163/620
(1)
(2)
[2]
(3)
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
automatically revoked with the identical effect as if the same had never been reserved.
Forfeiture of capacity.
Any reduction in the reservation of treatment capacity resulting from a Township user's failure
to utilize such capacity and/or failure to preserve such capacity by payment of sewer rental
fees shall be deemed forfeited at the time the reservation is lost.
Neither the Township nor the Hankin Group, its successors or assigns, shall have any
reimbursement or refund obligation whatsoever to a Township user who pays reservation or
tapping fee and/or sewer rental fees to preserve a reservation of treatment capacity.
Upon the forfeiture of the reserved sewage treatment capacity, the Township shall inform DEP
of this forfeiture by a notice in the form appended hereto as Appendix B.[2]
Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
Approval of subdivision and land development plans. No subdivision and land development plan
shall be finally approved or released for recording by the Township unless the same prominently
displays the following textual note:
No building permit for a building(s) depicted in this plan shall be issued unless at the time of
application therefor, adequate sewage treatment capacity is available or has been reserved
pursuant to the Eagleview Drainage Basin sewer use ordinance of 1994, as may be
supplemented and/or amended from time to time, to serve the use(s) proposed for the said
building(s).
Approval of sewage planning modules. No planning module shall be certified by the Township to
DEP unless the same prominently displays the following textual note:
Sewage transmission and treatment capacity is hereby certified as available to serve the
development described herein only during such period as the said capacity shall be reserved by
the developer in conformity with the procedure described in the Eagleview Drainage Basin sewer
use ordinance of 1994, as may be supplemented and/or amended from time to time, the
operative text of which is appended hereto and incorporated herein by reference as if the same
were here reprinted at length. The landowner and developer, by executing this application hereby
consent to the revocation of the reservation of sewage treatment capacity in the event of failure
to comply with the requirements specified in the ordinance. Landowner and developer here
acknowledge and stipulate that their consent to such revocation is a material inducement and
that the Township would not have certified the availability of such capacity in the absence of such
consent.
Sale or transfer of reserve capacity. No Township user shall be permitted to sell or transfer any
capacity allocated to a parcel of land and reserved by the user for such parcel of land to another
parcel of land whether owned by the user or by a third party.
§ 200-23. Sewer rental fees.
Imposition of sewer rent or charge. There is hereby imposed upon each property served by the
sewerage system and having the use thereof, sewer rents or charges payable as hereinafter
provided, for the use, whether direct or indirect, of the sewerage system, based on the schedules
of classifications and rates hereinafter set forth.
[Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-09]
Flat rates for certain classifications in the Eagleview service area.
[Amended 10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-09; 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-02; 1-3-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-01; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-05; 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01; 12-14-2015 by Ord. No.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 164/620
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
[2]
C.
D.
2015-06[1]]
Customer Classification Rental
(a) Each private dwelling or living unit (including each mobile
home space, row house, townhouse, semidetached house,
but excluding multiple-dwelling buildings)
$95 per three-month
period
(b) Each unit in a multiple-dwelling building (whether owned by a
single owner or as a condominium) except as described in (c)
below
$95 per three-month
period
(c) Each unit in a multiple-dwelling building (whether owned by a
single owner or as a condominium) which has no rooms
other than a living room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom and
one or two bedrooms
$95 per three-month
period
(d) Each firehouse, church or municipal building $95 per three-month
period
Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2016.
Meter rates for industrial, commercial and institutional users in the Eagleview service area.
[Amended 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-02; 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-05; 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01; 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06[2]]
Meter rates. Except for those customer classifications enumerated in § 200-23B of this article,
the quarterly sewer rents or charges shall be based on the quantity of water used as
evidenced by the meter readings of water meters installed by the water company and such
other meters or measuring devices as may be installed pursuant to any provisions of this
article, and shall be at the rate of $6.43 per thousand gallons of water used.
Minimum rates. Regardless of water consumption, the minimum charge for sanitary sewage
from industrial, commercial and institutional establishments shall not be less than $95 for
each such establishment for each three-month period.
Multiple use. In each case of a combination of one or more commercial, industrial or
institutional establishments in one property, all having the use of the sewerage system
through one sewer connection, then each such establishment shall be charged the abovementioned
minimum rate as though each were separately connected to the sewerage system,
and if there is only one water meter for any such combination, the Township may estimate the
amount of water used by each individual establishment if necessary.
Schools. Schools (public or other daily schools) shall be charged based upon the quantity of
water used by them, at the rates and in the manner provided by § 200-23C(1) of this article
for industrial, institutional and commercial establishments, except that, notwithstanding
Subsection C(2) of this section, the charge for each school for each quarterly billing period
ending September 30 will be subject to a minimum charge equal to the average of the three
bills issued for such school next preceding the period ending September 30 in each year.
Surcharge. In addition to the meter rates set forth in Subsection C, any person whose
wastewater characteristics for BOD , TSS, ammonia-nitrogen or phosphorous exceed the
typical concentrations in excess of those expected for typical domestic dischargers, as stated
in § 200-24C of this article, whether authorized by an agreement with the Township or
otherwise, shall be required to pay to the Township a surcharge, as detailed in § 200-24C of
this article.
Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2016.
Measuring volume for the purpose of § 200-23C.
5
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 165/620
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
Methods of measuring volume.
Whenever a person purchasing all water used from the water company discharges
sanitary sewage and/or industrial waste into the sewerage system, the volume of water
used, as determined from meter readings of the water company, shall be used in
computing the sewer rentals.
In cases where a person has a source of water supply in addition to or other than from
the water company and discharges sanitary sewage and/or industrial waste into the
sewerage system, such person shall permit the Township to install a meter on such
additional or other source of supply. The total amount of water consumed shown by these
meter readings will used in computing the sewer rentals.
In cases where a person uses water from the water company and/or from an
independent supply such that all or any part of the water so used is not discharged into
the sewerage system, the quantity of water used to determine the sewer rentals shall be
computed by one of the following methods as determined by the Township:
By placing a meter or measuring device on the sewer connection, the readings from
this meter or measuring device shall be used in computing the sewer rentals.
By placing a meter or measuring device on the effluent not discharging into the
sewerage system, the reading from this meter or measuring device will then be
deducted from the total water meter readings and the remainder will be used in
computing the sewer rentals.
When it is not practical to install measuring devices to determine continuously the
quantity of water not discharged into the sewerage system, the Township will
determine, in such manner and by such method as it may prescribe, the percentage
of metered water discharged into the sewerage system, and the quantity of water
used to compute the sewer rental shall be the percentage so determined of the
quantity measured by the water meter or meters. Any dispute as to the estimated
amount shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors of the Township, after notice
of the estimate, whose decision on the matter shall be final.
Measuring devices. All meters or measuring devices required to be used under the provisions
of this article [except those provided by the water company or those provided by the Township
under § 200-23D(1)(b) above] shall be furnished and installed by the Township at the
expense of the property owner. All such meters or measuring devices (except those provided
by the water company) shall be under the control of the Township, and may be tested,
inspected or repaired by Township employees whenever the Township shall deem necessary.
The owner of the property upon which such measuring device is installed shall be responsible
for its maintenance and safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made by the Township at
the property owner's expense, whether such repairs are made necessary by ordinary wear
and tear or other causes. Bills for such installation and repairs shall be due and payable at the
same time and collected in the same manner as are the bills for sewer services; such bills
from and after their due date shall constitute a lien upon the property upon which such
measuring device is installed.
Meter readings. The Township shall be responsible for the reading of all meters or measuring
devices (except to the extent the water company's readings are used), and they shall be
made available to Township employees for meter reading at any reasonable time.
Changes in classification, additional classifications and modifications. If use or classification of any
property should change within any quarterly period, the difference in the sewer rental, prorated on
a monthly basis to the nearest calendar month, will be charged or credited, as the case may be,
on the bill for the succeeding quarterly period. Additional classifications and additional sewer
rentals may be established by the Township from time to time.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 166/620
F.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
[3]
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
G.
Time and methods of payments. Sewer rentals or charges shall be paid quarterly, and billings for
sewer rentals shall be made by bills dated, and on, the first days of January, April, July and
October of each year, for the three-month period immediately preceding the date of the bill. The
bills for sewer rentals under § 200-23B and C for the quarterly period during which a property is
first connected to the sewerage system will be prorated on the basis of the applicable rate. All bills
shall be due and payable on their respective dates.
Penalties for delinquent sewer rentals and liens.
Penalties, interest, costs, and attorney's fees for delinquent accounts.
[Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-04]
All sewer charges not paid in full by the due date shall be deemed to be delinquent. A
penalty of 10% of the amount of the quarterly sewer charge shall be added to the
quarterly charge if not paid by the due date.
The amount of the quarterly sewer charge and penalty shall bear interest form the due
date at the rate of 10% per annum until paid.
Collection procedures shall be commerced for all accounts delinquent over six months or
exceeding $500. The Township shall charge an administrative fee as set by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors for starting collection procedures, which shall be added as
costs to the amount of the delinquent account.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
The Township may terminate sewer service to any property where the payment of sewer
charges has not been paid by the due date. Sewer service shall not be restored until all
delinquent charges, penalties, costs, interest, attorney's fees, and the cost of shutting off
and restoring service have been paid in full.
The penalties, interest, costs and charges set forth above shall be in addition to all other
legal and equitable remedies available to the Township to collect delinquent accounts,
including but not limited to municipal lien and assumpsit remedies. The amounts of the
penalties, interest, costs and charges set forth above may be changed from time to time
by resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors.
All sewer rentals not paid by the due date, and all penalties, interest, costs, charges and
attorney's fees thereon, shall be a lien against the delinquent property and shall be filed
as a lien in the office of the Prothonotary of Chester County and shall be collected in the
manner provided by law for filing and collection of such liens. The Township shall charge
a lien fee as set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors when the account is referred to
the Township Solicitor for collection, which shall be added as costs to the delinquent
account.[3]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
The delinquent account holder shall also be responsible for all legal fees incurred by the
Township in collecting the account in accordance with a schedule enacted from time to
time by Township ordinance.
All liens for delinquent accounts filed as of the effective date of this article shall be
amended to include interest at the statutory rate of 10% per annum beginning on the date
of the delinquency until paid.
All persons connected to the sewerage system shall give the Township their correct address.
Failure to receive bills will not be considered an excuse for nonpayment nor permit an
extension of the period during which bills are payable at face.[4]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 167/620
[4]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
Editor's Note: Former Subsection (c), regarding delinquent accounts, amended 10-15-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-09, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 4-12-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-04.
§ 200-24. Prohibitions and restrictions on all users.
General discharge restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no user shall
discharge or cause to be discharged to the sewerage system any sewage, industrial wastewater,
or other matter or substance:
Having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity at the EWTP resulting in
interference, but in no case with a temperature at the introduction into the sewerage system
which exceeds 120° F or is less than 40° F, and in no case heat in such quantities that the
temperature of the influent to the EWTP exceeds 104° F.
Containing more than 100 mg/l of fat, oil, wax, or grease, or more than 25 mg/l of petroleum
oils, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or other products of mineral origin containing substances
which will solidify or become viscous at atmospheric pressure at temperatures between 32° F
and 100° F.
Containing any liquids, solids, or gases at concentrations which are, or may be sufficient,
either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious
in any other way to the sewerage system or to the operation of the EWTP. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, fuel oil, kerosene, naphtha, paint products,
sulfides, and any substance having a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
Containing solid or viscous substances at concentrations which will cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference, such as, but not limited to: ashes, cinders, spent lime,
stone dust, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metals, glass, rags, grass clippings, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bentonite, lye, building materials, rubber,
asphalt residues, hairs, bones, leather, porcelain, china, ceramic wastes, polishing wastes, or
glass grindings.
Having a pH, stabilized, lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive or
scale forming property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment,
bacterial action or personnel of the sewerage system.
Containing pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
to injure or cause interferences, cause pass through, constitute a hazard to humans, animals
or plants, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the EWTP, or to exceed the limitation
set forth in a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
Containing any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or result in toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes in the sewerage system in a quantity that will cause worker health and
safety problems.
Containing objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
Containing radioactive substances of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
which are prohibited by applicable state or federal regulations.
Prohibited by any permit, statute, rule, regulation, and ordinance issued or promulgated by
any public agency, including the state and the EPA.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 168/620
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Containing any substance which will cause the EWTP to violate its NPDES permit or the
receiving water quality standards.
Containing any substance which shall cause the EWTP to be in noncompliance with sludge
use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act or
be in noncompliance with any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Control Act, or State Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
Containing nonbiodegradable complex carbon compounds.
Constituting a slug load.
Containing stormwater (from pavements, area ways, roofs, foundation drains or other
sources), surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, subsurface drainage, swimming
pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Township.
[Amended 4-24-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-04]
Containing any garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in size.
Containing pesticides, unless upon written request, special permission is obtained from the
Township.
Trucked or hauled wastewater. Tank truck or hauled waste discharges to the sewerage system are
prohibited, except as authorized hereinafter.
Tank truck or hauled wastes may only be discharged at the EWTP upon the issuance of a
discharge permit by the Township.
Tank truck or hauled wastes authorized for discharge shall be discharged only at the location,
time and at a rate fixed by the discharge permit.
Tank truck or hauled waste discharges shall not include any industrial wastewater.
Prior to discharge, the tank truck or hauled waste shall be subject to inspection and sampling
by the Township.
Tank truck or hauled waste discharges shall be subject to rates and charges in accordance
with a schedule established by the Township, as amended from time to time.
Strength of waste surcharge.
Any user discharging a wastewater to the sewerage system with a BOD concentration
exceeding 200 mg/l or a total suspended solids concentration exceeding 150 mg/l or an
ammonia-nitrogen concentration exceeding 20 mg/l or a phosphorus concentration exceeding
10 mg/l (extra-strength waste) shall pay a surcharge, as detailed in Subsection C(2).
No user shall discharge into the sewerage system any extra-strength wastewater without the
written consent of the Township evidenced by an agreement providing for sampling and the
payment of a surcharge to the Township, in accordance with the following formula:
Surcharge = (0.00834) Q [(BOD - 200) T + (TSS - 150) T ]
Where:
Q = is the industrial or commercial waste flow expressed in million gallons.
5
I I A I B
I
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 169/620
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
BOD = concentration of biochemical oxygen demand of the industrial or commercial flow
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
TSS = concentration of total suspended solids of the industrial or commercial flow
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
T = actual treatment costs incurred by the Township for removal of 1,000 pounds of
BOD as determined annually by the Township and based on the actual costs of
operation and maintenance.
Where:
Q = is the industrial or commercial waste flow expressed in million gallons.
BOD = concentration of biochemical oxygen demand of the industrial or commercial flow
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
TSS = concentration of total suspended solids of the industrial or commercial flow
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
T = actual treatment costs incurred by the Township for removal of 1,000 pounds of
BOD as determined annually by the Township and based on the actual costs of
operation and maintenance.
T = actual treatment costs incurred by the Township for removal of 1,000 pounds of
total suspended solids as determined annually by the Township and based on the
actual costs of operation and maintenance.
The surcharge computations shall be based on the wastewater sample analyses for the most
recent complete calendar quarter. The surcharge formulas are independent of each other and
shall be assessed singly or in combination, as applicable, for BOD and total suspended
solids, greater than 200 mg/l and 150 mg/l, respectively. Any surcharge formula producing a
negative value shall be disregarded.
The value of Q used to determine surcharges shall be based on the user's metered
wastewater flow, available water consumption records, or as estimated by the engineer.
The surcharge billings shall be in addition to any other quarterly sewer use charge paid by the
user to the Township.
The Township shall bill the amount of the surcharge to the user in its next regular billing after
the determination of the surcharge and the user shall pay same under the terms and on the
same schedule as the other amounts due under that bill.
§ 200-25. Prohibitions and restrictions on industrial users.
General. No industrial wastewater shall be discharged into the sewerage system in violation of
§ 200-24 hereof and unless the person discharging the same shall have obtained an industrial
waste discharge permit, except as authorized by the Township in accordance with the provisions
of this article.
Qualitative limits.
The Township shall establish local discharge limits regulating the discharge of specific
pollutants to the sewerage system by industrial users. Local discharge limits may be
established for any substance which is discharged, or likely to be discharged, to the sewerage
system.
Local discharge limits may limit concentration, mass, or a combination of the two.
The procedure for the calculation of local discharge limits shall be as recommended by the
approval authority.
Local discharge limits shall be calculated to prevent interference; pass through; the discharge
of toxic materials in toxic amounts; threats to worker health and safety; and physical,
chemical, or biological damage to the sewerage system.
Local discharge limits applicable to industrial users shall be adopted by ordinance by the
Township. Local discharge limits applicable to all significant industrial users shall be included
I
I
I
I
I
A
A
5
5
B
5
I
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 170/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
F.
in all industrial waste discharge permits.
Spills or slug loads.
All industrial users shall provide and maintain at their own expense facilities adequate to
prevent an accidental discharge or slug load of any substance stored or used at the industrial
user's facilities that, if discharged into the sewerage system, will violate any of the provisions
of § 200-24A or 200-25B of this article. Detailed facility plans and operating procedures to
provide this protection (accidental discharge prevention facility plans and procedures) shall be
submitted to the Township before construction of said facility. The plan shall contain, at a
minimum, a description of discharge practices, including nonroutine discharges; description of
stored chemicals; procedures both to notify the EWTP immediately of accidental discharges
and slug loads and procedures to prevent adverse impacts from such discharges and
procedures to prevent such discharges. All existing industrial users shall provide accidental
and slug load discharge prevention facility plans and procedures, or demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Township that they are not needed, within 180 days of the adoption of this
article. Industrial users proposing to connect to the sewerage system after the effective date
of this article shall submit accidental and slug load discharge prevention facility plans and
procedures to the Township for approval, or demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township
they are not needed, before connection to the sewerage system. Review of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the
industrial user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
In the case of an accidental discharge or slug load to the sewerage system of any pollutant,
the industrial user shall immediately notify, by telephone, the Township of the incident. The
notification shall include information regarding the location of the discharge, the kind of
pollutants involved, the concentration and volume of the discharge and corrective actions
planned or taken.
Within five days following an accidental discharge or slug load, the industrial user shall submit
to the Township a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the industrial users of any liability on account thereof.
A notice shall be permanently posted by each industrial user on a bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge or
slug load. Employers shall inform all employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental
discharge to occur, of the emergency notification procedure.
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. If the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards,
located in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, for any industrial user are more
stringent than limitations imposed under this article for industrial users in that subcategory, then
the pretreatment standards shall apply and are hereby incorporated in this article. The Township
shall notify all affected industrial users of the applicable (reporting) requirements under 40 CFR
403.12. If an industrial user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not
previously submitted an application for an industrial waste discharge permit, the industrial user
shall apply for a permit within 90 days of promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard.
Dilution prohibition. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment
standard or pretreatment requirement, no industrial user shall increase the use of process water,
or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The Township may
impose mass limitations on industrial users in cases where the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
State requirements. State requirements and limitations on industrial wastewater discharges shall
apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 171/620
G.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(c)
(2)
H.
in this article.
Right of revision. The Township reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the sewerage system.
Industrial waste discharge permits.
General.
No significant industrial users shall connect to or discharge wastewater to the sewerage
system without an industrial waste discharge permit.
Industrial users which are not significant industrial users do not require an industrial
waste discharge permit and may discharge industrial wastewater to the sewerage
system, but are required to comply with all other provisions of this article. If an industrial
user makes changes to processes, flow, wastewater concentration, wastewater
characteristics, or other changes which result in the industrial user meeting the definition
of significant industrial user, the industrial user shall immediately upon becoming aware
such a change has occurred, or 90 days prior to such a change if it is planned, notify the
Township and obtain an industrial waste discharge permit within 90 days of submission of
the permit application.
Where an industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, has not previously submitted an application for an industrial
waste discharge permit, the user shall, within 90 days after the promulgation of the
application National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, (1) obtain an industrial waste
discharge permit; and (2) provide the baseline monitoring information required by 40 CFR
403.12(b). This information shall be incorporated into the application for an industrial
waste discharge permit.
Permit application.
Significant industrial users shall file with the Township a completed industrial waste
discharge permit application.
The application for an industrial waste discharge permit shall be fully completed and
verified in writing by the industrial user, or a duly authorized and knowledgeable officer,
agent or representative thereof. The application shall contain in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, such scientific or testing data, or other information, as may be
required by the Township, and the applicant shall pay an application fee and shall
reimburse the Township for all expenses incurred as a result of the processing of the
signed application. The Township shall have, at its discretion, the right to inspect the
premises, equipment and material, and laboratory testing facilities of the applicant.
Notwithstanding the above, the applicant shall provide the following minimum information
to the Township:
Name and address of the industry; name, title, and telephone number of responsible
official; name, title, and phone number of person to contact for information about the
industrial waste discharge.
Description of the industry and the manufacturing processes or operations that occur
there and the types of products that are produced.
Applicable Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes for activities conducted at
the facility.
Statement on whether the industry is subject to compliance with National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards and which ones apply.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 172/620
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
(d)
(e)
(f)
Indication and description of the sources of, or the processes that produce, industrial
wastewaters.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by the Township and as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to
Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended. If the
discharge is from a proposed new discharge, wastewater characteristics shall be
estimated.
Volume of industrial wastewater to be discharged to the sewerage system and the
methods of measuring same. Flow volume information shall include the time and
duration of the discharge and the average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater
flow rates, including monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
Description of any wastewater treatment facilities or processes used to treat the
industrial wastes prior to their discharge to the sewerage system.
Schematic flow diagram showing the sources of industrial wastewater and the onsite
treatment processes.
The quantity of sludges removed from the system and their method and location of
disposal.
Description of any other wastes that are removed from the system, their quantities,
and methods and locations of disposal.
List of raw materials used or stored on the premises, their Material Safety Data
Sheets (MSDS), their approximate quantity of usage on a monthly basis, and what
they are used for.
Plans and specifications for a sampling manhole.
Such additional information as the Township shall request.
The industrial waste discharge permit application shall be submitted to the Township for
review. No industrial waste discharge permit shall be issued to an industrial user whose
discharge of materials to sewers, whether shown upon the application or determined
after inspection and testing conducted by the Township, is not in conformance with
federal, state, or Township statutes or resolutions. If an application is denied, the
Township shall state in writing the reason or reasons for denial, and said written
communication shall be delivered to the municipality and the applicant.
If the Township denies an application for an industrial waste discharge permit, the
Township shall review the denial, provided the significant industrial user gives written
notice requesting the review, with appropriate support information within 30 days after
receipt of the denial. The Township shall review the industrial waste discharge permit
application, the written denial, and such other evidence and matters as the applicant shall
present at a public hearing. The public hearing shall take place no later than 45 days
following receipt of the significant industrial user's request for the review. The Township's
decision shall be provided to the industrial user within 10 days of the public hearing and
shall be final.
If, based on the characteristics of the significant industrial user's waste discharge,
additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance procedures are required to
meet any the Township, municipal, state or federal pretreatment standards, the significant
industrial user shall submit to the Township, prior to issuance of the industrial waste
discharge permit, the shortest, reasonable schedule by which the significant industrial
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 173/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
(3)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
(a)
(4)
user will provide such additional pretreatment. The Township shall include an acceptable
compliance schedule in the user's industrial waste discharge permit. The completion date
in this schedule shall be no later than the compliance date established by the EPA for the
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The following conditions apply
to this schedule:
The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the forms of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the significant industrial user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
No increment shall exceed nine months.
Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for
compliance, the significant industrial user shall submit to the Township a report,
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to
be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this
increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the
significant industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no
event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the
Township.
Permit modifications. As soon as possible following the promulgation of a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the industrial waste discharge permit of users subject to
such standards shall be revised, if necessary, to require compliance with such standard within
the time prescribed by such standard.
Permit conditions.
Industrial waste discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this
article and all other applicable regulations, resolutions, user charges and fees
established by the Township. Permits shall contain the following:
Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics, as
based on applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR Part 403, categorical
standards, local limits, and state and local regulations;
Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports, including the
information to be contained and the signatory requirements of these reports;
Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater
discharge as specified by the Township, and affording the Township access thereto;
Requirements for notification of the Township in advance of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the
wastewater constituents being introduced into the sewerage system;
Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
List of prohibited discharges;
Statement of duration of the permit;
Notification of the rules regarding transferability;
Notification of penalties provided for noncompliance; and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 174/620
[10]
[11]
[12]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(c)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations,
frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting
schedule.
Right of entry requirements for authorized representatives of the Township
Indemnification of the Township on account of the discharge.
Permits may also contain other requirements, including but not limited to:
Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for
flow regulation and equalization;
Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities
and pretreatment facilities;
Compliance schedules; and
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township to ensure compliance with
this article, other municipal ordinances or other requirements.
Issuance of an industrial waste discharge permit in no way relieves the significant
industrial user from any liability on account of its discharge into the sewerage system,
whether discharge is permitted thereby or not.
Permit duration. Industrial waste discharge permits shall be issued for a one-year period. If
the Township elects not to cancel the permit on or before its anniversary, the permit will
automatically renew itself for another period of one year upon payment by the industrial user
of the applicable permit renewal fee. The terms and conditions of the permit shall be subject
to modification by the Township during the term of the permit. The significant industrial user
shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of change. The Township shall use its best efforts to inform the significant industrial user
at least 60 days prior to the effective date. In the event that such changes require major
changes in pretreatment by the significant industrial user, and the significant industrial user's
failure to comply with the amended discharge requirements does not itself or with other
failures to comply put the Township in substantial danger of violating any agreement, permit,
regulation or law, then the significant industrial user shall be allowed a reasonable period of
time to comply with the changes, provided the significant industrial user requests a time
extension and submits to the Township an implementation schedule acceptable to the
Township within the sixty-day period.
Permit transfer. Industrial waste discharge permits are issued to a specific significant
industrial user for a specific operation. An industrial waste discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or
changed operation without the prior written approval of the Township. The succeeding owner
or industrial user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing industrial
waste discharge permit.
Waste characteristic change. Any industrial user who plans or becomes aware of a change in
the method of operation or in the pretreatment facilities which will increase the concentration
of pollutants which are regulated by this article or the volume of wastewater discharged to the
sewerage system shall notify the Township in writing of the change at least 90 days prior to
such change. If required by the Township, the industrial user shall apply for an industrial
waste discharge permit that reflects the proposed changes. The new industrial waste
discharge permit will be subject to a fee to reimburse the Township for all expenses incurred
as a result of the processing of the permit. Approval or denial of a new industrial waste
discharge permit shall be regulated by the procedures established hereunder for the issuance
of an original permit.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 175/620
(8)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
I.
Files. The Township will maintain files in which copies of all industrial waste discharge
permits, revisions thereto, and supporting data will be filed for reference. Files shall be
maintained for a period of at least five years. This period of retention shall be extended during
the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the significant industrial user or the EWTP or
when requested by the Township, the Director of EPA or the Regional Administrator of EPA.
Reporting requirements for significant industrial users.
Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewerage system, any user subject
to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit to the Township a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated
process which are limited by such categorical standards, and the average and maximum daily
flow from these process units in the user's facility which are limited by such categorical
standards. The report shall state whether the applicable categorical standards are being met
on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operations and maintenance and/or
pretreatment are scheduled to bring the significant industrial user into compliance with the
applicable categorical standards. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and certified by a qualified professional.
Periodic compliance reports.
Each significant industrial user shall submit to the Township, during the months of April,
July, October and January, unless required more frequently in the significant industrial
user's industrial waste discharge permit or by the Township, a report indicating the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the discharge during the quarterly reporting period
which are regulated by the industrial waste discharge permit. All monitoring data obtained
by valid analytical techniques must be reported by the significant industrial user. In
addition, this report, where applicable, shall include a record of all daily flows which,
during the reporting period, exceeded the maximum daily flow listed in the significant
industrial user's industrial waste discharge permit. At the discretion of the Township, and
in consideration of such factors as high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc.,
the Township, upon written request from the significant industrial user, may agree to alter
the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. The report shall also
contain the following certification statement signed by the authorized representative of
the user;
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared
under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that
qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on
my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
The Township may impose mass limitations where the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate. In such cases, the report required by § 200-25I(2)(a) of this article shall state
the mass of pollutants regulated by categorical standards in the significant industrial
user's discharge to the sewerage system. These reports shall contain the results of
sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and
concentration, or production and mass where requested by the Township of pollutants
contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The
frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the significant industrial user's industrial
waste discharge permit. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 176/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved
by the EPA.
For categorical industries that have mass limits as categorical standards, the Township
may specify equivalent concentrations to regulate the strength of the significant industrial
user's discharge. If concentration limits are regulated in lieu of mass discharge limits, the
significant industrial user must provide the Township with the following information as part
of each compliance report:
For the reporting period, the rate of production of the process for which categorical
standards have been established.
The average wastewater flow rate, generated by the regulated production activity for
the reporting period.
Thirty days' notice of any anticipated change in production.
The industrial wastewater discharged into the sewerage system shall be sampled and
analyzed by and at the expense of the significant industrial user, and copies of the
original laboratory reports listing the results of the analyses and the analytical methods
used shall be submitted to the Township, within 15 days of completion, with the
significant industrial user's periodic compliance report as required in § 200-25I(2)(a) of
this article. Frequency of sampling and analyses shall be at least quarter-annually, unless
required more frequently by the Township. Unless otherwise stated in the industrial waste
discharge permit, all samples are to be time composite samples for the period of
discharge or for 24 hours, whichever is less, with sampling intervals of not more than one
hour. The samples shall be analyzed for the substances and characteristics required by
the significant industrial user's industrial waste discharge permit. The significant industrial
user shall follow the proper sample preservation and analysis techniques detailed in 40
CFR 136 or other approved techniques approved by the Township.
All records and information resulting from the monitoring activities required by the
industrial waste discharge permit shall be retained by the significant industrial user for at
least five years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the significant industrial user or the EWTP or when
requested by the Township, the Director of EPA, or the Regional Administrator of EPA.
Baseline monitoring report.
Where a significant industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted the baseline monitoring information
required by 40 CFR 403.12(b), the significant industrial user shall, within 180 days after
the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, provide
this information to the Township. The report shall include all items required by 40 CFR
403.12(b).
A new source, or a user proposing to discharge wastes into the sewerage system that is
subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, shall submit to the Township the
baseline monitoring report required by 40 CFR 403.12(b) at least 90 days prior to
commencement of discharge from the regulated process or facility.
Noncomplying discharge report. If sampling performed by a significant industrial user
indicates a violation of this article, an applicable pretreatment standard, or the significant
industrial user's industrial waste discharge permit, the significant industrial user shall notify
the Township within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also
repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
Township within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 177/620
(1)
(2)
J.
K.
(1)
(2)
L.
Monitoring facilities.
All significant industrial users shall provide and operate, at their own expense, monitoring
facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of its industrial waste
discharge. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the significant industrial
user's premises, but the Township may, when such a location would be impractical or cause
undue hardship on the significant industrial user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or
parked vehicles.
The monitoring facility shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Township. There shall be ample room in or near such facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and
measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition
at the expense of the significant industrial user. The facility shall be located as to be
accessible at all times to persons authorized by the Township. By obtaining an industrial
waste discharge permit, the significant industrial user consents to the entry upon its land, and
agrees to facilitate such entry, by representatives of the Township, and consents to the use of
the monitoring facility for observation, sampling, and measuring of the wastewater discharge
at all time. Construction of the monitoring facility shall be completed within 120 days following
issuance of the industrial waste discharge permit.
Inspection and sampling. The Township may inspect the facilities of any industrial user. Persons or
occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Township or its
representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or in the performance of any of their
duties. The Township and EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations. Where an industrial user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the industrial user shall make
necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the Township or EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay.
Pretreatment.
Significant industrial users shall provide necessary pretreatment and flow equalization
facilities as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as
specified by the appropriate federal regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat or flowequalize
wastewater to a level in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's sole expense. Detailed plans
showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Township for review before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an effluent in compliance with the provisions of this article.
Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities, flow-equalizing facilities, or method of
operation shall be reported to and be approved by the Township prior to the industrial user's
initiation of the changes.
A significant industrial user may allow a bypass which does not cause pretreatment standards
to be violated, but only for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. If a significant
industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice
to the Township, if possible, at least 10 days before the date of the bypass. A significant
industrial user shall give oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards to the Township within 24 hours from the time the significant industrial
user becomes aware of the bypass. A written report shall also be provided within five days of
the time the significant industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written report shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 178/620
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
M.
(1)
N.
dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected
to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the
bypass.
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to
officials of the EPA upon request.
The Township shall have access to all such pretreatment facilities and flow equalization
facilities as required by this article at all reasonable times for purposes of inspection and
testing.
Expenses incurred by the Township, which are directly attributable to one or more identified
dischargers into the sewer system, or to persons planning to connect one or more properties
to the sewer system, shall be paid to the Township by such discharger or person within 30
days of receipt of an invoice from the Township. All such expenses shall be collected by the
Township in the same manner as, and subject to the same penalties for nonpayment thereof,
including interest, discontinuance of service, municipal lien, and assumpsit remedies.
Examples of such expenses include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:
All Township expenses, including engineering and legal fees, for the review of preliminary
and final site plans, sewer plans and profiles, land planning modules, permit applications,
questionnaires, industrial waste discharge permits or agreements.
All Township expenses, including laboratory costs for the sampling and monitoring of
wastewater quantity or quality of wastewater discharged to the system.
All surcharges billed by the Township.
All fines or monetary penalties imposed by or passed on by the Township which are
directly attributable to a discharge to the sewer system.
Hazardous waste discharge notification.
An industrial user discharging any quantity of waste to the sewerage system, which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be an acute hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261, shall provide
a one-time notification to the Township, the EPA Region III Waste Management Division
Director, and the state hazardous waste authorities.
The notification required by § 200-25M(1) of this article shall include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other), and a certification that the industrial user has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical. If the industrial user discharges more
than 50 kilograms of such waste in a month to the sewerage system, the notification shall also
include an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the waste, as estimation of
the mass and concentration of such constituents discharged during the month, and an
estimation of the mass of constituents expected to be discharged by the industrial user to the
sewerage system during the following twelve-month period.
If an industrial user discharges a nonacute hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261 to the
sewerage system, the industrial user shall provide the one-time notification described in
§ 200-25M(2), if the total mass of hazardous waste discharged to the sewerage system
during any month exceeds 15 kilograms.
Confidential information.
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permits, notifications, and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be
available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the industrial
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 179/620
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
O.
A.
B.
user specifically requests in writing and is able to demonstrate to the Township's satisfaction
that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, those portions of a report that have been
accepted by the Township as confidential shall not be made available for inspection by the
public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this article, the NPDES permit, state disposal system permit and/or the state or
federal pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of any report shall be
available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
When information accepted by the Township as confidential is transmitted to any
governmental agency by the Township, a notification to the industrial user shall be provided
by the Township listing the confidential information transmitted, and the governmental entity
requesting the information.
Measuring volumes of wastewater.
The flow volume used to determine wastewater flows and surcharges shall be specified in the
industrial waste discharge permit and be based on:
Direct wastewater metering;
Metered water use; or
Such other method acceptable to the Township.
The Township shall require that each significant industrial user connected to its sewer system
issued an industrial waste discharge permit install and use any meter or measuring device
specified therein at the significant industrial user's own expense. The Township shall be
responsible for the reading of all meters or measuring devices. The meters and devices shall
be made available for meter reading at any reasonable time.
§ 200-26. Enforcement.
Immediate suspension by Township of discharge presenting imminent danger by any user. The
Township may order the suspension of discharge of wastewater by any user when such
suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Township, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents an imminent danger or harm to people or to the environment or of
interference (dangerous discharge). Any user notified of an order to suspend shall comply
therewith immediately. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Township may take such steps as it deems necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to effect the suspension of discharge of the user's wastewater
into the sewerage system. The Township may permit reinstatement of the discharge upon proof
satisfactory to itself of the elimination of the imminent and substantial danger referred to above.
The user shall submit a detailed written statement to the Township describing the causes of the
actual or threatened discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence within 15
days of the date of the first such discharge or threat of discharge. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the Township from seeking injunctive relief hereunder or at common law or
taking other enforcement action in connection with a dangerous discharge.
Termination of service of any user. Any user who violates any provision of this article, applicable
state and federal regulations, or an industrial waste discharge permit if applicable, is subject, in
addition to any civil or criminal penalties which may be imposed, to having his service terminated
and/or his industrial waste discharge permit revoked.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 180/620
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
Notification of violation by any user. Whenever the Township finds that the user has violated or is
violating this article, an industrial waste discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or
requirement contained herein, the Township may serve upon such person a written notice stating
the nature of the violation. The notice may require a response in the form of a plan, explanation,
compliance schedule, or other appropriate response within a specified time period. Compliance
with any such requirement is mandatory.
Legal action by the Township. If any person violates the provisions of this article, federal or state
pretreatment requirements, or any order related to sewer service, the Township may commence
an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of Common Pleas of this county.
In any such proceeding, the Township may seek to collect any delinquent sewer rentals and all
penalties thereon, together with any costs and/or attorneys fees due and payable under § 200-
23G hereof, and unpaid, any damages and costs incurred pursuant to § 200-27C hereof, and
unpaid, and any fines imposed under § 200-27A hereof, and unpaid.
§ 200-27. Violations and penalties.
Fines to be established by Township for violation by any user. In addition to any other remedy
available under this article, any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each twenty-four-hour period that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. All fines and penalties collected for the
violation of this article shall be paid over to the Township treasury. Enforcement of this article shall
be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The
Township's Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District
Attorney.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Action to enforce Township's ordinances applicable to any user. The Township shall take any
action permitted by law to enforce any provision of this article against any user.
Liability for damage to sewerage system. In the event that any person discharges its waste into
the sewerage system which causes or threatens to cause damage to the Township and/or EWTP
or to any employee thereof, or discharges any substance that damages or threatens to damage
the receiving stream, that person shall be liable for the damage thereof; said liability shall include
all costs incurred by the Township, including, but not limited to, costs of restoration or
replacement, fines, legal and engineering fees, and natural resources damages. The limit of the
damage shall be determined by the Township and the person shall be billed therefor. Legal action
may be taken to enforce collection and/or the Township may terminate the person's connection to
the sewerage system.
Article IV. Sewer Capacity Reservation
[Adopted 8-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-02]
Editor's Note: These regulations are applicable to the DARA service area.
§ 200-28. Applicability.
This article shall apply to sewer connections to the system of pipes and facilities operated by the
Township of Uwchlan, Chester County, Pennsylvania (the "Township") for the collection, conveyance,
treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage which is delivered to the Downingtown Regional Water
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 181/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
Pollution Control Center (the "sewer system"). The term "sanitary sewage" as used in this article shall
mean the normal waterborne waste from a household, and toilet wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, commercial and industrial establishments.
§ 200-29. Sewer capacity reservation.
Sanitary sewage transmission and treatment capacity in the sewer system shall be reserved only in
accordance with the following rules and regulations:
Payment of tapping fees to reserve capacity.
No sanitary sewage transmission or treatment capacity shall be reserved for a developer or
landowner or in connection with a development unless the applicable tapping fees as may be
established from time to time by resolution of the Uwchlan Township Municipal Authority (the
"Authority") pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., as amended, have been paid in full.
A developer or landowner with subdivision or land development plans, whether preliminary or
final, approved prior to the effective date of this article may reserve sanitary sewage
transmission and treatment capacity for any future construction or development under the
plans by paying the applicable tapping fee, as described in Subsection A(1) above; however,
nothing set forth in this article shall be applied to affect adversely the right of a developer or
landowner pursuant to Section 508(4)(ii) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 10508(4)(ii) to commence and to complete any aspect of the approved
development in accordance with the terms of such approval within five years from such
approval.
No building permit for a building(s) depicted on a subdivision or land development plan
approved prior to the effective date of this article shall be issued unless at the time of
application therefor, adequate sanitary sewage transmission and treatment capacity has been
reserved to serve the use(s) proposed for the said building(s).
The reservation of capacity shall be deemed effective upon payment to and acceptance by
the Township of the appropriate fees. The date of acceptance of the fees by the Township
shall be deemed the "reservation date".
The use of the reserved capacity in the sewer system is subject to any ban or prohibition on
connections imposed by any governmental authority or agency, or by operation of law.
Payment of minimum sewer rates.
Unless timely connection is made to the sewer system within six months of the reservation
date, sanitary sewage transmission and treatment capacity in the sewer system shall be
reserved for those uses on the basis of which the tapping fee was calculated only for that
period commencing six months after the reservation date during which the minimum periodic
sewer rate is timely paid as billed by the Township for each such use.
On the 30th consecutive day on which minimum sewer rates have been billed and are due
and owing but have not been paid, the reservation of sanitary sewage transmission and
treatment capacity shall be automatically revoked and deemed forfeited with the identical
effect as if the same had never been reserved. On revocation, the developer or landowner
shall be entitled to a refund of all or a portion of the tapping fees paid for a period of up to five
years according to the following percentages:
From the reservation date up to and including the first anniversary of the reservation
date, 100% of the tapping fee;
From the first anniversary of the reservation date up to and including the second
anniversary of the reservation date, 80% of the tapping fee;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 182/620
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
[1]
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
[1]
From the second anniversary of the reservation date up to and including the third
anniversary of the reservation date, 60% of the tapping fee;
From the third anniversary of the reservation date up to and including the fourth
anniversary of the reservation date, 40% of the tapping fee;
From the fourth anniversary of the reservation date up to and including the fifth
anniversary of the reservation date, 20% of the tapping fee; and
After the fifth anniversary of the reservation date, no refund of the tapping fee.
On revocation of the reserved sanitary sewage transmission and treatment capacity as
described in the preceding Subsection B(2) above, the Township shall inform the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection (the "DEP") of this
revocation by a notice in the form appended hereto as Appendix A.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
Neither the Township nor the Authority shall have any reimbursement or refund obligation
whatsoever to a developer or landowner for any sewer rental fees paid by the developer or
landowner to preserve a reservation of sanitary sewage transmission and treatment capacity.
Approval of subdivision and land development plans. No subdivision and/or land development
plan shall be finally approved or released for recording unless the same prominently displays the
following textual note:
No building permit for a building(s) depicted in this plan shall be issued unless at the time of
application therefor, adequate sanitary sewage transmission and treatment capacity has been
reserved and is available to serve the use(s) proposed for the said building(s).
Approval of sewage planning modules. No planning module shall be certified by the Township or
the Authority to the DEP unless the same prominently displays the following textual note:
Sanitary sewage transmission and treatment capacity is hereby certified as available to serve the
development described herein only during such period as the said capacity shall be reserved by
the developer in conformity with the procedure described in Uwchlan Township Ordinance No.
96-02, the operative text of which is appended hereto and incorporated herein by reference as if
the same were here reprinted at length. The landowner and developer, by executing this
application hereby consents to the revocation of the reservation of sewage transmission and
treatment capacity in the event of failure to comply with the requirements specified in ordinance
No. 96-02. Landowner and developer here acknowledge and stipulate that their consent to such
revocation is a material inducement and that the Township would not have certified the
availability of such capacity in the absence of such consent.
§ 200-30. Sale or transfer of reserved capacity.
No developer or landowner shall be permitted to sell or transfer any capacity reserved to a parcel of
land by the developer or landowner to another parcel of land whether owned by the developer or
landowner or by a third party.
Article V. Sewer Grinder Pumps
[Adopted 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-09]
Editor's Note: These regulations are applicable to both the DARA and Eagleview service areas.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 183/620
[1]
[2]
§ 200-31. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the installation, use and maintenance of
sewage grinder pumps and any associated force mains or low-pressure laterals. It is hereby declared
that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of Uwchlan Township.
§ 200-32. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article
shall be as follows:
ACT 537 PLAN
A municipality's official plan as defined in the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January
24, 1966, P.L. 1535 (1965), No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 750.1-750.20a ("Sewage Facilities
Act" or "Act 537").[1]
DEPARTMENT
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
GRINDER PUMP
Any electric motor driven, submersible, centrifugal pump capable of macerating all material found
in normal domestic sanitary sewage, including reasonable amounts of objects, such as plastics,
sanitary napkins, disposable diapers, rubber and the like, to a fine slurry, and pumping this
material through a small diameter discharge.[2]
MUNICIPALITY
Uwchlan Township, Chester County Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL PLAN REVISION
A change in the Municipality's Act 537 Plan to provide for additional or newly identified future or
existing sewage facilities needs, as defined fully in Section 1 of the Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1.
PROPERTY OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property located in the
Municipality.
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other discharge from the
bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation or any substance which constitutes pollution under the Clean Streams
Law, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1-691.1001, as amended.
Editor's Note: The definition of "authority," which immediately followed this definition, was deleted at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: The definitions of "improved property" and "municipal authority," which immediately
followed this definition, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-33. Planning requirements.
The connection of existing properties or proposed new land development to an existing or proposed
sewerage system through the use of sewage grinder pumps, their associated force mains, or low8/
17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 184/620
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
pressure laterals shall occur only after an official plan revision to the Uwchlan Township's Act 537 Plan,
approved by both Uwchlan Township and Department, designates that the proposed properties be
served by such a connection.
§ 200-34. Powers of Uwchlan Township.
Uwchlan Township is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and regulations
concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to time to effect the purposes herein.
Uwchlan Township is hereby authorized and empowered to take such other actions as are
necessary, including, but not limited to, entering into agreements with property owners that assure
proper operation and maintenance of sewage facilities within Uwchlan Township's borders,
including, but not limited to, sewage grinder pumps and any associated force mains or lowpressure
laterals.
§ 200-35. Duties and responsibilities of Uwchlan Township.
The Municipality shall exercise its powers and legal authority set forth herein, and under all
applicable statutes, ordinances, and other laws to affect the purposes of this article.
The Municipality may enter into an agreement with each property owner proposing to install or
who has installed a sewage grinder pump or low-pressure sewage system to assure the shortand
long-term operation and maintenance, use, service, repair or replacement of such systems.
All grinder pumps and low-pressure sewer systems (and the installation, use, operation,
maintenance, service, repair and replacement thereof) shall comply with the rules and regulations
of Uwchlan Township in effect from time to time.
All grinder pumps and low-pressure sewer systems shall be connected to the sewage collection
and conveyance system in full compliance with the rules and regulations of the Municipality in
effect from time to time.
Uwchlan Township shall maintain control over the type of grinder pumps used and assure that full
service capability is available locally on short notice.
Uwchlan Township shall bear no responsibility for the purchase, installation, use, operation,
maintenance, service, repair, or replacement of the grinder pump and/or its low-pressure force
main or lateral, except as otherwise set forth herein.
The Municipality shall own, maintain, and operate low-pressure force mains serving multiple
properties and located within the public right-of-way or right-of-way granted to Uwchlan Township
and which connect to the Uwchlan Township sewer system.
§ 200-36. Duties and responsibilities of others.
Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall bear full responsibility for providing,
installing, using, operating, maintaining, servicing, repairing and replacing his/her grinder pump
and/or its low-pressure force main or lateral, unless otherwise set forth herein.
Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall have full responsibility for using the pump
consistent with the manufacturer's instructions and shall avoid introducing into the sewerage
system materials that may damage the impellers on the pump, including, but not limited to, items
designated as biodegradable in septic tanks.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 185/620
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
[1]
(8)
(9)
A.
Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall close the sewage system and cease
operations during any period when the grinder pump and/or low-pressure system serving a
property is inoperable for more than 30 days.
Low-pressure force mains and laterals that pump to a public sewer adjoining the property shall be
owned and maintained by the property owner. Low-pressure laterals or force mains may not be
shared by multiple property owners, except for low-pressure force mains approved by the
Township as jointly used force mains that are located within the public right-of-way or right-of-way
granted to Uwchlan Township.
§ 200-37. Regulations governing installation of sewage pumps in
individual structures.
[Added 4-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-02]
In those structures where it is deemed by the Township Engineer and the Township Sanitation
Superintendent that it is impractical to service a structure by a gravity-fed sewer line, individual
sewage pumps shall be permitted to be installed but only in accordance with the guidelines listed
below:
In all such instances, two pumps shall be required, one acting as a backup unit, with a check
valve and gate valve system required. A switch panel, consisting of automatic and manual
switches, shall be provided to allow automatic alternate use of each pump.
The pump system shall include an alarm system that will alert the property owner of a
disruption of service.
The pumps shall be a grinder type or duplex, capable of passing a two-inch solid through a
three-inch sewer line and also shall be able to pump two feet per second.
The size tank required shall be a minimum of 36 inches by 30 inches of fiberglass
construction and shall be placed below floor level in the basement. In no instance shall
aboveground tanks be permitted. It shall be illegal to allow drainage water to flow into this
tank.
The pump should be fitted with a suitable gastight cover, and should be properly vented to the
outside of the structure.
The placement of electrical controls for the pump system and the tank shall be located in
accordance with the recommendation of the Township Sanitation Superintendent or his
authorized representative.
Prior to an occupancy permit being issued, the purchaser shall have given to him, by the
seller, a manual of operation for the sewer pump system.
For each individual pump system, an inspection fee as set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors shall be paid by the developer. The inspection of the pump system shall be done
by the Township Sanitation Superintendent or his authorized representative. Approval of the
system must be received before a occupancy permit will be issued.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
In cases of mobile or modular homes, outside installation of the tanks with the control panel
location inside the structure shall be required. In these cases, the sump shall be three feet in
diameter and six feet in depth, with the top of the sump a few inches above grade to prevent
groundwater from draining into the sump. All other provisions of this section, where there
exists no conflict, shall also be in effect for these instances.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 186/620
B.
C.
[2]
D.
E.
F.
[1]
When subdivision plan is received, contours will be checked to make sure, wherever possible,
basement sewage service is available to individual structures.
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this section shall be
served by the Township with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a tenday
period within which any such violation shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the Township
Sanitation Superintendent or his authorized representative.
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who continues any violation beyond the ten-day
period shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. A new and separate violation shall be deemed
to have been committed for each day any violation continues beyond the ten-day period.
Enforcement of this article shall be by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the
consent of the District Attorney.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[2]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
All fines and penalties imposed for violation of any provision of this section shall be paid to the
Treasurer of the Township for the use of the Township. Default in payment of the fine and costs
shall make the defendant liable to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05]
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall also be
liable to the Township for any expense, loss or damage caused to the Township by reason of such
violation. A continuing violation may also be cause for the Township to disconnect service to the
property. Such disconnection shall only take place after the affected party shall have received
written notification of such possible action by certified mail. In the certified letter it will again be
explained exactly what violation is existing.
§ 200-38. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of §§ 200-35 and 200-36 above
shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the Municipality by either seeking mitigation of the
nuisance or appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 200-39. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with
applicable law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by Uwchlan Township to effectuate this article shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of Uwchlan Township, and all applicable
laws, and applicable rules and regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Article VI. Sewer Construction
[Adopted 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-10]
Editor's Note: These regulations are applicable to both the DARA and Eagleview service areas.
§ 200-40. Adoption of sanitary sewer regulations.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 187/620
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
B.
A certain document attached hereto as Exhibit A, titled "Standard Construction and Material
Specifications for Wastewater Collection System Extensions," a copy of which is on file with the
Uwchlan Township Secretary at the Township Building, 715 North Ship Road, Exton, PA 19341, is
hereby adopted as the Uwchlan Township Sewer Code for the regulation and control of sanitary sewer
construction, and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms set forth in Exhibit A
are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this article.
§ 200-41. Severability.
If any provision or section of this article, including any provision or section of Exhibit A attached hereto,
is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any
of the remaining provisions or sections of this article.
Article VII. Industrial Users
[Adopted 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-02]
Editor's Note: These regulations are applicable to the DARA service area.
§ 200-42. Definitions.
Words in the present tense include the future. The singular number includes the plural number.
The plural number includes the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word
"may" is permissive.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, also known as the "Clean Water Act."
APPROVAL AUTHORITY
The Administrator or the Regional Administrator of EPA.
AUTHORITY
The Uwchlan Township Municipal Authority.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF USER
An authorized representative of a user is:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the user is a
corporation;
A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
A principal executive officer or a person having responsibility for the overall operation of
the user's facility if the user is a governmental agency, unincorporated organization, or
other similar entity;
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in (1) through (3) above, if:
The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in (1) or (2);
The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having overall
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial
discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, or a position of
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 188/620
(c)
equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the company; and
The written authorization is submitted to DARA.
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW
The wastewater discharge volume from the most recent calendar quarter divided by the
number of calendar days in that quarter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS
Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR Section 403.5(a)(1) and
(b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD)
The quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C. The
standard laboratory procedure shall be found in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Sewage" published by the American Public Health Association.
BYPASS
The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's facility for
pretreatment.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRY
Any industry subject to pretreatment standards as specified in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter
N, establishing quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be
discharged or introduced to a treatment plant by existing or new industrial users in specific
industrial subcategories.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD)
The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, required to chemically oxidize the organic and
inorganic matter in a water or wastewater sample under the standard laboratory procedure.
The standard laboratory procedure shall be that in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Sewage" published by the American Public Health Association.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT
BOD, COD, total suspended solids, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, total phosphorus, and fecal
coliform bacteria, and oil and grease of animal/vegetable origin.
DISCHARGE PERMIT
A permit issued by DARA authorizing the discharge of tank truck or hauled waste at the
DRWPCC.
DOWNINGTOWN AREA REGIONAL AUTHORITY (DARA)
A political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOWNINGTOWN REGIONAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL CENTER (DRWPCC)
The facilities in East Caln Township treating wastewater pursuant to the Intermunicipal
Agreement among DARA, the Borough of Downingtown and the Townships of Caln, East
Caln, Uwchlan and West Whiteland.
ENGINEER
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 189/620
Uwchlan Township's or DARA's consulting engineer, as appropriate.
EPA
The United States Environmental Protection Agency, including, where appropriate, the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
The DARA Executive Director.
GARBAGE
Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food,
and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE
An individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes.
INDUSTRIAL USER
Any person discharging industrial wastewater to the sewerage system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT
A permit authorizing a person to deposit or discharge industrial wastewater into the sewerage
system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER
Any water which, during a manufacturing, or processing operation, including those regulated
under Sections 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, comes into direct contact with or results from the
production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or
waste product, or any other water contaminated by an industrial process, and distinct from
sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE
The inhibition or disruption of the DRWPCC processes or operations which contributes to a
violation of any requirement of DARA's NPDES permit or a decrease in treatment efficiency.
The term includes inhibition or disruption of sewage sludge use or disposal from the
DRWPCC in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) or any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including
those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of
SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the DRWPCC.
LOCAL DISCHARGE LIMITS
Numerical limitations on the concentration, mass or other characteristics of wastes or
pollutants discharged to the sewerage system by industrial users, and which are developed
by DARA.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (MG/L)
The ratio of weight to volume expressing the concentration of a specified component in a
wastewater. Also known as parts per million (ppm).
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) and which are defined in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT)
A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342)
NATIONAL PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITED DISCHARGE
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 190/620
Any regulation developed under the authority of 40 CFR Section 403.5.
NEW SOURCE
Any building, structure, facility, or installation for which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
categorical standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section.
Determination of the applicability of new source standards shall be made as provided in the
Act and 40 CFR Section 403.3.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property, or his
agent.
PASS THROUGH
Discharge through the DRWPCC which exists in quantities or concentrations, alone or with
discharges from other sources, which causes a violation of any condition of DARA's NPDES
permit.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (PADEP)
The Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
department or agency of the Commonwealth succeeding to the existing jurisdiction or
responsibility of the Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association, group or society,
including the state and agencies, districts, commissions and political subdivision created by or
pursuant to state law and federal agencies, departments or instrumentalities thereof.
pH
The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed as moles per
liter.
POLLUTANT
Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, sewage sludge, garbage,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste
discharged into water.
PRETREATMENT
The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewerage system. The reduction
or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes
or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT
Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, prohibited discharge limits and local discharge
limits.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL
Registered professional engineer skilled in the field of wastewater treatment.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 191/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
SANITARY SEWAGE or SEWAGE
The normal waterborne waste from a household, and toilet wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, commercial and industrial establishments.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM
The DRWPCC and any pipe, conduit or other equipment, which carries wastewater to the
DRWPCC.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER
Any industrial user that:
Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; or
Discharges 10,000 gallons or more per day of industrial wastewater; or
Contributes a waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the dry weather compatible
pollutant capacity of the DRWPCC; or
Has a reasonable potential, as determined by DARA, or EPA, to adversely affect the
DRWPCC by interference, pass through of pollutants, sludge contaminations, to
endanger collection system and DRWPCC personnel, or to violate any applicable
pretreatment standard.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC)
An industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violations meet one or more of the
following criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66% or more
of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the
daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same parameter measured;
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those violations in which 33% or
more of all of the measurements for each parameter measured taken during a six-month
period equal or exceed the product of the daily average maximum limit or the average
limit times the applicable TRC multiplier (TRC multiplier equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil
and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants with numerical limits, except pH);
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement (daily maximum or longerterm
average) that DARA determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, an interference or pass through at the DRWPCC (including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public);
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the health of
DRWPCC personnel, the environment or the general public; or has resulted in DARA
exercising any emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule date, or
a compliance schedule milestone contained in the user's industrial waste discharge
permit or enforcement action for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline
monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and
reports on compliance with a compliance schedule;
Failure to accurately report incidents of noncompliance; or
Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best
management practices, that DARA determines will adversely affect the overall
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 192/620
implementation of its industrial pretreatment program.
SLUG CONTROL PLAN
A report prepared by an industrial user and provided to DARA in accordance with this article
which details the existing and proposed facility plans and operating procedures to be followed
by that user in the event of a slug load.
SLUG LOAD
Any discharge of wastewater of a nonroutine or episodic nature, including but not limited to an
accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge at a flow rate or concentration that may
cause a violation of any pretreatment requirement or pretreatment standard set forth in this
article.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC)
A classification pursuant to the latest Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.
STANDARD METHODS
The latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," a
manual published by the American Public Health Association specifying analytical procedures
for testing and analysis of wastewater.
STATE
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER
Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting
exclusively therefrom.
SURCHARGE
An additional charge for the treatment of extra-strength wastewater in excess of the basic
charge for treatment of wastewater.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN)
The sum of the organic nitrogen and ammonia nitrogen present in wastewater, as measured
by standard laboratory procedure as described in standard methods.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS)
The total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water or
wastewater and is removable by laboratory filtration as prescribed in standard methods.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan.
TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR COMPOSITE SAMPLE
A sample that is collected over time, formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing
discrete samples collected at regular intervals not exceeding one hour during a twenty-fourhour
time span. The sample may be collected either as a time composite sample (composed
of discrete sample aliquots collected in one container at constant time intervals providing
representative samples irrespective of discharge flow) or as a flow proportional composite
sample (collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to stream
flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while
maintaining a constant time interval between aliquots).
USER
Any person who contributes wastewater into the sewerage system.
WASTEWATER
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 193/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
A.
The combined flow of sanitary sewage and industrial wastewater, together with such
quantities of infiltration and inflow as may be present.
§ 200-43. Prohibitions and restrictions on all users.
General discharge restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no user shall
discharge or cause to be discharged to the sewerage system any sewage, industrial wastewater,
or other matter or substance:
Having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity at the DRWPCC resulting in
interference, but in no case with a temperature at the introduction into the sewerage system
which exceeds 120° F. or is less than 40° F., and in no case heat in such quantities that the
temperature of the influent to the DRWPCC exceeds 104° F.
Containing petroleum oils, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or other products of mineral oil
origin, animal fats, oil, wax, or grease, or other similar substances (collectively called "oil and
grease") in amounts that will cause pass through or interference.
Containing any liquids, solids, or gases at concentrations which are, or may be sufficient,
either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious
in any other way to the sewerage system or to the operation of the DRWPCC. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, fuel oil, kerosene, naphtha, paint products,
sulfides, and any substance having a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
Containing solid or viscous substances at concentrations which will cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference such as, but not limited to: ashes, cinders, spent lime,
stone dust, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metals, glass, rags, grass clippings, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bentonite, lye, building materials, rubber,
asphalt residues, hairs, bones, leather, porcelain, china, ceramic wastes, polishing wastes, or
glass grindings.
Having a pH, stabilized, lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive or
scale forming property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
bacterial action or personnel of the sewerage system.
Containing pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
to injure, cause a pass through or interference in the sewerage system, constitute a hazard to
humans, animals or plants, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the DRWPCC, or to
exceed the limitation set forth in a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
Containing any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or result in toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes in the sewerage system in a quantity that will cause worker health and
safety problems.
Containing objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
Containing radioactive substances of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
which are prohibited by applicable state or federal regulations.
Prohibited by any permit, statute, rule, regulation, and ordinance issued or promulgated by
any public agency, including the state and the EPA.
Containing any substance which will cause the DRWPCC to violate its NPDES permit or the
receiving water quality standards.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 194/620
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
Containing any substance which shall cause the DRWPCC to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the
Act or be in noncompliance with any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Control Act, or State Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
Containing nonbiodegradable complex carbon compounds.
Constituting a slug load.
Containing stormwater (from pavements, area ways, roofs, foundation drains or other
sources), surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, subsurface drainage, swimming
pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Township.
Containing any garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in size.
Containing pesticides, unless upon written request, special permission is obtained from the
Township and DARA.
Containing more than 100 mg/l of fat, oil, wax, or grease, or more than 25 mg/l of petroleum
oils, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or their products of mineral origin containing substances
which will solidify or become viscous at atmospheric pressure at temperatures between 32°
and 100° F.
Trucked or hauled wastewater.
Tank truck or hauled waste discharges to the sewerage system are prohibited, except as
authorized hereinafter.
Tank truck or hauled wastes may only be discharged at the DRWPCC upon the issuance of a
discharge permit by DARA.
Tank truck or hauled wastes authorized for discharge shall be discharged only at the location,
time and at a rate fixed by the discharge permit.
Tank truck or hauled waste discharges shall not include any industrial wastewater.
Prior to discharge, the tank truck or hauled waste shall be subject to inspection and sampling
by DARA.
Tank truck or hauled waste discharges shall be subject to rates and charges in accordance
with a schedule established by DARA, as amended from time to time.
Strength of waste surcharge.
Any user discharging wastewater to the sewerage system defined as extra-strength
wastewater in such ordinances as DARA shall adopt from time to time shall pay a surcharge
as set forth in those ordinances. The effective date of any change in definitions or fees shall
be stated in all such ordinances.
No user shall discharge into the sewerage system any extra-strength wastewater without a
written permit from DARA providing for sampling and the payment of a surcharge to the
Township, in accordance with the formulas set forth in the current DARA resolution.
The surcharge computations shall be based on the wastewater sample analyses for the most
recent complete calendar quarter. Surcharges shall be based on wastewater sample analyses
(or, in the absence thereof, on DARA's estimates) for the calendar quarter to which they
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 195/620
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
D.
apply. The surcharge formulas are independent of each other and measure different
characteristics of the same wastewater. Surcharges measured by each formula are
cumulative.
The surcharge billings shall be in addition to any other quarterly sewer use charge paid by the
user to the Township. Payment of a surcharge shall not relieve the user of its obligation to
comply with the mass loading limits listed in § 200-44C of this article.
DARA shall bill the amount of the surcharge to the Township in its next regular billing after the
determination of the surcharge, and the Township shall pay same under the terms and on the
same schedule as the other amounts due under that bill.
Grease interceptors.
General requirements. Grease or any other insoluble material which is capable of obstructing
or overloading the building drainage or sewer system, or which is capable of interfering with
the normal operation of the sewage treatment processes, shall not be deposited by any mean
into such systems.
Interceptors required. Interceptors for grease and other soluble material shall be provided as
required in this section. An interceptor shall not be required for individual dwelling units, or for
any private living quarters not used for commercial purposes.
Approval by plumbing official.
The plumbing official shall be the official appointed by the Board of Supervisors charged
with the administration and enforcement of this section.
Users requiring interceptors shall provide the plumbing official with sufficient information
describing the discharge, including drainage volumes and grease concentrations from the
proposed fixtures and equipment which will be producing grease-ladened discharges or
drainage, and showing the materials and features of the interceptor.
The plumbing official shall make the final decision concerning which fixtures and
equipment shall require drainage or discharge through a grease interceptor(s). Such a
decision will be based on a review of the above stated information as well as actual
inspection of the proposed fixtures and equipment on the site.
No interceptor shall be installed until the interceptor design and location have been
approved by the plumbing official.
Design and use.
Interceptors shall be sized to have a grease retention capacity of not less than two
pounds for each gallon per minute of discharge or drainage flow. The size of each
interceptor shall be approved by the plumbing official. The rated capacity of each
interceptor shall be identified by a permanent plate attached to the interceptor cover
confirming the official Plumbing Drainage Institute (PDI) rating in gallons per minute.
Interceptors shall be equipped with devices to control the rate of discharge or drainage
flows through the interceptor so that its rated flow is not exceeded.
Wastewater and drainage flows, other than those requiring grease separation, shall not
be discharged into any interceptor. Food waste grinders shall not discharge into any
interceptor.
Construction. In general, interceptors shall conform to PDI-G101. The plumbing official shall
give approval for each interceptor type, including the material composition and configuration
thereof, on each individual case basis. Drawings and specifications of approved grease
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 196/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
A.
interceptors shall be available for inspection at the Township office. The following interceptor
types shall apply:
Cast iron type. Composed of a cast iron body and cover with the manufacturer's shopapplied
acid-resisting coating inside and outside. The unit interior design shall
incorporate removable flow baffles, threaded inlet and outlet, and internal air relief, a
double wall trap with internal cleanout, and a scoriated cover with a neoprene sealing
gasket.
Fabricated steel type. Composed of a welded steel body and cover with the
manufacturer's shop-applied acid-resisting, rust-inhibitive coating inside and outside. The
unit interior design shall incorporate removable flow baffle-through arrangement,
threaded inlet and outlet, and internal air relief, double wall internal trap or deep-seal
external trap, floor level cleanout provisions, and an anti-skip cover with a neoprene
sealing gasket.
Special types. Special type interceptors shall include those units which are not of the
types stated previously and are usually greater capacity. Special interceptors may be of
precast concrete construction for reasons of economy due to the larger size of such
units.
Location. Interceptors shall be located outside for all installations. Each unit shall be
serviceable on grade with the cover completely removable. The cover shall be surrounded by
a housekeeping pad of concrete construction. The interceptor shall be accessible at all times
to the plumbing official. Each proposed interceptor location shall be approved by the plumbing
official prior to installation.
Maintenance. The plumbing official shall initially require a written report indicating biweekly
interceptor grease draw-off quantities over a three-month time period. Such report shall be
submitted in letter form and shall clearly indicate the owner's name and address as well as
the information requested herein. The plumbing official shall review the submitted report and
shall make the determination as to the frequency of the interceptor grease draw-off. This
schedule of grease draw-off shall be strictly followed on a continual basis until such time as
the grease ladened discharge or drainage is discontinued by the owner's operations, or
unless subsequent experience demonstrates the need for more frequent draw-off. The
plumbing official reserves the right to change the schedule of grease draw-offs by increasing
or decreasing the frequency of draw-off times, based on his/her site inspections and
observations of operations.
§ 200-44. Prohibitions and restrictions on industrial users.
General.
No person shall discharge industrial wastewater into the sewerage system in violation of
§ 200-43 hereof and unless the person discharging the same has submitted a complete and
accurate industrial waste discharge questionnaire to DARA in the form prescribed by the
Executive Director, and has been issued an industrial waste discharge permit or has been
issued a written determination by the Township or the Executive Director that a permit is
unnecessary for the discharge described in the questionnaire.
Where a proposed discharge is believed by DARA to have a reasonable potential for
adversely impacting the sewerage system, DARA may require treatability studies to be
performed by the industrial user on the proposed wastewater in order to demonstrate its
compatibility with the sewerage system. When such studies are required by DARA, they shall
be preceded by the submittal of a treatability study plan by the industrial user to DARA for
review and approval. All costs associated with preparing the treatability study plan and
performing the treatability study shall be borne by the industrial user. DARA reserves the right
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 197/620
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
(1)
C.
to reject any treatability plan it feels is inadequate to show the treatability of a given
wastewater.
Qualitative limits.
DARA shall establish local discharge limits regulating the discharge of specific pollutants to
the sewerage system by industrial users. Local discharge limits may be established for any
substance which is discharged, or likely to be discharged, to the sewerage system. The local
discharge limits, which may be amended from time to time, are appended hereto as Exhibit 1
(Local Discharge Limits).[1]
[Amended 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05
Editor’s Note: Exhibit 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
Local discharge limits may limit concentration, mass, or a combination of the two.
The procedure for the calculation of local discharge limits shall be as recommended by the
approval authority.
Local discharge limits shall be calculated to prevent interference; pass through; the discharge
of toxic materials in toxic amounts; threats to worker health and safety; and physical,
chemical, or biological damage to the sewerage system.
Local discharge limits applicable to industrial users shall be adopted by resolution of DARA.
Local discharge limits applicable to all significant industrial users shall be included in all
industrial waste discharge permits.
Discharging any pollutant in excess of a local discharge limit established for that pollutant
shall be a violation of this article.
Mass loading limits.
No industrial wastewater discharged into the sewerage system shall exceed the following
mass loadings:
For wastewater discharges less than 17,000 gpd on a calendar quarter average,
140 pounds per day of BOD;
140 pounds per day of TSS;
10.5 pounds per day of TKN;
280 pounds per day of COD;
4 pounds per day of phosphorus.
For wastewater discharges greater than 17,000 gpd on a calendar quarter average,
8,340 x Q pounds per day of BOD;
8,340 x Q pounds per day of TSS;
625 x Q pounds per day of TKN;
16,680 x Q pounds per day of COD;
230 x Q pounds per day of Phosphorus;
Where "Q" is the average monthly flow limit, in units of million gallons per day
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 198/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
(gpd), set forth in the industrial waste discharge permit.
Spills or slug loads.
All industrial users shall provide and maintain at their own expense facilities adequate to
prevent an accidental discharge or slug load of any substance stored or used at the industrial
user's facilities that, if discharged into the sewerage system, will violate any of the provisions
of § 200-43A or 200-44B of this article. Slug control plans shall be submitted, as requested, to
the Township and DARA, detailing the facility plans and operating procedures to be utilized by
the industrial user for this protection.
Slug control plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine discharges; a description
of stored chemicals;
Procedures for immediately notifying the Executive Director and the Township of
accidental discharges and slug loads into the sewer system;
Procedures to prevent adverse impacts from such discharges and procedures to
prevent reoccurrence of all such discharges.
All existing industrial users shall also provide the Authority with a copy of its slug control
plan, or demonstrate to the satisfaction of DARA that such a plan is not needed, within
180 days of the adoption of this article. Industrial users proposing to connect to the
sewerage system after the effective date of this article shall submit a copy of its slug
control plan to the Township and to DARA for approval, or demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Township and DARA that they are not needed, before connection to the sewerage
system. Review of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from
the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of
this article.
In addition, where an industrial user plans or becomes aware of a change in its method of
operation that may affect its potential to create a slug load to the public sewer system the
user shall notify DARA and the Township of the change so that DARA may reevaluate the
need for a slug control plan from the user.
In the case of a slug load to the sewerage system of any pollutant, the industrial user shall
immediately notify by telephone the Executive Director and the Township of the incident. The
notification shall include information regarding the location of the discharge, the kind of
pollutants involved, the concentration and volume of the discharge and corrective actions
planned or taken.
Within five days following a slug load, the industrial user shall submit to the Township, and to
the Executive Director, a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the users of any liability on account thereof.
A notice shall be permanently posted by each industrial user on a bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge or
slug load. Employers shall inform all employees who may cause or allow a slug load to occur,
of the emergency notification procedure.
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. If the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards,
located in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, for any industrial user are more
stringent than limitations imposed under this article for industrial users in that subcategory, then
the pretreatment standards shall apply and are hereby incorporated in this article. DARA shall
notify all affected industrial users of the applicable (reporting) requirements under 40 CFR Section
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 199/620
F.
G.
H.
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
I.
403.12. If an industrial user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not
previously submitted an application for an industrial waste discharge permit, the user shall apply
for a permit within 90 days of promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
Dilution prohibition. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment
standard or pretreatment requirement, no industrial user shall increase the use of process water,
or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. DARA may impose
mass limitations (in addition to those imposed under § 200-44C) on users in cases where the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
State requirements. State requirements and limitations on industrial wastewater discharges shall
apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those
in this article.
DARA's right of revision. The Township and DARA reserve the right to establish more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the sewerage system.
Industrial waste discharge permits.
General.
No significant industrial user shall connect to or discharge wastewater to the sewerage
system without an industrial waste discharge permit. Nonsignificant industrial users may
also be required to have an industrial waste discharge permit depending on the nature
and quantity of their discharge, subject to the Authority's discretion.
Industrial users that are not required by the Authority to have an industrial waste
discharge permit may discharge industrial wastewater to the sewerage system, but are
required to comply with all other provisions of this article. If an industrial user makes
changes to the processes, flow, wastewater concentration, wastewater characteristics, or
other operations reported in the most recent industrial waste discharge questionnaire
filed by the user with DARA, user shall immediately upon becoming aware such a change
has occurred, or 90 days prior to such a change if it is planned, notify DARA and the
Township of the change, and a determination will be made by DARA whether the
change(s) necessitate the issuance of an industrial waste discharge permit to the user.
Where an industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for an industrial
waste discharge permit, the user shall, within 90 days after the promulgation of the
application National Categorical Pretreatment Standard:
Obtain an industrial waste discharge permit; and
Provide the baseline monitoring information required by 40 CFR 403.12(b). This
information shall be incorporated into the application for an industrial waste
discharge permit.
Permit application.
All industrial users shall file with the Township a complete and accurate industrial waste
discharge permit application in the form prescribed by DARA.
The application for an industrial waste discharge permit shall be fully completed and
verified in writing by the industrial user, or a duly authorized and knowledgeable officer,
agent or representative thereof. The application shall contain in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, such scientific or testing data, or other information, as may be
required by DARA or the Township and shall pay an application fee and shall reimburse
DARA and the Township all expenses incurred as a result of the processing of the signed
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 200/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
(c)
application. The Township and DARA shall have, at their discretion, the right to inspect
the premises, equipment and material, and laboratory testing facilities of the applicant.
Notwithstanding the above, the applicant shall provide the following minimum information
to the Township:
Name and address of the user; name, title, and telephone number of responsible
official; name, title, and phone number of person to contact for information about the
industrial waste discharge.
Description of the industry and the manufacturing processes or operations that occur
there and the types of products that are produced.
Applicable Standard Industrial Classification Codes for activities conducted at the
facility.
Statement on whether the industry is subject to compliance with National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards and which ones apply.
Indication and description of the sources of or the processes that produce industrial
wastewater.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by DARA and as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to
Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended. If the
discharge is from a proposed new discharge, wastewater characteristics shall be
estimated.
Volume of industrial wastewater to be discharged to the sewerage system and the
methods of measuring same. Flow volume information shall include the time and
duration of the discharge and the average daily and 30 minute peak wastewater flow
rates, including monthly, and seasonal variations, if any.
Description of any wastewater treatment facilities or processes used or proposed to
be used to treat the industrial wastes prior to their discharge to the sewerage
system.
Schematic flow diagram showing the existing and proposed sources of industrial
wastewater and the on-site treatment processes.
The quantity of sludge removed from the system and their method and location of
disposal.
Description of any other wastes that are removed from the system, their quantities,
and methods and locations of disposal.
List of raw materials used or stored on the premises, their material safety data
sheets, their approximate quantity of usage on a monthly basis, and what they are
used for.
Plans and specifications for a sampling manhole.
A list of any additional environmental control permits held by or for the facility, such
as air quality permits, RCRA permits, stormwater management permits, etc.
Such additional information as the Township or DARA shall request.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 201/620
(d)
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(f)
(3)
(a)
(4)
The industrial waste discharge permit application shall be reviewed by the Township, and
if acceptable, submitted to the Executive Director for review. The Executive Director will
review the application and make a determination as to whether a permit will be required
for the discharge. No industrial waste discharge permit shall be issued to an industrial
user whose discharge of materials to sewers, whether shown upon the application or
determined after inspection and testing conducted by the Township or DARA, is not in
conformance with federal, state, Township, or DARA statutes, or resolutions. If an
application is denied, the Executive Director shall state in writing the reason or reasons
for denial, and said written communication shall be delivered to the Township and the
applicant.
If the Executive Director or the Township denies an application for an industrial waste
discharge permit, the DARA Board shall review the denial, provided the industrial user
gives written notice requesting the review, with appropriate support information within 30
days after receipt of the denial. The DARA Board shall review the industrial waste
discharge permit application, the written denial, and such other evidence and matters as
the applicant shall present at its next regular meeting following receipt of the user's
request for the review. The Board's decision shall be provided to the user within 10 days
of the meeting and shall be final.
If, based on the characteristics of the industrial user's waste discharge, additional
pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance procedures are required to meet any
DARA, Township, state or federal pretreatment standards, the user shall submit to DARA,
prior to issuance of the industrial waste discharge permit, the shortest, reasonable
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. DARA shall include
an acceptable compliance schedule in the user's industrial waste discharge permit. The
completion date in this schedule shall be no later than the compliance date established
by EPA for the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The following
conditions apply to this schedule:
The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the forms of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the significant industrial user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
No increment shall exceed nine months.
Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for
compliance, the industrial user shall submit to the DARA and the Township a report,
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to
be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this
increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to
return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine
months elapse between such progress reports to DARA and the Township.
Permit modifications. As soon as possible following the promulgation of a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the industrial waste discharge permit of users subject to
such standards shall be revised, if necessary, to require compliance with such standard within
the time prescribed by such standard.
Permit conditions.
Industrial waste discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this
article and all other applicable regulations, ordinances, user charges and fees
established by DARA and the Township. Permits shall contain the following:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 202/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(c)
(5)
Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable general
pretreatment standards in 40 CFR Part 403, categorical standards, local limits, and
state and local law;
Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports, including the
information to be contained and the signatory requirements of these reports;
Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater
discharge as specified by DARA, including compliance records with regard to
effluent limits and any best management practices, and affording DARA and the
Township access thereto;
Requirements for notification of DARA and the Township in advance of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the sewerage system;
Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
List of prohibited discharges;
Statement of duration of the permit;
Notification of the rules regarding transferability;
Notification of penalties provided for noncompliance; and
Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations,
frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting
schedule.
Right of entry requirements for authorized representatives of DARA and the
Township.
Indemnification of DARA and the municipality on account of the discharge.
Permits may also contain other requirements, including but not limited to:
Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for
flow regulation and equalization;
Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities
and pretreatment facilities;
Compliance schedules; and
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by DARA or the Township to ensure
compliance with this article, DARA resolutions, or other requirements.
Issuance of an industrial waste discharge permit in no way relieves the industrial user
from any liability on account of its discharge into the sewerage system, whether
discharge is permitted thereby or not.
Permit duration. Industrial waste discharge permits shall be issued for a one-year period. If
DARA or the Township elects not to cancel the permit on or before its anniversary, the permit
will automatically renew itself for another period of one year upon payment by the user of the
applicable permit renewal fee; however, in no case shall a permit duration exceed five years
before it is reissued. The terms and conditions of the permit shall be subject to modification by
DARA or the Township during the term of the permit. The user shall be informed of any
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 203/620
(6)
(7)
(8)
(1)
(a)
(2)
J.
proposed changes in its permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. DARA
and the Township shall use their best efforts to inform the user at least 60 days prior to the
effective date. In the event that such changes require major changes in pretreatment by the
user, and the user's failure to comply with the amended discharge requirements does not
itself or with other failures to comply put DARA or the Township in substantial danger of
violating any agreement, permit, regulation or law, then the user shall be allowed a
reasonable period of time to comply with the changes, provided the user requests a time
extension and submits to DARA and the Township an implementation schedule acceptable to
DARA and the Township within the sixty-day period.
Permit transfer. Industrial waste discharge permits are issued to a specific industrial user for a
specific operation. An industrial waste discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred
or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without
the approval of DARA and the Township. The succeeding owner or user shall also comply
with the terms and conditions of the existing industrial waste discharge permit.
Waste characteristic change. Any industrial user who plans or becomes aware of a change in
the method of operation or in the pretreatment facilities which will increase the concentration
of pollutants which are regulated by this article or the volume of wastewater discharged to the
sewerage system, shall notify DARA and the Township of the change at least 90 days prior to
such change. If required by DARA or the Township, the industrial user shall apply for an
industrial waste discharge permit that reflects the proposed changes. The new industrial
waste discharge permit will be subject to a fee to reimburse DARA and the Township for all
expenses incurred as a result of the processing of the permit. Approval or denial of a new
industrial waste discharge permit shall be regulated by the procedures established hereunder
for the issuance of an original permit.
Files. DARA and the Township shall maintain files in which copies of all industrial waste
discharge permits, revisions thereto, and supporting data will be filed for reference. Files shall
be maintained for a period of at least five years. This period of retention shall be extended
during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the user or the DRWPCC or when
requested by DARA, the Director of EPA or the Regional Administrator of EPA.
Reporting requirements for industrial users.
Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewerage system, any industrial
user subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit to DARA and the
Township a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge
from the regulated process which are limited by categorical standards, and the average and
maximum daily flow from these process units in the user's facility which are limited by such
categorical standards. The report shall state whether the applicable categorical standards are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operations and maintenance
and/or pretreatment are scheduled to bring the user into compliance with the applicable
categorical standards. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
user and certified by a qualified professional.
Periodic compliance reports.
Each permitted industrial user shall submit to DARA and the Township, during the
months of April, July, October and January, or as specified in the user's industrial waste
discharge permit or by DARA, a complete and accurate report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge during the reporting period which are
regulated by the industrial waste discharge permit. All monitoring data obtained for
purposes of determining compliance with the industrial waste discharge permit by
certified analytical techniques must be reported by the user. In addition, this report, where
applicable, shall include a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting period,
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 204/620
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(d)
exceeded the maximum daily flow listed in the industrial waste discharge permit. At the
discretion of DARA and the Township and in consideration of such factors as high or low
flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., DARA, upon written request from the user, may
agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. The report
shall also contain the following certification statement signed by the authorized
representative of the user:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared
under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that
qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on
my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
The Township or DARA may impose mass limitations where the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required by § 200-44J(2)(a) of this
article shall state the mass of pollutants regulated by categorical standards in the
industrial user's discharge to the sewerage system. These reports shall contain the
results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and
concentration, or production and mass where requested by DARA, of pollutants
contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The
frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the user's industrial waste discharge
permit. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR
Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the
EPA.
For categorical industries that have mass limits as categorical standards, DARA may
specify equivalent concentrations to regulate the strength of the industrial user's
discharge. If concentration limits are regulated in lieu of mass discharge limits, the user
must provide DARA with the following information as part of each compliance report:
For the reporting period, the rate of production of the process for which categorical
standards have been established.
The average wastewater flow rate, generated by the regulated production activity for
the reporting period.
Thirty days' notice of any anticipated change in production.
The industrial wastewater discharged into the sewerage system shall be sampled and
analyzed by and at the expense of the industrial user, and copies of the original
laboratory reports listing the results of the analyses and the analytical methods used shall
be submitted to DARA and the Township, with the user's periodic compliance report
required in § 200-44J(2)(a) of this article. In cases where the standard requires
compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user
shall submit documentation as required by the control authority or the applicable
standards to determine compliance with the standard. Frequency of sampling and
analyses shall be quarterly, or as specified by the industrial waste discharge permit or
DARA. Unless otherwise stated in the industrial waste discharge permit, all samples are
to be time composite samples for the period of discharge or for 24 hours, whichever is
less, with sampling intervals of not more than one hour. The samples shall be analyzed
for the substances and characteristics required by the user's industrial waste discharge
permit and shall be representative of the conditions occurring during the reporting period.
The user shall follow the proper sample preservation and analysis techniques detailed in
40 CFR 136 or other approved techniques approved by DARA.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 205/620
(e)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
All records and information resulting from the monitoring activities required by the
industrial waste discharge permit shall be retained by the industrial user for at least five
years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved
litigation regarding the user or the DRWPCC or when requested by the Township, DARA
or the Director of EPA, or the Regional Administrator of EPA.
Baseline monitoring report.
Where a significant industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted the baseline monitoring information
required by 40 CFR 403.12(b), the user shall, within 180 days after the promulgation of
the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, provide this information to
DARA. The report shall include all items required by 40 CFR 403.12(b).
A new source, or a user proposing to discharge wastes into the sewerage system that is
subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, shall submit to DARA the
baseline monitoring report required by 40 CFR 403.12(b) at least 90 days prior to
commencement of discharge from the regulated process or facility.
Noncomplying discharge report. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a
violation of this article, an applicable pretreatment standard, or the user's industrial waste
discharge permit, the user shall notify DARA and the Township within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to DARA and the Township within 30 days after becoming aware
of the violation.
Monitoring facilities.
All permitted industrial users shall provide and operate, at their own expense, monitoring
facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of its industrial waste
discharge. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the
Township may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the
user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so
that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
The monitoring facility shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by DARA and the Township. There shall be ample room in or near such facility to
allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and
measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition
at the expense of the user. The facility shall be located as to be accessible at all times to
persons authorized by DARA or the Township. By obtaining an industrial waste discharge
permit, the user consents to the entry upon its land, and agrees to facilitate such entry, by
representatives of DARA and the Township, and consents to the use of the monitoring facility
for observation, sampling, and measuring of the wastewater discharge at all time.
Construction of the monitoring facility shall be completed within 120 days following issuance
of the industrial waste discharge permit.
Inspection and sampling. DARA or the Township may inspect the facilities of the user. Persons or
occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow DARA or its
representative, and the Township or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all
parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or
in the performance of any of their duties. DARA, the Township, and EPA shall have the right to set
up on the industrial user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force
which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from DARA, the Township, or EPA will be permitted to enter, without
delay.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 206/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
M.
(1)
(2)
N.
Pretreatment.
All industrial users shall provide necessary pretreatment and flow-equalizing facilities as
required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the appropriate
federal regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat or flow-equalize wastewater to a level in
compliance with the provisions of this article shall be provided, operated, and maintained at
the user's sole expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to DARA and the Township for review before construction of
the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent in
compliance with the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities, flow-equalizing facilities, or method of operation shall be reported to and be
approved by DARA and the Township prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
An industrial user may allow a bypass which does not cause pretreatment standards to be
violated, but only for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. If the user knows in
advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to DARA and the Township, if
possible, at least 10 days before the date of the bypass. A user shall give oral notice of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to DARA and the
Township within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written
report shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written report shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements
shall be made available to officials of the EPA upon request.
DARA and the Township shall have access to all such pretreatment facilities and flowequalizing
facilities as required by this article at all reasonable times for purposes of
inspection and testing.
The Township shall reimburse DARA for all of its expenses incurred as a result of review,
monitoring, application processing, sampling, or any other activities conducted by DARA and
directly related to ensuring the industrial user's compliance with the provisions of this article.
Such expenses shall be subject to reimbursement to the Township by the industrial user.
Hazardous waste discharge notification.
An industrial user discharging any quantity of waste to the sewerage system, which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be an acute hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261, shall provide
a one-time notification to the Township, DARA, the EPA Region III Waste Management
Division Director, and the state hazardous waste authorities.
The notification required by § 200-44N(1) of this article shall include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other), and a certification that the industrial user has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical. If the user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste in a month to the sewerage system, the notification shall also include
an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the waste, as estimation of the
mass and concentration of such constituents discharged during the month, and an estimation
of the mass of constituents expected to be discharged by the user to the sewerage system
during the following twelve-month period.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 207/620
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
O.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
P.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
Q.
If an industrial user discharges a nonacute hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261 to the
sewerage system, the user shall provide the one-time notification described in § 200-44N(2) if
the total mass of hazardous waste discharged to the sewerage system during any month
exceeds 15 kilograms.
Confidential information.
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permits, notifications, and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be
available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user
specifically requests in writing and is able to demonstrate to the Township's and DARA's
satisfaction that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, those portions of a report that have been
accepted by the Township and DARA as confidential shall not be made available for
inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this article, the NPDES permit, state disposal system permit
and/or the state or federal pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of
any report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
When information accepted by the Township or DARA as confidential is transmitted to any
governmental agency by the Township or DARA, a notification to the industrial user shall be
provided by the Township or DARA listing the confidential information transmitted, and the
governmental entity requesting the information.
Measuring volumes of wastewater.
The flow volume used to determine wastewater flows and surcharges shall be specified in the
industrial waste discharge permit and be based on:
Direct wastewater metering; or
Metered water use; or
Such other method acceptable to DARA.
The Township shall require that each industrial user connected to its sewer system and
issued an industrial waste discharge permit install and use any meter or measuring device
specified therein at the user's own expense. The Township shall be responsible for the
reading of all meters or measuring devices. DARA may read the meters from time to time at
its discretion. The meters and devices shall be made available for meter reading at any
reasonable time.
Charges and fees.
The Authority and Township may adopt through separate ordinances charges and fees for
implementing and enforcing the pretreatment program, including:
Fees for reimbursement of the costs of setting up and implementing the industrial
pretreatment program;
Fees for monitoring, inspections, and sampling associated with the industrial
pretreatment program;
Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction plans;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 208/620
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
Fees for review of permit applications;
Fees associated with the review of permit appeals;
Fees for consistent removal by the Authority of pollutants otherwise subject to federal
pretreatment regulations;
Other fees the Authority may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained
herein.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from any and
all other fees chargeable by the Authority or the Township.
§ 200-45. Enforcement.
Significant noncompliance. DARA will publish on an annual basis in a newspaper(s) of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the DRWPCC
a list of those industrial users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance as defined in this article.
Immediate suspension by the Township of discharge presenting imminent danger by any user.
The Township shall order the suspension of discharge of wastewater by any user when so
directed by DARA. DARA may direct such a suspension when such suspension is necessary,
in the opinion of DARA, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents an
imminent danger or harm to people or to the environment or of interference (dangerous
discharge).
Any user notified of an order to suspend shall comply therewith immediately. In the event of a
failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Township shall take
such steps as it deems necessary and, if directed by DARA, as directed by DARA, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to affect the suspension of discharge of the
user's wastewater into the sewerage system. The Township shall permit reinstatement of the
discharge upon proof satisfactory to itself and DARA of the elimination of the imminent and
substantial danger referred to above. The user shall submit a detailed written statement to
DARA describing the causes of the actual or threatened discharge and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence within 15 days of the date of the first such discharge or threat
of discharge.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit DARA from seeking injunctive relief hereunder or
at common law or taking other enforcement action in connection with a dangerous discharge.
Termination of service of any user. Any user who violates any condition of this article, applicable
state and federal regulations or an industrial waste discharge permit if applicable is subject, in
addition to any civil or criminal penalties which may be imposed, to having his service terminated
and/or his industrial waste discharge permit revoked.
Notification of violation by any user. Whenever DARA or the Township finds that the user has
violated or is violating this article, an industrial waste discharge permit, or any prohibition,
limitation or requirements contained herein, or has failed to provide the Executive Director with the
information needed to accurately determine compliance with any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Township or DARA may, and the Township at the direction of DARA shall, serve
upon such person a written notice of violation. The notice may require a response in the form of a
plan, explanation, compliance schedule, or other appropriate response within a specified time
period. Compliance with any such requirement is mandatory.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 209/620
E.
F.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
Legal action by the Township. If any user violates the provisions of this article, federal or state
pretreatment requirements, or any order related to sewer service of the Township, the Township
may and, at the direction of DARA shall, commence an action for appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief in the Court of Common Pleas of this county. In any such proceeding, the
Township may seek to collect any damages and costs incurred pursuant to § 200-46C hereof, and
unpaid, and any fines imposed under § 200-46A hereof, and unpaid.
Civil penalty assessment policy for industrial users. DARA shall adopt a formal, written civil
penalty assessment policy from time to time and make the same available to the public. Industrial
users participating in the pretreatment program (the "pretreatment program") established under
§ 200-44 of this article shall be given notice of the policy.
§ 200-46. Violations and penalties.
Fines to be established by the Township for violation by any user. In addition to any other remedy
available under this article, any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense, together
with the cost of the prosecution, which fine may be collected by suit or summary proceeding
brought in the name of the Township before any Magisterial District Judge. All fines and penalties
collected for the violation of this article shall be paid over to the Township treasury. Each day on
which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and different offense. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of
the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Action to enforce the Township's ordinances applicable to any user. The Township shall at the
direction of DARA take any action permitted by law to enforce any provisions of this article.
Liability for damage to sewerage system. In the event that any person discharges its waste into
the sewerage system which causes or threatens to cause damage to the Township sewerage
system and/or DRWPCC or to any employee thereof, or discharges any substance that damages
or threatens to damage the receiving stream, that person shall be liable for the damage thereof;
said damage shall include all costs incurred by the Township and/or DARA, including, but not
limited to, costs of restoration or replacement, fines, legal and engineering fees, and natural
resource damages. The limit of the damage shall be determined by DARA and the Township, and
the person shall be billed therefore. Legal action may be taken to enforce collection and/or the
Township may terminate the person's connection to the sewerage system.
Chapter 205. Solid Waste Collection and Recycling
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 12-13-1993 by Ord. No.
93-11; amended in its entirety 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 96-18. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 166.
§ 205-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and be cited as the "Uwchlan Township Municipal Waste Collection
and Recycling Ordinance."
§ 205-2. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 210/620
The following terms shall have the following meanings in this chapter:
ACT 101
The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L.
556, No. 101, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
ACT 97
The Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, as amended, 35 P.S.
§ 6018.101 et seq.
BULK WASTE
Large items such as furniture, rugs, mattresses, television sets, washers, dryers, refrigerators,
stoves, hot water heaters, bicycles and other like items. Bulk waste shall not include construction
material, concrete, automotive parts, cans of wet paint or leaf waste.
BURNING
The act of consuming by fire; to flame, char, scorch, or blaze. As used in this chapter, "smoldering"
shall have the same meaning as "burning" and any smoldering shall be deemed a burning.
[Added 10-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-19]
LEAF WASTE
Leaves.
MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid,
liquid, semi-solid or gaseous material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge not
meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air pollution control
facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE COLLECTOR
Any person collecting or transporting municipal waste or recyclable materials from owners or
occupants of property in Uwchlan Township, and any business or institution within Uwchlan
Township which generates municipal waste or recyclable materials and uses its own employees
and equipment for the collection or transportation of municipal waste or recyclable materials. All
municipal waste collectors, as defined herein, shall be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
MUNICIPAL WASTE CONTRACTOR
The contractor of Uwchlan Township pursuant to § 304(c) of Act 101 to carry out its duties for
recycling, transportation, collection and storage of municipal waste and source-separated
recyclable materials in a manner that is consistent with Act 97 and Act 101, and the regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto. Any such person shall be jointly and severally responsible with the
Township when carrying out its duties for transportation, collection or storage activity.
OPEN BURNING
A fire, the air contaminants from which are emitted directly into the outdoor atmosphere and not
directed thereto through a flue.
[Added 10-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-19]
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, institution, cooperative enterprise, trust,
municipal authority, federal government or agency, Commonwealth institution or agency, or any
other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as a subject of rights and duties. In any
provision of the chapter prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination of the
foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or any other
legal entity having officers and directors.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 211/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Those materials specified by Uwchlan Township for collection in accordance with this chapter and
recycling regulations which may be promulgated from time to time. Such material may include, but
shall not be limited to, aluminum and bimetal cans, clear and colored glass containers, plastics,
mixed paper and newspaper. The list of recyclable materials may be changed from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township.
RESIDENCE
Any occupied single or multifamily structure having up to and including four dwelling units per
structure, or each dwelling unit in a multifamily structure, if the units are individually owned, with a
separate entrance onto a public or approved private street.
RESIDENT
Any person who owns, leases or occupies a property located in Uwchlan Township used as a
residence.
SOURCE-SEPARATION
The separation of recyclable materials from municipal waste at the points of origin for the purpose
of recycling.
YARD WASTE
Garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings, and similar materials, but not including grass
clippings.
§ 205-3. Separation program established.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory source separation and collection of
recyclable materials and leaf waste within Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania. No
person shall store, collect, transport or dispose of recyclable materials or leaf waste within Uwchlan
Township except in accordance with this chapter. The use of a municipal waste collector will not relieve
any person from compliance with this chapter.
§ 205-4. Recycling.
Recyclable materials. All recyclable materials shall be separated from all municipal waste
generated within Uwchlan Township. When placed at the curb for collection in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, recyclable materials shall be placed in reusable containers which clearly
identify the contents as recyclables, or otherwise in accordance with the rules and regulations
adopted hereunder.
Leaf waste. All leaf waste shall be separated from all municipal waste generated within Uwchlan
Township. When placed at the curb for collection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
leaf waste shall be placed in paper biodegradable bags, or otherwise in accordance with the rules
and regulations adopted hereunder. Any person who otherwise provides for the proper disposal of
leaf waste by composting shall not be required to comply with the provisions of the subsection.
Yard waste. All yard waste shall be separated from all municipal waste generated within Uwchlan
Township. When placed at the curb for collection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
yard waste shall be placed in paper biodegradable bags, or otherwise in accordance with the rules
and regulations adopted hereunder. Any person who otherwise provides for the proper disposal of
yard waste by composting shall not be required to comply with the provisions of the subsection.
Residential collection. The collection of recyclable materials from all residences within the
Township shall be made by the municipal waste contractor at a minimum of once per week. Leaf
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 212/620
E.
and yard waste shall be collected from such residences by the municipal waste contractor in
accordance with the rules and regulations adopted hereunder.
Multifamily rental residential properties. An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of
multifamily rental housing properties with four or more units may comply with their responsibilities
under this chapter by establishing a collection system for recyclable materials at each property
and pickup by a licensed municipal waste collector. The collection system must include suitable
containers for collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the containers, and
written instructions to the occupants or residents concerning the use and availability of the
collection system. In addition, such owners, landlords, and agents shall annually provide written
documentation and certification to the Township of the total number of tons of materials and the
types of materials recycled. Such owners, landlords, and agents shall annually provide written
documentation and certification to the Township of the total number of tons of materials and the
types of materials recycled. Such owners, landlords, and agents may comply with the reporting
requirements hereunder by requiring their municipal waste collector to provide said documentation
and certification directly to the Township. Owners, landlords, and agents of owners or landlords
who comply with this chapter under this subsection shall not be liable for the noncompliance of
occupants of their buildings.
§ 205-5. Commercial, institutional and municipal recycling.
All persons occupying commercial, institutional and municipal establishments within Uwchlan Township
shall separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf waste, and such other
recyclable materials as may be changed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of
Uwchlan Township generated at such establishments and from community activities, store the
materials until collection by a licensed municipal waste collector, and annually provide written
documentation and certification to Uwchlan Township of a total number of tons of materials and the
types of materials recycled. Such persons may comply with the reporting requirements hereunder by
requiring their municipal waste collector to provide said documentation and certification directly to the
Township.
§ 205-6. Impairment of ownership.
Nothing in this chapter or any regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall be deemed to impair the
ownership of recyclable materials by the person who generated them unless and until recyclable
materials are placed at curbside or similar location for collection by the municipal waste contractor.
§ 205-7. Scavenging prohibited.
From the time of placement of the recyclable materials at the curb or other designated place for
collection by the municipal waste contractor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and any rules
and regulations adopted hereunder, the recyclable materials shall become and be the property of the
municipal waste contractor. It shall be a violation of the chapter for any person not authorized by the
Township to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable materials placed at
the curb or other designated place for collection by the municipal waste contractor pursuant to the
provisions of the chapter. Any and each such unauthorized collection in violation hereof from one or
more properties shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereafter provided in this
chapter.
§ 205-8. Municipal waste storage, collection and disposal.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 213/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
A.
All municipal waste generated in Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania, shall be stored,
collected, transported and disposed of in accordance with this chapter. No person shall store, collect,
transport and dispose of municipal waste within Uwchlan Township except in accordance with this
chapter. The use of a municipal waste collector will not relieve any person from compliance with this
chapter.
§ 205-9. Residential collection and disposal.
All municipal waste generated at residences throughout the Township shall be collected by the
municipal waste contractor. The residents of townhouse properties acting by and through a duly
constituted homeowners' association may be exempted by the Board of Supervisors from the
requirements of this subsection regarding the collection of municipal waste by the municipal waste
contractor upon written application to the Board of Supervisors. Any such approval shall be
subject to the following.
On the effective date of this chapter, said homeowners' association must have complied with
all of the following requirements:
The homeowners' association must have a valid existing, written contract with a
municipal waste collector for collection services. A copy of the contract must be
submitted with the application.
The homeowners' association must in fact provide such collection services to its
residents.
The homeowners' association must in fact pay the contractor directly for such services
from assessments to each individual resident.
The municipal waste collector must duly obtain a municipal waste collector's license from the
County of Chester and must remain in full compliance with the terms and conditions of the
license and this chapter.
The homeowners' association must establish and enforce a collection system for recyclable
materials and leaf waste at each residence in accordance with § 205-4 of this chapter,
including pickup by the licensed municipal waste collector.
The homeowners' association must yearly provide written documentation and certification to
the Township of the total number of tons of materials and the types of materials recycled.
Collection of municipal waste shall be made by the municipal waste contractor at a minimum of
once per week or at such frequency as shall be set forth in the rules and regulations adopted
hereunder.
When placed at the curb for collection, municipal waste shall be stored in closed watertight
containers. The maximum number of containers authorized for placement at the curb for each
collection day and the maximum capacity of each container shall be in accordance with the rules
and regulations adopted hereunder.
§ 205-10. Residential fees and charges.
The fee for collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials for a residential property as
provided for in this chapter shall be as from time to time established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors or in accordance with any contract between the Township and a successful bidder for
the collection/hauling/recycling services for residential properties, as the case may be. Such
collection fees, together with any Township administrative fees to be established from time to time
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 214/620
B.
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
B.
by the Board of Supervisors, shall be charged directly to the property owner, who shall promptly
pay the same in accordance with the terms of the statement.
Fees shall be billed quarterly to the owner of each residence by the Township. The bills for regular
collection for the quarterly period during which the property is first provided collection services will
be prorated on the basis of the applicable rate. All bills shall be due and payable on their
respective dates.
§ 205-11. Penalties for late fees and liens for delinquent
accounts.
Penalties, interest, costs, and attorneys' fees for delinquent accounts.
[Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-04]
All collection service charges not paid in full by the due date shall be deemed to be
delinquent. A penalty of 10% of the amount of the collection service charge shall be added to
the charge if not paid by the due date.
The amount of the collection service charge and penalty shall bear interest from the due date
at the rate of 10% per annum until paid.
Collection procedures shall be commenced for all accounts delinquent over three months or
exceeding $500. The Township shall charge an administrative fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors for starting collection procedures, which shall be added
as costs to the amount of the delinquent account.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The Township may terminate collection service to any property where the payment of
collection service charges has not been paid by the due date. Collection service shall not be
restored until all delinquent charges, penalties, costs, interest, attorneys' fees, and the cost of
shutting off and restoring service have been paid in full.
The penalties, interest, costs and charges set forth above shall be in addition to all other legal
and equitable remedies available to the Township to collect delinquent accounts, including but
not limited to municipal lien and assumpsit remedies. The amounts of the penalties, interest,
costs and charges set forth above may be changed from time to time by resolution of the
Township Board of Supervisors.
All collection service charges not paid by the due date, and all penalties, interest, costs,
charges and attorneys' fees thereon, shall be a lien against the delinquent property and shall
be filed as a lien in the Office of the Prothonotary of Chester County and shall be collected in
the manner provided by law for filing and collection of such liens.
The delinquent account holder shall also be responsible for all legal fees incurred by the
Township in collecting the account in accordance with a schedule enacted from time to time
by Township ordinance.
All liens for delinquent accounts filed as of the effective date of this chapter shall be amended
to include interest at the statutory rate of 10% per annum beginning on the date of the
delinquency until paid.
All persons receiving collection services by the municipal waste contractor shall provide the
Township their correct address. Failure to receive bills will not be considered an excuse for
nonpayment nor permit an extension of the period during which bills are payable at face value.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 215/620
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
The Township shall have the right to cut off collection services from the delinquent premises and
not to restore the same until all delinquent bills against the same and the cost of discontinuing and
restoring service shall have been paid. These penalties shall be concurrent with all other
remedies, legal and equitable, available to the Township for collection of said fees, including, but
not limited to, municipal lien and assumpsit remedies.
§ 205-12. General prohibitions.
No person shall place municipal waste in containers used for the collection of recyclable materials.
No person shall place designated recyclable materials in containers used for the collection of
municipal waste.
No person shall store municipal waste outside of an enclosed building in other than closed
watertight containers.
No person shall place containers for municipal waste or recyclable materials at the curb or in the
front yard of any lot, except during the period beginning at 6:00 p.m., prevailing time, on the day
prior to the scheduled collection and ending at midnight on the day of the scheduled collection.
Front yard shall mean the area between the street line and the first building on the lot.
No person other than the occupants of the property on which containers for municipal waste are
stored or the authorized municipal waste contractor or collector, as the case may be, shall remove
the covers of, or any of the contents of, the containers.
No person shall place, store, collect, transport or dispose of municipal waste generated at his or
her residence in any container for municipal waste located at a different property than the
residence where the municipal waste was first generated.
No person shall allow or permit any municipal waste to collect or remain upon any property. Any
unauthorized accumulation of municipal waste on any property is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of municipal waste within
five days after the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
No municipal waste or recyclable materials shall be deposited on highways, streets, alleyways,
sidewalks, vacant lots, or public grounds nor be thrown into any culvert, storm sewer, drainage
system, stream or other body of water.
No person may permit the open burning of recyclable materials or leaf waste.
[Added 10-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-19]
§ 205-13. Municipal waste collectors requirements.
General provision. It shall be unlawful for any municipal waste collector to collect and transport
municipal waste or recyclable materials within Uwchlan Township without a license first had and
obtained from the County of Chester. As a condition of this chapter, the municipal waste collector
shall provide for the collection of recyclable materials, leaf waste and yard waste, including written
quarterly reports to the Township of the materials recycled.
License requirement. All municipal waste collectors shall obtain a license therefor on application to
the County of Chester. Said municipal waste collector may collect or transport such municipal
waste or recyclable materials within the Township for a period of one year from the date of
issuance of the license or until January 31 of each calendar year. Any municipal waste collector to
whom a license is so issued shall have the privilege of collecting and transporting any municipal
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 216/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
D.
waste or recyclable materials picked up within the boundaries of Uwchlan Township, in strict
conformance with this chapter.
Collection of recyclable materials, leaf and yard waste.
Except as provided hereinbelow, and as a condition to collect in Uwchlan Township, the
municipal waste collector shall establish a program for the collection and transportation of
recyclable materials, leaf and yard waste, which shall at minimum comply with the following:
Provide for the collection of designated recyclable materials from each multifamily rental
property, commercial, institutional and municipal establishment, and community activity
served, and provide to such customers reusable containers for the storage and collection
of recyclable materials.
Establish procedures for the storage and collection of recyclable materials, and provide
persons served adequate notification of the procedures.
Provide for the collection of leaf waste and yard waste.
Establish procedures for the separation, storage and collection of leaf and yard waste,
and provide persons served adequate notification of the procedures.
Issue warning notices of violations on forms provided by the Township to persons served
failing to comply with procedures for the storage and collection of recyclable materials
and leaf waste, and provide a copy of any such warning to the Township.
Provide quarterly written documentation and certification to the Township of the total
number of tons of materials, the types of materials, the place of disposition of materials
recycled, and the properties in the Township from which the materials were collected.
Reports shall be filed 15 days following the close of a calendar quarter.
A municipal waste collector who only collects or transports recyclable materials in Uwchlan
Township shall not be required to comply with Subsection C(1)(c) and (d) above regarding the
collection of leaf waste.
Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any municipal waste collector to:
Collect or transport any municipal waste, recyclable materials, leaf waste or yard waste from
any person failing to source-separate said materials in violation of this chapter and
regulations adopted hereunder.
Collect or transport any municipal waste, recyclable materials, leaf waste or yard waste from
any residence served by the municipal waste contractor in violation of this chapter and
regulations adopted hereunder.
Co-mingle any designated recyclable material, leaf waste or yard waste collected within the
Township with any municipal waste.
Fail to provide for the proper disposition of any municipal waste, recyclable materials, leaf
waste or yard waste collected or transported within the Township.
Commence the collection of municipal waste, recyclable materials, leaf waste or yard waste
from any property within Uwchlan Township prior to 6:00 a.m.
Load or operate any vehicle within the Township or transport municipal waste, recyclable
materials, leaf waste or yard waste within the Township in such a manner as to allow
municipal waste, recyclable materials, leaf waste or yard waste to fall upon the public roads or
upon land abutting the public roads in the Township.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 217/620
(7)
(8)
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
Fail to replace the containers with their lids or covers in place at the location of collection in an
orderly manner.
Otherwise create a public nuisance.
Collection equipment and transportation vehicles. The collection equipment and transportation
vehicles used for the collection of municipal waste shall be of the closed metal body type with an
automatic compactor unit. The said vehicle shall have and display a valid Pennsylvania vehicle
registration sticker and at all times be in good and proper mechanical condition and in compliance
with the minimum safety and sanitary regulations for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All such
vehicles shall be specifically designed to prevent leakage of any liquids or fluids. Other types of
vehicles may be used only for the collection of recyclable materials, leaf waste, bulk waste, yard
waste and Christmas trees, provided such items are separately collected in accordance with other
provisions of this chapter and regulations adopted hereunder. The municipal waste and
recyclables so collected shall be suitably enclosed or covered so as to prevent roadside littering,
attraction of vermin or creation of other nuisances. The collection equipment and transportation
vehicles shall be kept in an clean and sanitary condition.
Exhibiting license. Each licensee shall at all times while in the process of collecting or transporting
said municipal waste or recyclables have and display in a proper manner a valid motor vehicle
registration sticker and have the license, or a copy thereof, issued by the Chester County
Commissioners within the vehicle being employed in said collection or transportation and shall
exhibit the same on demand to the Codes Enforcement Officer or his/her designee or to any police
officer of the Township.
Compliance. The municipal waste/recycling hauler shall at all times comply with all the provision of
this chapter and the regulations adopted hereunder, including but not limited to the recycling and
reporting requirements set forth in § 205-13E of this chapter, all other applicable ordinances and
regulations of the Township, Act 97, Act 101 and any other applicable state, federal or local
provision of law.
Grant, suspension or revocation of collection privileges. The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan
Township shall have the right to refuse to allow a hauler to operate in Uwchlan Township if said
municipal waste collector, his or its agents, servants or employees fail to comply with any
provision of this chapter and the regulations adopted hereunder, and all other applicable
ordinances and regulation of the Township, Act 97, Act 101 and any other applicable state, federal
or local provision of law.
§ 205-14. Rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials by any municipal waste collector, including
but not limited to the municipal waste contractor, and the preparation for collection of municipal waste
and recyclable materials by persons, property owners and residents of the Township shall be made in
compliance with the regulations to be adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township to
carry out the intent and purpose of the Board of Supervisors and, when so approved, shall have the
same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter. The said rules and regulations may be
amended, modified or repealed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 205-15. Enforcement.
Unlawful conduct; public nuisance. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to
violate, cause to assist in the violation of any provision of this chapter, or violate, cause or assist in
the violation of any rule, regulation or resolution promulgated by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 218/620
[1]
B.
C.
D.
Penalties. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provisions of this chapter or of
the regulations adopted hereunder, or any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in
this chapter, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township. Each twenty-four period that a
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or
penalty. Upon a finding of liability for committing said violation, in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, the defendant shall pay the fine, plus all court costs, including
attorneys' fees. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of determination of a violation by a
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgement, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Injunction. In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter, Uwchlan Township may
institute a suit in equity where unlawful conduct or a public nuisance exists as defined in this
chapter for an injunction to restrain a violation of this chapter or any rules, regulations or resolution
promulgated or issued by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to this chapter.
Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this chapter shall be deemed
concurrent. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall not prevent the Township from
exercising any other remedy provided by this chapter or provided at law or equity.
§ 205-16. Construction.
The terms and provisions of this chapter are to be liberally construed so as to best achieve and
effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This chapter shall be construed in pari materia with Act 97,
Act 101 and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder.
Chapter 209. Speed-Timing Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 12-14-1981 by Ord. No.
81-02. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 209-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Speed-Timing Devices Ordinance of Uwchlan
Township."
§ 209-2. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in
Act 81 (Vehicle Code), Chapter 1, Section 102, Definitions, of the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, as supplemented and amended.
§ 209-3. Approval of use.
The Board of Supervisors hereby declares that it has approved the use of speed-timing devices to aid
in the enforcement of Uwchlan Township's speed restrictions.
§ 209-4. Devices specified.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 219/620
[1]
[1]
A.
The types of speed-timing devices which can be used shall be either mechanical or electrical timing
devices which are approved by the Department, as provided in 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368 (the Vehicle
Code). For example, and not by way of limitation, the Board of Supervisors specifically authorizes the
use of the Model TK 100, Excessive Speed Preventor, manufactured by Systems Innovation, Box 357,
Hallstead, Pennsylvania. The above speed-timing device was approved under the provisions of 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3368(d) by the Department on December 16, 1978.
§ 209-5. Enforcement.
The peace officers of Uwchlan Township are authorized and directed to use the approved speed-timing
devices to aid in the enforcement of the Township's speed restrictions.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Section 6, regarding posting of signs, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 10-8-1984 by Ord. No. 84-09.
Chapter 214. Stormwater Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 12-9-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-07.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 260.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Appendix A - Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small
Projects
Attachment 2 - Appendix B - Natural Hydrology Site Design Process
Attachment 3 - Appendix C - Runoff Coefficients and Curve Numbers
Attachment 4 - Appendix D - West Nile Virus Design Guidance
Attachment 5 - Appendix E - Stormwater Best Management Practices and Conveyances
Operation and Maintenance Agreement
Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Ch. 214, Stormwater Management, adopted 5-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-02, as amended.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 214-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Uwchlan Township's Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 214-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from land disturbance and
development throughout a watershed increases flooding, flows and velocities, contributes to
erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases
the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management
and flood reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces infiltration and
groundwater recharge, increases nonpoint source pollution to waterways, and threatens public
health and safety.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 220/620
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting from land disturbance and
development throughout a watershed can harm surface water resources by changing the natural
hydrologic patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of streambeds
and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating
aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, and
pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge.
A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including minimization of impacts of new
development, redevelopment, and other earth disturbance activities causing accelerated runoff
and erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of the municipality and all of the people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
Stormwater is an important water resource that provides infiltration and groundwater recharge for
water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by reducing the volume of stormwater
generated and by using project designs that maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain
high water quality, infiltration, stream baseflow, and aquatic ecosystems. Cost-effective and
environmentally sensitive stormwater management can be achieved through the use of
nonstructural site design techniques that minimize impervious surfaces, reduce disturbance of
land and natural resources, avoid sensitive areas (i.e., riparian buffers, floodplains, steep slopes,
wetlands, etc.), and consider topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential component in
successfully addressing stormwater.
Federal and state regulations require the municipality to implement a program of stormwater
controls. The municipality is required to obtain a permit and comply with its provisions for
stormwater discharges from its separate storm sewer system under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
Nonstormwater discharges to municipal or other storm sewer systems can contribute to pollution
of the waters of the commonwealth.
§ 214-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, safety and general welfare, property and water
quality by implementing drainage and stormwater management practices, criteria, and provisions
included herein for land development, construction and earth disturbance activities, to achieve the
following throughout the municipality:
Reduce the frequency and magnitude of flooding and stormwater impacts affecting people,
property, infrastructure and public services.
Sustain or improve the natural hydrologic characteristics and water quality of groundwater and
surface waters.
Protect natural resources, including riparian and aquatic living resources and habitats.
Maintain the natural hydrologic regime of land development sites and their receiving watersheds.
Minimize land disturbance and protect and incorporate natural hydrologic features, drainage
patterns, infiltration, and flow conditions within land development site designs.
Reduce and minimize the volume of stormwater generated, and manage and release stormwater
as close to the source of runoff as possible.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 221/620
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
Provide infiltration and maintain natural groundwater recharge to protect groundwater supplies and
stream baseflows, prevent degradation of surface water and groundwater quality, and to otherwise
protect water resources.
Reduce stormwater pollutant loads to protect and improve the chemical, physical, and biological
quality of ground and surface waters.
Reduce scour, erosion and sedimentation of stream channels.
Reduce flooding impacts and preserve and restore the natural flood-carrying capacity of streams
and their floodplains.
Protect adjacent and downgradient lands from adverse impacts of direct stormwater discharges.
Minimize impervious surfaces and connected impervious surfaces to promote infiltration and
reduce the volume and impacts of stormwater runoff.
Provide proper long-term operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater management
facilities, BMPs and conveyances that are implemented within the municipality.
Reduce the impacts of runoff from existing developed land undergoing redevelopment while
encouraging new development and redevelopment in urban areas and areas designated for
growth.
Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program that addresses nonstormwater
discharges.
Provide performance standards and design criteria based on watershed-based stormwater
management planning.
Provide standards to meet certain NPDES stormwater permit requirements.
Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore the existing and designated uses of the
waters of the commonwealth.
Implement the requirements of total maximum daily load (TMDLs) where applicable to waters
within or impacted by the municipality.
Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and management.
Fulfill the purpose and requirements of PA Act 167 (PA Act 167, Section 3):
"(1) Encourage planning and management of stormwater runoff in each watershed which is
consistent with sound water and land use practices.
(2) Authorize a comprehensive program of stormwater management designated to preserve
and restore the flood carrying capacity of Commonwealth streams; to preserve to the
maximum extent practicable natural stormwater runoff regimes and natural course, current
and cross-section of water of the Commonwealth; and to protect and conserve ground
waters and ground-water recharge areas.
(3) Encourage local administration and management of stormwater consistent with the
Commonwealth's duty as trustee of natural resources and the people's constitutional right
to the preservation of natural, economic, scenic, aesthetic, recreational and historic values
of the environment."
§ 214-4. Statutory authority.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 222/620
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
The municipality is empowered or required to regulate land use activities that affect runoff and surface
and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of:
Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167) 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Stormwater
Management Act (hereinafter referred to as "the Act");
Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.; and
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 hereinafter referred to as the "MPC").
§ 214-5. Applicability.
The following activities are regulated by this chapter:
All regulated activities as defined in this chapter including, but not limited to, new
development, redevelopment, and earth disturbance activities that are located within the
municipality shall be subject to regulation by this chapter.
When a building and/or grading permit is required for any regulated activity on an existing
parcel or approved lot created by a subdivision and/or improved as a land development
project, issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon adherence to the terms of this
chapter.
This chapter contains the stormwater management performance standards and design criteria
that are necessary from a watershed-based perspective. The municipality's stormwater
management conveyance and system design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by the
applicable municipal ordinance(s) and applicable state regulations, or as included in § 214-25
of this chapter.
Duty of persons engaged in a regulated activity. Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter,
including exemptions, any landowner or any person engaged in a regulated activity, including but
not limited to the alteration or development of land, which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics, shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to
health, safety, or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required to
manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which
otherwise adequately protects health, property, and water quality of waters of the commonwealth.
Phased and incremental project requirements.
Any regulated activity (including but not limited to new development, redevelopment, or earth
disturbance) that is to take place incrementally or in phases, or occurs in sequential projects
on the same parcel or property, shall be subject to regulation by this chapter if the cumulative
proposed impervious surface or earth disturbance exceeds the corresponding threshold for
exemption (as presented in Table 6.1 "Thresholds for Regulated Activities Exempt from
Chapter Provisions").[1]
Editor's Note: See § 214-6B.
The date of adoption of this chapter shall be the starting point from which to consider tracts as
parent tracts relative to future subdivisions, and from which impervious surface and earth
disturbance computations shall be cumulatively considered.
For example: If, after adoption of this chapter, an applicant proposes construction of a threehundred-
square-foot garage, that project would be exempted from the requirements of this
chapter as noted in Table 6.1. If, at a later date, an applicant proposes to construct a ninehundred-
square-foot room addition on the same property, the applicant would then be
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 223/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
required to implement the stormwater management and plan submission requirements of this
chapter for the cumulative total of 1,200 square feet of additional impervious surface added to
the property since adoption of this chapter.
§ 214-6. Exemptions and modified requirements.
Requirements for exempt activities.
An exemption from any requirement of this chapter shall not relieve the applicant from
implementing all other applicable requirements of this chapter or from implementing such
measures as are necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare, property and water
quality.
An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from complying with the requirements for statedesignated
special protection waters designated by PA DEP as high-quality (HQ) or
exceptional-value (EV) waters, or any other current or future state or municipal water quality
protection requirements.
An exemption under this chapter shall not relieve the applicant from complying with all other
applicable municipal ordinances or regulations.
General exemptions. Regulated activities that involve less than 400 square feet of proposed
impervious surfaces and less than 5,000 square feet of earth disturbance, or are listed in
Subsection C, are exempt from those (and only those) requirements of this chapter that are
included in the sections and articles listed in Table 6.1. Exemptions are for the items noted in
Table 6.1 only, and shall not relieve the landowner from other applicable requirements of this
chapter. Exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such measures as are
necessary to protect health, safety, welfare, property, and water quality.
TABLE 6.1
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Exempt from Chapter Provisions
Ordinance
Article/Section
Activities Listed
in § 214-6C
Less Than 400 Square
Feet of Proposed
Impervious Surfaces
and Less Than 5,000
Square Feet of
Proposed Earth
Disturbance
Equal to or Greater
Than 400 Square Feet
of Proposed
Impervious Surfaces
Or Equal to or Greater
Than 5,000 Square
Feet of Proposed
Earth Disturbance
Article I, General
Provisions
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Article II, Definitions Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Article III, §§ 214-16,
214-17 and 214-25 -
SWM Standards
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Article III, §§ 214-15,
214-18, 214-19, 214-20,
214-21, 214-22, 214-23
and 214-24 - SWM
Standards
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article IV, SWM Site
Plan Requirements
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 224/620
[1]
(1)
(2)
C.
TABLE 6.1
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Exempt from Chapter Provisions
Ordinance
Article/Section
Activities Listed
in § 214-6C
Less Than 400 Square
Feet of Proposed
Impervious Surfaces
and Less Than 5,000
Square Feet of
Proposed Earth
Disturbance
Equal to or Greater
Than 400 Square Feet
of Proposed
Impervious Surfaces
Or Equal to or Greater
Than 5,000 Square
Feet of Proposed
Earth Disturbance
Article V, Performance,
Inspection and As-
Builts
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VI, Fees and
Expenses
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VII, O&M and
Easements
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VIII, Prohibitions Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Article IX, Enforcement
and Penalties
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Other erosion, sediment
and pollution control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102 of the Pa. Code and other
applicable state and municipal codes, including the Clean Streams
Law.[1]
NOTES:
Specific activities listed in Subsection C are exempt from the indicated requirements, regardless
of size.
A proposed regulated activity must be less than both the proposed impervious surfaces and
proposed earth disturbance thresholds to be eligible for exemption from the requirements listed
in this table.
"Proposed impervious surface" - as defined in this chapter.
"Exempt" - Regulated activities are exempt from the requirements of listed section(s) only; all
other provisions of this chapter apply.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Exemptions for specific activities. The following specific regulated activities are exempt from the
requirements of §§ 214-15, 214-18, 214-19, 214-20, 214-21, 214-22, 214-23 and 214-24, and
Articles IV, V, VI and VII, of this chapter (as shown in Table 6.1), unless otherwise noted below. All
other conveyance and system design standards established by the municipality in other codes or
ordinances shall be required, and all other provisions of this chapter shall apply.
Emergency exemption: emergency maintenance work performed for the protection of public
health, safety and welfare. This exemption is limited to repair of the existing facility; upgrades,
additions or other improvements are not exempt. A written description of the scope and extent
of any emergency work performed shall be submitted to the municipality within two calendar
days of the commencement of the activity. A detailed plan shall be submitted no later than 30
days following commencement of the activity. If the municipality finds that the work is not an
emergency, then the work shall cease immediately and the requirements of this chapter shall
be addressed as applicable.
Maintenance: any maintenance to an existing stormwater management system, facility, BMP
or conveyance made in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Municipal
Engineer or municipality.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 225/620
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
D.
Existing landscaping: use of land for maintenance, replacement or enhancement of existing
landscaping.
Gardening: use of land for gardening for home consumption.
Agricultural related activities:
Agricultural activities (as defined in Article II), when performed in accordance with the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
Conservation practices (as defined in Article II) that do not involve construction of any
new or expanded impervious surfaces.
Forest management: forest management operations, which are consistent with a sound forest
management plan as filed with the municipality and which comply with the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection's management practices contained in its publication
"Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry" (as amended or replaced by
subsequent guidance). Such operations are required to have an erosion and sedimentation
control plan, which meets the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 and meets the
erosion and sediment control standards of § 214-17 of this chapter.
Maintenance of existing paved surfaces: Replacement of existing paved surfaces shall meet
the erosion and sediment control requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 and § 214-17 of
this chapter, and is exempt from all other requirements of this chapter listed in Subsection C
above. Resurfacing of existing paved surfaces is exempt from the requirements of this
chapter listed above. Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces shall comply with
all requirements of this chapter as indicated in Table 6.1.
Municipal roadway shoulder improvements: shoulder improvements conducted within the
existing roadway cross section of municipal-owned roadways, unless an NPDES permit is
required, in which case the proposed work must comply with all requirements of this chapter.
In-place replacement of residential dwelling unit: the replacement in the exact footprint of an
existing one- or two-family dwelling unit.
In-place replacement, repair, or maintenance of residential impervious surfaces: the
replacement of existing residential patios, decks, driveways, pools, garages, and/or sidewalks
that are accessory to an existing one- or two-family dwelling unit in the exact footprint of the
existing impervious surface.
Modified requirements for small projects. Regulated activities that involve 400 square feet to less
than 1,000 square feet of proposed impervious surfaces and less than 5,000 square feet of
proposed earth disturbance may apply the modified requirements presented in the "Simplified
Approach to Stormwater Management for Small Projects" (Simplified Approach) (Appendix A[2]) to
comply with the requirements of §§ 214-15, 214-18, 214-19, 214-20, 214-21, 214-22, 214-23 and
214-24, and Articles IV, V, VI and VII of this chapter (as shown in Table 6.2). The applicant shall
first contact the Municipal Engineer to confirm that the proposed project is eligible for use of the
Simplified Approach and is not otherwise exempt from these chapter provisions; to determine what
components of the proposed project are to be considered as impervious surfaces; and to
determine if other known site or local conditions exist that may preclude the use of any techniques
included in the Simplified Approach. Appendix A includes instructions and procedures for
preparation, submittal, review and approval of documents required when using the Simplified
Approach and shall be adhered to by the applicant. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply.
TABLE 6.2
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Eligible for "Modified" Requirements for Chapter
Provisions Listed Below
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 226/620
[2]
[3]
Ordinance Article/Section TABLEA c6t.i2vities Listed in § 214-6D
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Eligible for "Modified" Requirements for Chapter
Provisions Listed Below
Ordinance Article/Section Activities Listed in § 214-6D
Article I, General Provisions All provisions apply
Article II, Definitions All provisions apply
Article III, §§ 214-16 214-17 and 214-25 - SWM
Standards
All provisions apply
Article III, §§ 214-15, 214-18, 214-19, 214-20,
214-21, 214-22, 214-23 and 214-24 - SWM
Standards
Exempt if modified requirements of § 214-6D
are applied
Article IV, SWM Site Plan Requirements Exempt if modified requirements of § 214-6D
are applied
Article V, Performance, Inspection and As-
Builts
Exempt if modified requirements of § 214-6D
are applied
Article VI, Fees and Expenses Exempt if modified requirements of § 214-6D
are applied
Article VII, O&M and Easements Exempt if modified requirements of § 214-6D
are applied
Article VIII, Prohibitions All provisions apply
Article IX, Enforcement and Penalties All provisions apply
Other erosion, sediment and pollution control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102 of the
Pa. Code and other applicable state and
municipal codes, including the Clean Streams
Law.[3]
NOTES:
"Modified Requirements" - Regulated activities listed within the subsections of this chapter noted
in Table 6.2 are eligible for exemption only from the indicated sections and subsections of this
chapter and only if the modified requirements of Subsection D are met to the satisfaction of the
municipality; all other provisions of this chapter apply.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 214-7. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the municipality inconsistent with any of the provisions of this
chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 214-8. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter is for any reason found to be unconstitutional,
illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared the
intent of the governing body of the municipality that this chapter would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision, sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included
herein.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 227/620
A.
B.
C.
A.
[1]
B.
A.
B.
§ 214-9. Compatibility with other ordinances or legal
requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure and comply with other required permits or approvals for activities regulated
by any other applicable code, rule, act, law, regulation, or ordinance.
To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater
management than any other code, rule, act, law, regulation or ordinance, the specific requirements
contained in this chapter shall take precedence.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the municipality's requirements
regarding stormwater matters that do not conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local
stormwater management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design
and details, outlet structure design, etc.). The requirements of this chapter shall supersede any
conflicting requirements in other municipal ordinances or regulations.
§ 214-10. Financial security.
For all activities requiring submittal of a stormwater management (SWM) site plan that involve
subdivision or land development, the applicant shall post financial security to the municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management facilities as required by the
approved SWM site plan and this chapter, and such financial security shall:
Be equal to or greater than the full construction cost of the required facilities except to the extent
that financial security for the cost of any of such improvements is required to be and is posted with
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in connection with a highway occupancy permit
application; and
Be determined, collected, applied and enforced in accordance with Sections 509 through 511 of
the MPC and the provisions of the municipality's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(SALDO).[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509 through 10511 and Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land
Development, respectively.
§ 214-11. Waivers.
General. The requirements of this chapter are essential and shall be strictly adhered to. For any
regulated activity where, after a close evaluation of alternative site designs, it proves to be
impracticable to meet any one or more of the mandatory minimum standards of this chapter on the
site, the municipality may approve measures other than those in this chapter, subject to
Subsections B and C.
The governing body shall have the authority to waive or modify the requirements of one or more
provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of the chapter is observed. Cost or financial
burden shall not be considered a hardship. Modification may also be considered if an alternative
standard or approach can be demonstrated to provide equal or better achievement of the results
intended by the chapter. A request for modification shall be in writing and accompany the SWM
site plan submission. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts on which the request is
based, the provision or provisions of the chapter involved and the minimum modification
necessary.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 228/620
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
PA DEP approval required. For any proposed regulated activity involving earth disturbance equal
to or greater than one acre, the municipality may approve measures for minimum volume and
infiltration control other than those required in this chapter only after consultation with and
evaluation by PA DEP that the alternate site design meets state water quality requirements and
does not conflict with state law, including, but not limited to, the PA Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S.
§ 691.1 et seq.
§ 214-12. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or erroneous information
provided by an applicant is void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work
undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
Article II. Definitions
§ 214-13. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender;
and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example, but is intended
to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
The word "person" includes an individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation,
firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. Whenever used in any section
prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "person" shall include the members of a partnership,
the officers, members, servants and agents of an association, officers, agents and servants of a
corporation, and the officers of a municipality.
The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.
The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed, maintained, or arranged to
be used, occupied, or maintained."
The definitions in this chapter are for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and
have no bearing on other municipal regulations or ordinances.
§ 214-14. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY
Activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and
animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, plowing,
disking, harrowing, planting or harvesting crops; or pasturing and raising of livestock; and
installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 229/620
A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the municipality for
approval to engage in any regulated activity as defined in this chapter.
AS-BUILT PLANS (DRAWINGS)
Engineering or site plans or drawings that document the actual locations, dimensions and
elevations of the improvements, and building components, and changes made to the original
design plans. The final version of these documents, or a copy of same, are signed and sealed by
a qualified licensed professional and submitted to the municipality at the completion of the project,
as per the requirements of § 214-33 of this chapter as "final as-built plans."
BANKFULL
The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASEFLOW
Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the sustained discharge that does not
result from direct runoff or from water diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other
human activities.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE)
Activities, facilities, designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to provide water quality treatment, infiltration, volume reduction, and/or peak
rate control, to promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this
chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped in to one of two broad categories or measures:
"structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with
stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include,
but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices from large-scale retention ponds and
constructed wetlands to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or
forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater
BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the site.
BUFFER
See "riparian buffer."
CARBONATE GEOLOGY or CARBONATE ROCK FORMATIONS
See "karst."
CFS
Cubic feet per second.
CHANNEL
A natural or artificial open drainage feature that conveys, continuously or periodically, flowing
water and through which stormwater flows. Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural
and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly full.
CN
Curve number.
COMMONWEALTH
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT
The Chester County Conservation District.
CONSERVATION PLAN
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 230/620
A plan written by a planner certified by NRCS that identifies conservation practices and includes
site-specific BMPs for agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy use areas.
CONSERVATION PRACTICES
Practices installed on agricultural lands to improve farmland, soil and/or water quality which have
been identified in a current conservation plan.
CONVEYANCE
A natural or man-made, existing or proposed facility, feature or channel used for the transportation
or transmission of stormwater from one place to another. For the purposes of this chapter,
conveyance shall include pipes, drainage ditches, channels and swales (vegetated and other),
gutters, stream channels, and like facilities or features.
DESIGN STORM
The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION BASIN
An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff
and releasing it at a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely shortly
after any given rainfall event.
DETENTION or TO DETAIN
Capture and temporary storage of runoff in a stormwater management facility for release at a
controlled rate.
DETENTION VOLUME
The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the waters of the commonwealth at a
controlled rate.
DEVELOPER
A person who seeks to undertake any regulated activities at a site in the municipality.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH)
The outside bark diameter of a tree at breast height which is defined as 4.5 feet above the ground
surface at the point of highest elevation in contact with the trunk of the tree.
DISTURBED AREA
Land area disturbed by or where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DRAINAGE AREA
That land area contributing runoff to a single point (including but not limited to the point/line of
interest used for hydrologic and hydraulic calculations) and that is enclosed by a natural or manmade
ridgeline.
EARTH DISTURBANCE or EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not
limited to, clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; land
development; building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock,
or earth materials.
EASEMENT
A right of use granted by a landowner to allow a grantee the use of the designated portion of land
for a specified purpose, such as for stormwater management or other drainage purposes.
EROSION
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 231/620
The process by which the surface of the land, including water/stream channels, is worn away by
water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN
A plan required by the Conservation District or the municipality to minimize accelerated erosion
and sedimentation, and that must be prepared and approved per the applicable requirements.
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD
A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land areas from rainfall or the overflow
of streams, rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN
The low area adjoining and including any water- or drainagecourse or body of water subject to
periodic flooding or overflow. The limits of a floodplain shall be those areas identified in the current
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and accompanying maps prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), including all digital data developed as part of the FIS. In the
absence of such maps, the floodplain shall be determined through the mapping of alluvial soils as
determined by the current United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) soil survey.
FLOODWAY
The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably
required to carry and discharge the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA.
In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year
floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the
center line of the stream and to 50 feet beyond the top of the bank of the stream on both sides.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATION
Planning and activities necessary for the management of forestlands. These include timber
inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging
road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD
A vertical distance between the design high-water elevation and the elevation of the top of a dam,
levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or
basin.
GEOTEXTILE
A fabric manufactured from synthetic fiber that is used to achieve specific objectives, including
infiltration, separation between different types of media (i.e., between soil and stone), or filtration.
GOVERNING BODY
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township.
GRADE/GRADING
1. (noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground, specified in percent and shown on
plans as specified herein. 2. (verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment,
or the bottom of an excavation.
GROUNDWATER
Water that occurs in the subsurface and fills or saturates the porous openings, fractures and
fissures of underground soils and rock units.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 232/620
The replenishment of existing natural groundwater supplies from infiltration of rain or overland
flow.
HEC-1
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) hydrologic runoff
model.
HEC-HMS
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) hydrologic modeling
system (HMS).
HOTSPOT
Area where prior or existing land use or activities can potentially generate highly contaminated
runoff with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME
The hydrologic system, cycle or balance that sustains the quality and quantity of stormwater,
stream baseflow, storage, and groundwater supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG)
A classification of soils by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) into four runoff
potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little
runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it prevents or is
resistant to infiltration of water, including but not limited to: structures such as roofs, buildings,
storage sheds; other solid, paved or concrete areas such as streets, driveways, sidewalks, parking
lots, patios, paver areas, swimming pools (including the water surface), tennis or other paved
courts; or athletic playfields comprised of synthetic turf materials. For the purposes of determining
compliance with this chapter, compacted soils or stone surfaces used for vehicle parking and
movement shall be considered impervious. Surfaces that were designed to allow infiltration (i.e.,
areas of porous pavement) will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Municipal Engineer,
based on appropriate documentation and condition of the material.
INFILTRATION
Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the
atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION FACILITY
A stormwater BMP designed to collect and discharge runoff into the subsurface in a manner that
allows infiltration into underlying soils and groundwater (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, or
seepage trenches, etc.).
INTERMITTENT STREAM
A defined channel in which surface water is absent during a portion of the year, in response to
seasonal variations in precipitation or groundwater discharge.
INVERT
The lowest surface, the floor or bottom of a culvert, pipe, drain, sewer, channel, basin, BMP, or
orifice.
KARST
A type of topography that is formed over limestone or other carbonate rock formations by
dissolving or solution of the rock by water, and that is characterized by closed depressions,
sinkholes, caves, a subsurface network of solution conduits and fissures through which
groundwater moves, and no perennial surface drainage features.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 233/620
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any
purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features.
A subdivision of land.
LANDOWNER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to
purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if they are
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in the land.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL
A Pennsylvania registered professional engineer, registered landscape architect, registered
professional land surveyor, or registered professional geologist, or any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State and qualified by law to perform the work required by the
chapter within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LIMITING ZONE
A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or underlying strata that includes one of the following:
A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional, determined by direct observation of
the water table or indicated by other subsurface or soil conditions.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of loose rock fragments,
including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill the voids between the fragments.
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition that is so slowly permeable that it effectively
limits downward passage of water.
MAINTENANCE
The action taken to restore or preserve the as-built functional design of any facility or system.
MFEMP
Mushroom farm environmental management plan.
MPC
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247.
MS4
Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER
A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed
as the engineer for a municipality, planning agency, or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY
Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 234/620
NEW DEVELOPMENT
Any regulated activity involving placement or construction of new impervious surface or grading
over existing pervious land areas not classified as redevelopment as defined in this chapter.
NOAA
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION
Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES
Water flowing in stormwater collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of
a rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMPs)
See "best management practice (BMP)."
NPDES
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal government's system for issuance of
permits under the Clean Water Act,[1] which is delegated to PA DEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS
Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service, SCS), an agency
of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
PA DEP
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARENT TRACT
The parcel of land from which a land development or subdivision originates, determined from the
date of municipal adoption of this chapter.
PEAK DISCHARGE
The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.
PennDOT
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PENNSYLVANIA STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES MANUAL (PA DEP BMP
MANUAL)
Document No. 363-0300-002 (December 2006, and as subsequently amended).
PERVIOUS SURFACE or PERVIOUS AREA
Any area not defined as impervious surface.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of Uwchlan Township.
POINT SOURCE
Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch,
channel, tunnel, or conduit from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pennsylvania Code § 92a.l.
POSTCONSTRUCTION
Period after construction during which disturbed areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in
place and functioning, and all proposed improvements approved by the municipality are
completed.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 235/620
PREDEVELOPMENT
Land cover conditions assumed to exist within the proposed disturbed area prior to
commencement of the regulated activity for the purpose of calculating the predevelopment water
quality volume, infiltration volume, and peak flow rates as required in this chapter.
PRETREATMENT
Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide storage or filtering, or other methods to trap
or remove coarse materials and other pollutants before they enter the stormwater system, but may
not necessarily be designed to meet the entire water quality volume requirements of this chapter.
PROPOSED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
All new, additional and replacement impervious surfaces.
RAINFALL INTENSITY
The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of time.
RECHARGE
The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration of rainfall, other surface waters, or land
application of water or treated wastewater.
REDEVELOPMENT
Any regulated activity that involves demolition, removal, reconstruction, or replacement of existing
impervious surface(s).
REGULATED ACTIVITY
Any earth disturbance activity(ies) or any activity that involves the alteration or development of
land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
Any activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pennsylvania Code
Chapters 92a, 102, or the Clean Streams Law.[2]
RETENTION BASIN
An impoundment that is designed to temporarily detain a certain amount of stormwater from a
catchment area and which may be designed to permanently retain stormwater runoff from the
catchment area; retention basins always contain water.
RETENTION or TO RETAIN
The prevention of direct discharge of stormwater runoff into surface waters or water bodies during
or after a storm event by permanent containment in a pond or depression; examples include
systems which discharge by percolation to groundwater, exfiltration, and/or evaporation processes
and which generally have residence times of less than three days.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF
The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD
The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected
to occur one time. For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to
occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a twenty-fiveyear
storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
RIPARIAN
Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent to the banks of a stream or other
body of water.
RIPARIAN BUFFER
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 236/620
An undeveloped area of land adjacent to a body of water wherein existing or new vegetation is
located and maintained to protect the integrity of stream channels and shorelines, to reduce the
impact of upland sources of pollution by trapping, filtering, and converting sediments, nutrients,
and other chemicals, and to supply food, cover and thermal protection to fish and other aquatic
species and wildlife.
RUNOFF
Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO
See Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.[3]
SCS
Soil Conservation Service, now known as the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
SEDIMENT
Soil or other materials transported by, suspended in or deposited by surface water as a product of
erosion.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) primarily used
for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW
A flow process associated with broad, shallow water movement on sloping ground surfaces that is
not channelized or concentrated.
SITE
Total area of land in the municipality where any proposed regulated activity, as defined in this
chapter, is planned, conducted, or maintained or that is otherwise impacted by the regulated
activity.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD
A method of runoff computation developed by NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land
use/cover to a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under
Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.[4]
STORM FREQUENCY
See "return period."
STORMWATER
Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY
Any feature, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate, or quantity. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open
channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN
The plan prepared by the applicant or its representative, in accordance with the requirements of
Article IV of this chapter, indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at a particular site in
accordance with this chapter, and including all necessary design drawings, calculations,
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 237/620
supporting text, and documentation to demonstrate that chapter requirements have been met,
herein referred to as "SWM site plan." All references in this chapter to "final" or "approved" SWM
site plans shall incorporate the approved SWM site plan and all subsequent approved revisions
thereto.
STREAM
A natural watercourse.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
See "BMP (best management practices)."
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land as defined in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 (as amended).[5]
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, PA, as
amended.[6]
SWALE
An artificial or natural waterway or low-lying stretch of land that gathers and conveys stormwater
or runoff, and is generally vegetated for soil stabilization, stormwater pollutant removal, and
infiltration.
SWM SITE PLAN
See "stormwater management site plan."
TIMBER OPERATIONS
See "forest management."
TOP-OF-BANK
Highest point of elevation of the bank of a stream or channel cross section at which a rising water
level just begins to flow out of the channel and into the floodplain.
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE
A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED
Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the
boundaries of the commonwealth, as determined by the criteria promulgated from time to time by
the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
WATER TABLE
The uppermost level of saturation of pore space or fractures by groundwater. "Seasonal high
water table" refers to a water table that rises and falls with the seasons due either to natural or
man-made causes.
WETLAND
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 238/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include
swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WOODS
Any land area of at least 0.25 acre with a natural or naturalized ground cover (excluding
manicured turf grass) and that has an average density of two or more viable trees per 1,500
square feet with a DBH of six inches or greater and where such trees existed at any time within
three years of the time of land development application submission of the proposed project. The
land area to be considered "woods" shall be measured from the outer driplines of the outer trees.
Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
Article III. Stormwater Management Standards
§ 214-15. General requirements.
Applicants proposing regulated activities in the municipality which are not exempt under § 214-6
shall submit a stormwater management site plan (SWM site plan) to the municipality for review
and approval in accordance with Articles III and IV. SWM site plans approved by the municipality
shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
The stormwater management and runoff control criteria and standards in this chapter shall apply
to the total proposed regulated activity, even if it is to take place in stages. The measurement of
impervious surfaces shall include all of the impervious surfaces in the total proposed regulated
activity even if the development is to take place in stages.
No regulated activity within the municipality shall commence until:
The municipality issues approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates compliance with
the requirements of this chapter; and
The applicant has received a letter of adequacy or approval for the erosion and sediment
control plan review by the municipality and the Conservation District (if required), and has
received all other local, state and federal permit approvals required for the project involving
the regulated activity.
Neither submission of a SWM site plan under the provisions herein nor compliance with the
provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any person or
property otherwise imposed by law.
The applicant shall design the site to minimize disturbances to land, site hydrology, and natural
resources, and to maintain the natural hydrologic regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions.
The applicant shall apply the procedures set forth in § 214-18 for the overall site design and for
selection, location and design of features and BMPs to be used to comply with the requirements of
this chapter.
To the maximum extent practicable, postconstruction stormwater shall be discharged within the
drainage area of the same stream or water body receiving the runoff prior to construction of the
proposed regulated activity.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 239/620
G.
H.
I.
[1]
J.
[2]
K.
L.
M.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
N.
For regulated activities with one acre or more of proposed earth disturbance, existing drainage
peak rate discharges up to and including the one-hundred-year storm onto or through adjacent
property(ies) or downgradient property(ies), including diffuse drainage discharge, shall not be
altered in any manner without written permission from, and, where applicable as determined by
the municipality an easement and agreement with, the affected landowner(s) for conveyance of
discharges onto or through their property(ies). Such discharge shall be subject to any applicable
discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated activity) that drain through a
proposed site are not subject to water quality and volume control, infiltration, stream channel
protection, or peak flow rate control requirements (as presented in §§ 214-19, 214-20, 214-21, and
214-22). Drainage facilities located on the site shall be designed to safely convey flows from
outside of the site through the site.
If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from limited portions of the disturbed area for achieving
water quality volume control standards, stream channel protection standards, and the two-, five-,
and ten-year storm event peak runoff rate reduction standards for new development required by
this chapter, the applicant shall propose alternate methods to mitigate the bypass of the BMPs,
subject to the approval of the Municipal Engineer. In no case shall resulting peak rate be greater
than the predevelopment peak rate for the equivalent design storm.
For all regulated activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed, implemented,
operated, and maintained during the regulated activities (i.e., during construction) as required to
meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter, to meet the erosion and sediment control
requirements of the municipality, if applicable, and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
For all regulated activities, permanent BMPs and conveyances shall be designed, implemented,
operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the
Stormwater Management Act.[2]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq. and 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., respectively.
The design of all BMPs and conveyances shall incorporate sound engineering principles and
practices in a manner that does not aggravate existing stormwater problems as identified by the
municipality. The municipality reserves the right to disapprove any design that would result in
construction in an area affected by existing stormwater problem(s) or continuation of an existing
stormwater problem(s).
Existing wetlands, either on the site or on an adjacent property, shall not be used to meet the
minimum design requirements for stormwater management or stormwater runoff quality treatment.
Stormwater discharges to existing wetlands shall not degrade the quality or hydrologic integrity of
the wetland.
Hotspots runoff controls. Specific structural or pollution prevention practices may be required, as
determined to be necessary by the Municipal Engineer, to pretreat runoff from hotspots prior to
infiltration. Following is a list of examples of hotspots:
Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities;
Vehicle fueling stations;
Vehicle service and maintenance facilities;
Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities;
Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.);
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 240/620
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
O.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
Industrial sites based on Standard Industrial Classification Codes;
Marinas (service and maintenance areas);
Outdoor liquid container storage;
Outdoor loading/unloading facilities;
Public works storage areas;
Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials;
Commercial container nursery;
Contaminated sites/brownfields;
Other land uses and activities as designated by the municipality.
Contaminated and brownfield sites. Where BMPs may contribute to the migration of contaminants
in groundwater, the water quality and runoff volume, stream channel protection, and peak rate
control standards shall be met; however, at the Municipal Engineer's discretion, the minimum
infiltration requirement may be reduced or eliminated commensurate with the contaminated area
and the required water quality and runoff control measures may be increased to mitigate the
reduced infiltration requirement for the contaminated area.
Additional water quality requirements. The municipality may require additional stormwater control
measures for stormwater discharges to special management areas including, but not limited to:
Water bodies listed as "impaired" by PA DEP.
Any water body or watershed with an approved total maximum daily load (TMDL).
Areas of known existing flooding problems.
Critical areas with sensitive resources (e.g., state-designated special protection waters, coldwater
fisheries, carbonate geology or other groundwater recharge areas that may be highly
vulnerable to contamination, drainage areas to water supply reservoirs, etc.).
Applicants shall utilize the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (PA
BMP Manual), as amended, or other sources acceptable to the Municipal Engineer, for testing and
design standards for BMPs, and where there is a conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the
most restrictive applies.
For areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology that may be susceptible to the formation of
sinkholes and other karst features, the location, type, and design of infiltration BMPs shall be
based on a site evaluation conducted by a qualified licensed professional and based on the PA
BMP Manual or other design guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
All regulated activities located within a special flood hazard area designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) shall comply with § 510 of the Uwchlan Township
Zoning Ordinance, as amended, and shall be designed to maintain the flood-carrying capacity of
the floodway such that the base flood elevations are not increased, either upstream or
downstream. The natural conveyance characteristics of the site and the receiving floodplain shall
be incorporated into the stormwater management practices proposed for the site.
Disturbance of existing ground cover during construction of the proposed regulated activity is
prohibited within 50 feet of top-of-bank of all perennial and intermittent waterways, water bodies
(lakes, ponds, etc.) and wetlands, except for activities otherwise approved by state or local
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 241/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
agencies (e.g., stream restoration projects, road crossings, subsurface utility projects, etc.). At the
Municipal Engineer's discretion, and with Conservation District and PA DEP approval where
necessary, the nondisturbance buffer may be reduced because of setback or other site
constraints, but never be less than 10 feet.
§ 214-16. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
The following permit or other regulatory requirements may apply to certain regulated activities and
shall be met prior to (or as a condition of) final approval by the municipality of the SWM site plan and
prior to commencement of any regulated activities, as applicable:
All regulated activities subject to permit or regulatory requirements by PA DEP under regulations
at Title 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, or erosion and sediment control requirements of the
municipality.
Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by PA DEP under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code,
Chapter 105.
Any BMP or conveyance that would be located in or adjacent to surface waters of the
commonwealth, including wetlands, subject to permit by PA DEP under Title 25 Pennsylvania
Code, Chapter 105.
Any BMP or conveyance that would be located on or discharge to a state highway right-of-way, or
require access to or from a state highway and be subject to approval by PennDOT.
Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must pass or convey flows from the
tributary area and any facility which may constitute a dam subject to permit by PA DEP under Title
25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 105.
§ 214-17. Erosion and sediment control.
No regulated activity within the municipality shall commence until:
The municipality receives documentation that the applicant has received:
A "letter of adequacy" from the Conservation District or other approval from PA DEP in
compliance with Title 25, Chapter 102, of the Pennsylvania Code of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities, if applicable;
A PA DEP NPDES Construction Activities Permit as required under Title 25 Pennsylvania
Code Chapter 92a, if applicable;
Evidence of any other permit(s) or approvals required for the regulated activities; and
An erosion and sediment control plan has been approved by the municipality, if required.
A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required permit(s), as required by PA
DEP regulations, shall be available on the site at all times.
Additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be applied where infiltration BMPs are
proposed, at a minimum including those required in § 214-20M.
§ 214-18. Site design process.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 242/620
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(8)
C.
The applicant shall design the site to minimize the disturbances to land, site hydrology, and natural
resources, and to maintain the natural hydrologic regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions. For
regulated activities with 10,000 or more square feet of proposed earth disturbance or 2,000 or more
square feet of proposed impervious surfaces, the applicant shall demonstrate in its SWM site plan (as
required in § 214-27C) that the design sequence, objectives and techniques described below were
applied to the maximum extent practicable in the site design of the regulated activity while complying
with all other requirements of this chapter. The site design shall:
First, identify and delineate all existing natural resources and natural and man-made hydrologic
features listed in § 214-27B(8) that are located within the site, or receive discharge from, or may
be impacted by, the proposed regulated activity.
Second, provide a prioritized listing of these resources and features to identify:
Those to be incorporated into the site design in a manner that provides protection from any
disturbance or impact from the proposed regulated activity;
Those to be protected from further disturbance or impact but for which the proposed regulated
activity will provide improvement to existing conditions;
Those that can be incorporated into and utilized as components of the overall site design in a
manner that protects or improves their existing conditions while utilizing their hydrologic
function within the limits of their available capacity (e.g., for infiltration, evapotranspiration, or
reducing pollutant loads, runoff volume or peak discharge rates, etc.) to reduce the need for
or size of constructed BMPs; and
Those that may be considered for alteration, disturbance or removal.
Third, develop the site design to achieve the following:
Recognize and incorporate the priorities identified in § 214-18B as the basis for the proposed
site layout, grading, construction, and permanent ground cover design;
Minimize earth disturbance (both surface and subsurface);
Maximize protection of or improvement to natural resources and special management areas;
Minimize the disturbance of natural site hydrology, in particular natural drainage features and
patterns, discharge points and flow characteristics, natural infiltration patterns and
characteristics, and natural channel and floodplain conveyance capacity;
Incorporate natural hydrologic features and functions identified in § 214-18B into the site
design to protect and utilize those features and their hydrologic functions to reduce the need
for or size of constructed BMPs;
Maximize infiltration and the use of natural site infiltration features, patterns and conditions,
and evapotranspiration features;
Apply selective grading design methods to provide final grading patterns or preserve existing
topography in order to evenly distribute runoff and minimize concentrated flows;
Minimize the cumulative area to be covered by impervious surfaces; and:
Minimize the size of individual impervious surfaces;
Separate large impervious surfaces into smaller components;
Disconnect runoff from one impervious surface to another; and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 243/620
(d)
(9)
(10)
(a)
(b)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(12)
(13)
[1]
(14)
D.
A.
B.
C.
Utilize porous materials in place of impervious wherever practicable;
Minimize the volume and peak discharge rates of stormwater generated;
Avoid or minimize stormwater runoff pollutant loads and receiving stream channel erosion;
Locate infiltration and other BMPs:
At or as near to the source of generation as possible; and
At depths that are as shallow as possible;
Prioritize the selection and design of BMPs as follows:
Nonstructural and vegetation BMPs; then
Structural (surface and subsurface) BMPs;
For flow volumes requiring conveyance from the source of generation to a BMP for
management, give preference to open channel conveyance techniques that provide infiltration
and water quality benefits, and landscape-based management in common open space areas,
where practicable; and
Consider additional guidance for incorporating natural hydrology into the site and BMP
designs, methods and techniques that support the objectives of § 214-18B and C. Appendix B
presents additional discussion of natural hydrology site design and sources of information for
conservation design, low-impact design, and sustainable design.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
The procedures set forth above shall be utilized to the maximum extent practicable for the overall
site design and selection, location and design of features and BMPs to be used to comply with the
requirements of §§ 214-19, 214-20, 214-21 and 214-22.
§ 214-19. Water quality and runoff volume requirements.
To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated activities and meet state water quality
requirements, BMPs shall be provided in the site design that replicate predevelopment stormwater
infiltration and runoff conditions, such that postconstruction stormwater discharges do not degrade the
physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. The applicant shall comply with
the following water quality and runoff volume requirements for all regulated activities, including all new
development and redevelopment activities:
The postconstruction total runoff volume shall not exceed the predevelopment total runoff volume
for all storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation (design
storm). The water quality and runoff volume to be managed shall consist of any runoff volume
generated by the proposed regulated activity over and above the predevelopment total runoff
volume and shall be captured and permanently retained or infiltrated on the site. Permanent
retention options may include, but are not limited to, reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and
infiltration.
For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions shall be determined using
the corresponding ground cover assumptions presented in § 214-23D of this chapter.
The design of the facility outlet shall provide for protection from clogging and unwanted
sedimentation.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 244/620
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
BMPs that moderate the temperature of stormwater shall be used to protect the temperature of
receiving waters.
Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction with achieving the infiltration
requirements of § 214-20. The infiltration volume required under § 214-20 may be included as a
component of the water quality volume. If the calculated water quality and runoff volume is greater
than the volume infiltrated, then the difference between the two volumes shall be managed for
water quality and runoff volume control through other techniques or practices but shall not be
discharged from the site.
Runoff from the disturbed area shall be treated for water quality prior to entering existing
waterways or water bodies. If a stormwater management practice does not provide water quality
treatment, then water quality BMPs shall be utilized to provide pretreatment prior to the runoff
entering the stormwater management practice.
The municipality may require additional water quality and runoff control measures for stormwater
discharging to special management areas such as those listed in § 214-15P.
When the regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage areas, the water quality and
runoff volume shall be separately addressed for each drainage area.
Weighted averaging of runoff coefficients shall not be used for manual computations or input data
for water quality and runoff volume calculations.
Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated activity) may be excluded
from the calculation of the water quality and runoff volume requirements.
Water quality and volume control practices shall be selected and designed to meet the criteria of
§ 214-18C that apply to water quality and volume control.
§ 214-20. Infiltration requirements.
Providing for infiltration consistent with the natural hydrologic regime is required to compensate for the
reduction in the recharge that occurs when the ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is
created or expanded. The applicant shall achieve the following infiltration requirements:
Wherever possible, infiltration should be designed to accommodate the entire water quality and
runoff volume required in § 214-19.
For regulated activities involving new development, the volume of a minimum of one inch of runoff
from all proposed impervious surfaces shall be infiltrated.
For regulated activities involving redevelopment, whichever is less of the following volume options
shall be infiltrated:
The volume of a minimum of one inch of runoff from all proposed impervious surfaces; or
The total water quality and runoff volume required in § 214-19 of this chapter.
If the requirements of § 214-20B or C cannot be physically accomplished, then the applicant shall
be responsible for demonstrating with data or calculations to the satisfaction of the Municipal
Engineer why this infiltration volume cannot be physically accomplished on the site (e.g., shallow
depth to bedrock or limiting zone, open voids, steep slopes, etc.) and what alternative volume can
be infiltrated; however in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of runoff volume shall be infiltrated.
Only if a minimum of at least 0.5 inch infiltration requirement cannot be physically accomplished
on the site shall a waiver from § 214-20 be considered by the municipality. Waivers shall follow the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 245/620
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
K.
procedures in § 214-11.
If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from portions of the impervious surfaces, the infiltration
volume for the remaining area shall be increased an equivalent amount to offset the loss.
When a project contains or is divided by multiple watersheds, the infiltration volume shall be
separately addressed for each watershed.
Existing impervious surfaces located in areas outside of the site (i.e., outside of the regulated
activity) may be excluded from the calculation of the required infiltration volume.
A detailed soils evaluation of the site shall be conducted by a qualified professional and at a
minimum shall address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, and subgrade stability. The general
process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be conducted by a qualified licensed professional
and shall be consistent with the PA BMP Manual (as amended) (or other guidance acceptable to
the Municipal Engineer) and in general shall:
Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made features within the site to
determine general areas of suitability for infiltration practices. In areas where development on
fill material is under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of subgrade stability;
infiltration may not be ruled out without conducting these tests.
Provide field tests such as double-ring infiltrometer or other hydraulic conductivity tests (at the
elevation of the proposed infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate hydraulic
conductivity rate. Standard septic/sewage percolation tests are not acceptable for design
purposes.
Design the infiltration facility for the required retention (infiltration) volume based on fielddetermined
infiltration capacity (and apply safety factor as per applicable design guidelines) at
the elevation of the proposed infiltration surface.
On-lot infiltration features are encouraged; however, it shall be demonstrated to the Municipal
Engineer that the soils are conducive to infiltration on the identified lots.
Infiltration BMPs shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions and shall be
constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:
A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the BMP and the top of the limiting
zone. Additional depth may be required in areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology (see
§ 214-20N).
An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional stormwater volume and drain completely
as determined by field tests conducted by the applicant.
The infiltration facility shall completely drain the retention (infiltration) volume within three
days (72 hours) from the end of the design storm.
All infiltration practices shall:
Be selected and designed to meet the criteria of § 214-18C that are applicable to infiltration;
Be set back at least 10 feet from all buildings and features with subgrade elements (e.g.,
basements, foundation walls, etc.), unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer;
Be set back at least five feet from all property lines;
For any infiltration practice that collects runoff from shared or multiple features and that is
located within 15 feet of a building or feature with subgrade elements (e.g., basements,
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 246/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
(1)
T.
foundation walls, etc.), the bottom elevation shall be set below the elevation of the subgrade
element.
Infiltration facilities shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be located to avoid introducing
contaminants to groundwater:
When a hotspot is located in the area draining to a proposed infiltration facility, an evaluation
of the potential of groundwater contamination from the proposed infiltration facility shall be
performed, including a hydrogeologic investigation (if necessary) by a qualified licensed
professional to determine what, if any, pretreatment or additional design considerations are
needed to protect groundwater quality.
When located within a "wellhead protection area" of a public water supply well, infiltration
practices shall be in conformance with the applicable approved source water protection
assessment or source water protection plan.
The applicant shall provide appropriate safeguards against groundwater contamination for
land uses that may cause groundwater contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
During site construction, all infiltration practice components shall be protected from compaction
due to heavy equipment operation or storage of fill or construction material. Infiltration areas shall
also be protected from sedimentation. Areas that are accidentally compacted or graded shall be
remediated to restore soil composition and porosity. Adequate documentation to this effect shall
be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for review. All areas designated for infiltration shall not
receive runoff until the contributory drainage area has achieved final stabilization.
Consideration of infiltration BMPs for areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology is
encouraged, but only where the design, supporting calculations, results of soils or other site
investigations or other documentation are provided to the municipality demonstrating that the
potential or likelihood of subsidence or sinkholes is minimal. Evaluation of site conditions and
infiltration design shall rely on guidance in the PA BMP Manual (as amended) or other guidance
acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
Groundwater quality of the carbonate aquifer shall be protected from infiltration of pollutants. At a
minimum, stormwater runoff from hotspots (i.e., sources of significant pollutant runoff) shall first be
discharged through a water quality BMP(s) to remove pollutants prior to infiltration. Where soil
characteristics are insufficient to provide removal of pollutants from sources other than hotspots,
stormwater runoff shall first be discharged through a water quality BMP(s) to remove pollutants
prior to infiltration.
Where sediment transport in the stormwater runoff is anticipated to reach the infiltration system,
appropriate permanent measures to prevent or collect sediment shall be installed prior to
discharge to the infiltration system.
Where roof drains are designed to discharge to infiltration practices, they shall have appropriate
measures to prevent clogging by unwanted debris (for example, silt, leaves and vegetation). Such
measures shall include but are not limited to leaf traps, gutter guards and cleanouts.
All infiltration practices shall have appropriate positive overflow controls.
No sand, salt or other particulate matter may be applied to a porous surface material for winter ice
conditions.
The following procedures and materials shall be required during the construction of all subsurface
facilities:
Excavation for the infiltration facility shall be performed with equipment that will not compact
the bottom of the seepage bed/trench or like facility.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 247/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
The bottom of the bed and/or trench shall be scarified prior to the placement of aggregate.
Only clean aggregate with documented porosity, free of fines, shall be allowed.
The tops, bottoms and sides of all seepage beds, trenches, or like facilities shall be covered
with drainage fabric. Fabric shall be nonwoven fabric acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
Stormwater shall be distributed throughout the entire seepage bed/trench or like facility and
provisions for the collection of debris shall be provided in all facilities.
§ 214-21. Stream channel protection requirements.
For regulated activities involving new development with one or more acres of earth disturbance, the
applicant shall comply with the following stream channel protection requirements to minimize stream
channel erosion and associated water quality impacts to the receiving waters:
The peak flow rate of the postconstruction two-year, twenty-four-hour design storm shall be
reduced to the predevelopment peak flow rate of the one-year, twenty-four-hour-duration
precipitation, using the SCS Type II distribution.
To the maximum extent practicable, and unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer, the
postconstruction one-year, twenty-four-hour storm flow shall be detained for a minimum of 24
hours and a maximum not to exceed 72 hours from a point in time when the maximum volume of
water from the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm is stored in a proposed BMP (i.e., when the
maximum water surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can begin at the
start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the orifice is at the invert of the proposed BMP).
For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions shall be determined using
the corresponding ground cover assumptions presented in § 214-23D of this chapter.
The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be three inches in diameter
unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer, and a trash rack shall be installed to
prevent clogging. For sites with small drainage areas contributing to the BMP that do not provide
enough runoff volume to allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation with the three-inch orifice, the
calculations shall be submitted showing this condition.
When the calculated orifice size is below three inches, gravel filters (or other methods) are
recommended to discharge low-flow rates subject to the Municipal Engineer's satisfaction. When
filters are utilized, maintenance provisions shall be provided to ensure filters meet the design
function.
All proposed stormwater facilities shall make use of measures to extend the flow path and
increase the travel time of flows in the facility.
When a regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage areas, the peak flow rate
control shall be separately addressed for each drainage area.
§ 214-22. Stormwater peak rate control requirements.
The applicant shall comply with the following peak flow rate control requirements for all regulated
activities including those that involve new development and redevelopment.
Postconstruction peak flow rates from any regulated activity shall not exceed the predevelopment
peak flow rates as shown for each of the design storms specified in Table 22.1.
TABLE 22.1
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 248/620
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
Peak Rate Control Standards
(Peak Flow Rate of the Postconstruction Design Storm Shall be Reduced to the Peak Flow
Rate of the Corresponding Predevelopment Design Storm Shown in the Table)
Predevelopment Design Storm
Postconstruction Design
Storm Frequency
(24-Hour Duration)
New Development
Regulated Activities
Redevelopment Regulated
Activities
TABLE 22.1
Peak Rate Control Standards
(Peak Flow Rate of the Postconstruction Design Storm Shall be Reduced to the Peak Flow
Rate of the Corresponding Predevelopment Design Storm Shown in the Table)
Predevelopment Design Storm
Postconstruction Design
Storm Frequency
(24-Hour Duration)
New Development
Regulated Activities
Redevelopment Regulated
Activities
2-year 1-year 2-year
5-year 2-year 5-year
10-year 2-year 10-year
25-year 25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year 100-year
For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions shall be determined using
the corresponding ground cover assumptions presented in § 214-23D of this chapter.
For regulated activities involving only redevelopment, no peak flow rate controls are required when
and only if the total proposed impervious surface area is at least 20% less than the total existing
impervious surface area to be disturbed by the regulated activity. In all cases where this
requirement is not met, the redevelopment regulated activity shall achieve the peak flow rate
controls presented in Table 22.1, using the redevelopment ground cover assumptions presented in
§ 214-23D.
Only the area of the proposed regulated activity shall be subject to the peak flow rate control
standards of this chapter. Undisturbed areas for which the discharge point has not changed are
not subject to the peak flow rate control standards.
Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated activity) that drain through a
proposed site are not subject to peak flow rate control requirements. Drainage facilities located on
the site shall be designed to safely convey flows from outside of the site through the site.
When a regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage areas, the peak flow rate
controls shall be separately addressed for each drainage area.
The effect of structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices implemented as part
of the overall site design may be taken into consideration when calculating total storage volume
and peak flow rates.
§ 214-23. Calculation methodology.
Stormwater runoff from all regulated activity sites with a drainage area of greater than five acres
shall be calculated using a generally accepted calculation technique(s) that is based on the NRCS
Soil Cover Complex Method. Table 23.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods. The
method selected for use shall be based on the individual limitations and suitability of each method
for a particular site. The use of the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges for drainage
areas greater than five acres shall be permitted only upon approval by the Municipal Engineer.
TABLE 23.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed By Applicability
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 249/620
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
D.
TABLE 23.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed By Applicability
TR-20
(or commercial computer
package based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full hydrology
computer model is desirable or necessary.
TR-55
(or commercial computer
package based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land development plans
where limitations described in TR-55 are
met.
HEC-1/HEC-HMS US Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of a full hydrologic
computer model is desirable or necessary.
Rational Method (or commercial
computer package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites up to five acres, or as approved
by the municipality.
Other methods Varies Other computation methodologies
approved by the municipality.
All calculations using the Soil Cover Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall
depths for the various return period storms consistent with this chapter. Rainfall depths used shall
be obtained from NOAA Atlas 14 values consistent with a partial duration series. When
stormwater calculations are performed for routing procedures or infiltration, water quality and
runoff volume functions, the duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours.
All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities consistent with appropriate
times of concentration (duration) and storm events with rainfall intensities obtained from NOAA
Atlas 14 partial duration series estimates, or the latest version of the PennDOT Drainage Manual
(PDM Publication 584). Times of concentration shall be calculated based on the methodology
recommended in the respective model used. Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow
shall be computed using Manning's equation.
The applicant shall utilize the following ground cover assumptions for all predevelopment water
quality and runoff volume, infiltration volume and peak flow rate calculations:
For regulated activities involving new development, the following ground cover assumptions
shall be used:
For areas that are woods (as defined in Article II of this chapter), predevelopment
calculations shall assume ground cover of "woods in good condition."
For all other areas (including all impervious surfaces), predevelopment calculations shall
assume ground cover of "meadow."
For regulated activities involving redevelopment, the following ground cover assumptions
shall be used:
For areas that are woods (as defined in Article II of this chapter), predevelopment
calculations shall assume ground cover of "woods in good condition."
For areas that are not woods or not impervious surfaces, predevelopment calculations
shall assume ground cover of "meadow."
For areas that are impervious surfaces, predevelopment calculations shall assume at
least 20% of the existing impervious surface area to be disturbed as "meadow" ground
cover.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 250/620
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(3)
[1]
E.
F.
G.
[2]
H.
(1)
(2)
I.
[1]
A.
The applicant shall determine which stormwater standards apply to the proposed regulated
activity as follows:
Stormwater standards for new development shall apply to all proposed regulated
activities that involve only new development activities as defined in this chapter.
Stormwater standards for redevelopment shall apply to all proposed regulated activities
that involve only redevelopment activities as defined in this chapter.
At the discretion of the Municipal Engineer, regulated activities that involve a combination
of both new development and redevelopment activities, as defined in this chapter, may
either:
Apply the stormwater standards (redevelopment or new development) that are
associated with the activity that involves the greatest amount of land area; or
Apply the redevelopment and new development stormwater standards to the
corresponding redevelopment and new development portions of the proposed
regulated activity.
Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both predevelopment and proposed (postconstruction) conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from Table C-1 in Appendix C of
this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Runoff coefficients (C) for both predevelopment and proposed (postconstruction) conditions for
use in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table C-2 in Appendix C of this chapter.
Weighted averaging of runoff coefficients shall not be used for manual computations or input data
for water quality and runoff volume calculations.
Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of pipes, culverts, and storm sewers shall be
consistent with methods and computations contained in the Federal Highway Administration
Hydraulic Design Series Number 5 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-01-020 HDS No. 5, as amended).
Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of open channels shall be consistent with
methods and computations contained in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic
Engineering Circular Number 15 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-05-114 HEC 15, as amended).
Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table C-3 in Appendix C of
this chapter.[2]
Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Runoff calculations shall include the following assumptions:
Average antecedent moisture conditions (for the Soil Cover Complex Method only for
example, TR-55, TR-20).
A Type II distribution storm (for the Soil Cover Complex Method only for example, TR-55, TR-
20).
§ 214-24. Other requirements.
Any BMP intended to hold standing water for four days or longer shall be designed to incorporate
biologic controls consistent with the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix D,[1] PA DEP
document 363-0300-001 "Design Criteria - Wetlands Replacement/Monitoring" as amended, or
contact the Pennsylvania State Cooperative Wetland Center or the Penn State Cooperative
Extension Office for design information.
Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 251/620
[2]
B.
[3]
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
A.
Any stormwater basin required or regulated by this chapter designed to store runoff and requiring
a berm or earthen embankment shall be designed to provide an emergency spillway to safely
convey flow up to and including the one-hundred-year proposed conditions. The height of
embankment shall provide a minimum one foot of freeboard above the maximum pool elevation
computed when the facility functions for the one-hundred-year proposed conditions inflow. Should
any BMP require a dam safety permit under PA Chapter 105 regulations,[2] the facility shall be
designed in accordance with and meet the regulations of PA Chapter 105 concerning dam safety.
PA Chapter 105 may require the safe conveyance of storms larger than one-hundred-year event.
Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by PA Chapter 105 regulations[3]
shall be designed to convey, without damage to the drainage facility or roadway, runoff from the
twenty-five-year storm event. Larger storm events (fifty-year and one-hundred-year storms) shall
also be safely conveyed in the direction of natural flow without creating additional damage to any
drainage facilities, nearby structures, or roadways.
Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management facilities (i.e., detention basins)
shall be designed to convey the design flow to or from the facility.
Roadway crossings or structures located within designated floodplain areas shall be able to
convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design storm consistent with Federal Emergency
Management Agency National Flood Insurance Program - Floodplain Management Requirements.
Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way shall comply with PennDOT minimum design
standards and permit submission and approval requirements.
Adequate erosion protection and energy dissipation shall be provided along all open channels and
at all points of discharge. Design methods shall be consistent with the Federal Highway
Administration Hydraulic Engineering Circular Number 11 (Publication No. FHWA-IP-89-016, as
amended) and the PA DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (Publication
No. 363-2134-008, as amended), or other design guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
§ 214-25. Other conveyance and system design standards.
Basin standards.
Detention basins.
The maximum inside side slopes shall not exceed three horizontal to one vertical
(3H:1V). The minimum required slope for the basin bottom is 2%. A level bottom is
acceptable, provided the designer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the municipality
that the basin bottom will be landscaped with appropriate wetland vegetation pursuant to
§ 214-25B.
Inflow structures. The inflow pipe invert into a basin shall be a minimum of six inches
above the basin floor or lining so that the pipe can adequately drain after rainstorms.
Inlets shall discharge into areas of the basin that slope toward the outlet structure.
Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the greatest extent possible in
order to maximize the flow path through the basin.
Low-flow channels. Low-flow channels constructed of concrete or asphalt are not
permitted. Where low-flow channels are necessary, they shall be composed of a natural
or bioengineered material. Low-flow channels shall be designed to promote water quality
and slow the rate of flow through the basin. Low-flow channels may also be designed to
infiltrate where practical.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 252/620
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Retention basins/wet basins are not permitted unless approved by the municipality. If
permitted, they shall be designed to create a healthy ecological community with sufficient
circulation of water to prevent the growth of unwanted vegetation and mosquitoes.
Outlet structures. Outlet structures shall meet the following specifications:
To minimize clogging and to facilitate cleaning and inspection, outlet pipes shall have an
internal diameter of at least 18 inches and a minimum grade of 1%.
Antiseep collars shall be provided on all outlet pipes within a constructed berm.
All principal outlet structures shall be built using reinforced concrete with watertight
construction joints.
Outlet pipes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete with rubber gaskets in
conformance with AASHTO M170, M198 and M207.
Energy dissipation practices that convert concentrated flow to uniform shallow sheet flow
shall be used where appropriate.
If required by the municipality, basin outlet structures shall have childproof nonclogging
trash racks over all design openings exceeding 12 inches in diameter except those
openings designed to carry perennial stream flows. Periodic cleaning of debris from trash
racks shall be included in the operation and maintenance plan.
Antivortex devices, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to the basin berm, shall be
provided at the top of all circular risers or stand pipes.
Embankment.
The fill material shall be free of roots, woody vegetation, oversized stones, rocks, or other
objectionable material. Areas on which fill is to be placed shall be scarified prior to
placement of fill. Fill material will be placed in six-to-nine-inch layers and shall be
compacted based upon acceptable engineering standards.
A core trench or key-way. Embankments that exceed three feet in height shall include a
core trench or key-way along the center line of the embankment to prevent seepage at
the joint between the existing soil and the fill material. The core trench or key-way shall
be a minimum of three feet below the existing grade and eight feet wide with a side slope
of 1:1 (horizontal:vertical) or flatter.
Energy dissipaters and level spreaders. Energy dissipaters and/or level spreaders shall be
installed to prevent erosion and/or initiate sheet flow at points where pipes or drainageways
discharge to or from basins. Energy dissipaters shall comply with criteria in PA DEP Erosion
and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual, Technical Guidance Number 363-2134-008,
March 2012, as amended. Such facilities shall be both functional and harmonious with the
surrounding environment; for example, native rock shall be used in constructing dissipaters
where practical.
Emergency spillways shall be sized and located to permit the safe passage of stormwater
flows from a one-hundred-year storm. The maximum velocities in vegetated spillways
excavated in otherwise undisturbed soil shall be analyzed based upon the velocity of peak
flow in the emergency spillway during an assumed clogged primary outlet condition. Where
maximum velocities exceed design standards contained in the PA DEP Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual, Technical Guidance Number 363-2134-008, March 2012,
as amended, suitable lining shall be provided. All emergency spillways placed on fill materials
shall be lined. Lining for emergency spillways shall incorporate native colors and materials
where possible including monoslab revetments, grass pavers, and native stone.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 253/620
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
Freeboard. Freeboard is the difference between the elevation of the design flow in the
emergency spillway (usually the one-hundred-year peak elevation) and the top elevation of
the settled basin embankment (top of berm). The minimum freeboard shall be one foot.
Discharge points. The minimum distance between a proposed stormwater management
facility (aboveground or subsurface detention/infiltration facility) discharge point (including the
energy dissipater, the emergency spillway, dam breast area, or water storage area) and a
downstream property boundary shall in no case be less than indicated in the table below.
Where there is discharge onto or through adjacent properties prior to release to a stream,
designers shall demonstrate how downstream properties are to be protected. The municipality
may require that the setback distance be increased based upon factors such as topography,
soil conditions, the size of structures, the location of structures and discharge rates. A
drainage easement may also be required.
Drainage Area
(acres)
Setback Distance
(feet)
1 to 2 25
2 to 4 50
4 to 10 75
Over 10 100
Conveyance systems.
Storm drainage collection systems, inlets and pipes, shall be designed to convey a twentyfive-
year storm event without surcharging a storm drain structure. Design provisions shall be
provided that allow for the overland conveyance of the one-hundred-year storm flow to the
required stormwater management facilities, if applicable, without damage to any private or
public property.
Cross-pipes, box culverts and bridges shall be designed to convey a one-hundred-year storm
event.
Any drainage facility crossing a state highway shall conform to all applicable PennDOT design
standards.
A five-minute storm duration shall be used if this duration does not result in a maximum
expected discharge that exceeds the capacity of a thirty-inch pipe.
If a five-minute storm duration results in a pipe size exceeding 30 inches, the time of
concentration approach shall be used in determining storm duration.
Curb inlets. Curb inlets shall be located at curb tangents on the uphill side of street
intersections and at intervals along the curbline to control the maximum amount of
encroachment of runoff on the roadway pavement so that it does not exceed a width of four
feet during the design storm event. Design and location of curb inlets shall be approved by
the municipality. The maximum amount of flow through an intersection may not exceed one
inch.
Inlets and manholes shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding 300 feet, and shall be located
wherever branches are connected or sizes are changed, and wherever there is a change in
alignment or grade. For drainage lines of at least 36 inches diameter, inlets and manholes
shall be spaced at intervals of 400 feet maximum.
Inlets, culverts and basin discharge systems shall be designed for the worst case condition.
Inlet capacity shall be based on design data provided by the manufacturers and accepted by
the Municipal Engineer. If acceptable information is not available, inlets in nonponding areas
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 254/620
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
shall be designed for a maximum capacity of four cubic feet per second (cfs). Where ponding
occurs, inlet capacity shall be based on accepted engineering design practices.
The capacity of all stormwater pipes shall be calculated utilizing the Manning's Equation for
open channel flow as applied to closed conduit flow. The Manning's roughness coefficient
shall be 0.13 for all concrete pipe. In cases where pressure flow may occur, the hydraulic
grade line shall be calculated throughout the storm sewer system to verify that at least one
foot of freeboard will be provided in all inlets and manholes for the design storm event.
Culverts shall be designed based on procedures contained in Hydraulic Design of Highway
Culverts, HDS #5, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.
Flow velocity. Stormwater pipe systems shall be designed to produce a minimum velocity of
3.0 feet per second when flowing full. The maximum permissible velocity shall be 10.0 feet
per second. Pipe slopes shall not be less than 0.5%.
Minimum pipe size. Minimum pipe size shall be 18 inches.
Inlet and manhole construction. Inlet and manhole castings and concrete construction shall
be equivalent to PennDOT design standards.
Open end pipes must be fitted with concrete endwalls and wing walls in accordance with
PennDOT standards.
All storm sewer pipes shall be laid to a minimum depth of one foot from subgrade to crown of
pipe.
Pipe materials. All storm piping shall be in accordance with PennDOT specifications. The use
of corrugated metal pipe (CMP) shall only be permitted upon approval from the municipality
on a case- by-case basis. Piping shall be saw-cut at ends, as needed, and not hammered or
broken.
Stormwater pipes must be oriented at right angles to electric, water, sanitary sewer, and gas
utilities when crossing above or beneath it. Crossing angles of less than 90° will only be
permitted at the discretion of the municipality. When skewed crossings are permitted, interior
angles between alignment of the storm sewer pipe and utility may not be less than 45°.
Modified inlet boxes shall be used when required in accordance with the PennDOT
Publication 72 - RC Standards. Pipes shall not be allowed to enter the corner of boxes. The
crown of the pipe shall be at least four inches below the top of the precast structure box.
All manholes, endwalls, inlet boxes, inlet grates and inlet hoods shall be constructed in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 408 and Publication 72 - RC Standards.
Permanent open swales shall be designed to convey a one-hundred-year storm event
computed from the Manning's Equation.
Open swales shall be stabilized with vegetation or other materials in accordance with Title 25,
Chapter 102, rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. Slopes for swale banks shall not exceed one foot vertical for every four feet
horizontal.
A minimum of a twenty-foot-wide access and maintenance easement shall be provided for
and centered on all storm sewers and open swales not located within the public right-of-way.
Article IV. Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan
Requirements
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 255/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(a)
[1]
[1]
[2]
[2]
[3]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
A.
§ 214-26. General requirements.
For any regulated activity, unless exempt per the provisions of § 214-6:
Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is required.
No regulated activity shall commence until the municipality issues written approval of a SWM site
plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter and, if required, a
letter of adequacy has been issued by the Conservation District for an erosion and sediment
control plan.
The preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, and the issuance
of any building or occupancy permit shall not proceed until the applicant has received written
approval of a SWM site plan from the municipality.
The SWM site plan approved by the municipality shall be on site throughout the duration of the
regulated activity.
§ 214-27. SWM site plan contents.
The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project including items described in
§ 214-18, calculations, maps, and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated
computations and erosion and sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the
computations and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and
date. All SWM site plan materials shall be submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear,
concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall not be accepted for
review and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included in the SWM site
plan:
General.
A general description of the proposed project;
A listing of all regulatory approvals required for the proposed project and the status of the
review and approval process for each. Final approval or adequacy letters must be submitted
to the municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the municipality's issuing final approval of the
SWM site plan. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or approvals for
the programs listed below shall be part of the SWM site plan, if applicable:
NPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activities;
PA DEP permits as needed:
PA DEP joint permit application;
Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management);[1]
Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management);[2]
Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 106.
PennDOT highway occupancy permit;
Erosion and sediment control plan letter of adequacy; and
Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 256/620
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(8)
B.
A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any revision to the approved SWM
site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the municipality, and that a revised erosion
and sediment control plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the Conservation District or
municipality (as applicable) for a determination of adequacy prior to construction of the
revised features.
The following signature block signed and sealed by the qualified licensed professional
responsible for the preparation of the SWM site plan:
"I (name), on this date (date of signature), hereby certify to the best of my knowledge that
the SWM site plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Uwchlan Township
Ordinance No. 2013-07, Stormwater Management Ordinance." [Note: include signature,
name, discipline of professional license, and license stamp or seal here]
Maps or plan sheets. Map(s) or plan sheets of the site shall be submitted on minimum twenty-fourinch-
by-thirty-six-inch sheets and shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for
recording at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds and the requirements of the
operation and maintenance (O&M) plan and O&M agreement (Article VII). If the SALDO has
additional or more stringent criteria than this chapter, then the SALDO criteria shall also apply.
Unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer, the contents of the maps or plan sheets
shall include, but not be limited to:
A location map, with a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet or greater, showing the site location
relative to highways, municipal boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks.
The name of the project, tax parcel number(s), and the names, addresses and phone
numbers of the owner of the property, the applicant, and firm preparing the plan.
Signature and seal of the qualified licensed professional(s) responsible for preparation of the
maps and plan sheets.
The date of SWM site plan submission and revision dates, as applicable.
A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50 feet.
A North arrow.
Legal property boundaries, including:
The total project property boundary and size with distances marked to the nearest foot
and bearings to the nearest degree.
Boundaries, size and description of purpose of all existing easements and deedrestricted
areas of the project property, with distances marked to the nearest foot and
bearings to the nearest degree.
Existing natural resources and natural or man-made hydrologic features that are located
within the site or receiving discharge from, or that may otherwise be impacted by, the
proposed regulated activity, including but not limited to:
All existing natural resources, hydrologic features and drainage patterns including natural
waterways, water bodies, wetlands, streams (intermittent and perennial), ponds, lakes,
vernal pools, etc., natural infiltration areas and patterns, areas of significant natural
evapotranspiration, and other water features and aquatic resources.
Any existing man-made drainage features, BMPs, conveyances, facilities, open
channels, swales, drainage patterns, or other flood, stormwater or drainage control
features.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 257/620
(c)
(d)
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
[1]
[2]
(n)
(o)
(p)
(9)
For the site, discharge points and locations of concentrated flows and their drainage
areas.
For named waters, show names and their watershed boundaries within the site.
Special management areas (as per § 214-15P).
For the water bodies, streams and wetlands identified in § 214-27B(8)(a), label or
otherwise show the following attributes, if applicable:
The designated use as determined by PA DEP (25 Pa. Code Chapter 93);
Impairments listed on the PA DEP "Integrated List" (as updated) and the listed
source and cause of impairment;
Name, date, and target pollutant(s) for any approved total maximum daily load
(TMDL); and
Drainages to water supply reservoirs.
Areas that are part of the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI) and a list of
potential impacts and clearances received (for regulated activities involving one acre or
more proposed earth disturbance).
Woods, vegetated riparian buffers and other areas of natural vegetation.
Topography using contours (with elevations based on established bench marks) at
intervals of two feet. The datum used and the location, elevation and datum of any bench
marks used shall be shown.
Areas classified by the municipality as steep slopes.
Soil names and boundaries, general type of soils with hydrologic soil group noted, and in
particular note areas most conducive to infiltration BMPs, such as Groups A and B, etc.,
estimated permeabilities in inches per hour, and location and other results of all soil tests
and borings.
If present, areas with underlying carbonate geologic units, existing sinkholes, subsidence
or other karst features, and any associated groundwater recharge areas with increased
vulnerability to contamination.
Any contaminated surface or subsurface areas of the site.
Water supply wells.
Location of existing well(s) on the project property and delineation of the(ir) recharge
area(s) (if known), or a fifty-foot-diameter assumed recharge area;
Location of existing well(s) within 50 feet beyond the boundary of the project
property boundary (if public water supply is proposed for the regulated activity); and
Current FEMA one-hundred-year floodplain boundaries, elevations, and floodway
boundaries for any special flood hazard areas on or within 100 feet of the property.
Boundaries of riparian buffer(s) as required by § 510.9 of the Uwchlan Township Zoning
Ordinance.
Location of the proposed regulated activity, limits of earth disturbance (disturbed area), and
BMPs and conveyances relative to the location of existing natural resources and hydrologic
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 258/620
(10)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(18)
features and special management areas resulting from the site design process of § 214-18.
Description of existing and proposed ground cover and land use including the type and total
area.
Existing and proposed man-made features including roads, paved areas, buildings, and other
impervious and pervious surfaces on the project property (or an appropriate portion of the
property as determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer) and within the proposed
disturbed area, and including the type and total area of the following:
Existing impervious surfaces;
Existing impervious surfaces proposed to be replaced;
Existing impervious surfaces to be permanently removed and replaced with pervious
ground cover;
New or additional impervious surfaces; and
Percent of the site covered by impervious surfaces for both the existing and proposed
postconstruction conditions.
The total extent of the upstream area draining through the site.
All BMPs, conveyances and other stormwater management facilities shall be located on the
plan sheets, including design drawings, profile drawings, construction details, materials to be
used, description of function, etc.
Complete delineation of the flow paths used for calculating the time of concentration for the
predevelopment and postconstruction conditions shall be included.
The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers, on-lot wastewater facilities
(including subsurface tanks and leach fields), and water supply lines within the site and within
50 feet beyond the proposed limits of earth disturbance.
A grading plan, including all areas of proposed earth disturbance and the proposed regulated
activity and delineating the boundary or limits of earth disturbance of the site. The total
disturbed area of the site shall be noted in square feet and acres.
Proposed final grade elevations and contours at intervals of two feet.
For each proposed BMP and conveyance included in the SWM site plan (including any to be
located on any property other than the property being developed by the applicant), the
following shall be included on the SWM site plan map or plan sheets:
Identification of the person responsible for ongoing inspections, operation, repair, and
maintenance of the BMP or conveyance after completion of construction.
Delineation of the land area, structures, impervious surfaces, and conveyances draining
to and from the BMP or conveyance.
Easements, as per the requirements of Article VII, that shall include:
Boundaries labeled with distances shown in feet and bearings to the nearest degree;
Notes or other documentation, as needed, to grant the municipality the right of
access to all BMPs and conveyances for the purposes of inspection and
enforcement of the requirements of this chapter, and any applicable O&M plans and
O&M agreements;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 259/620
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
Notes or other documentation, as needed, to grant the municipality the right of
access to all roadways necessary to access all BMPs and conveyances, where
roadways are not to be dedicated to the municipality;
Notes or other documentation as needed to grant the owner of any BMP or
conveyance the right of access for the purpose of inspection, operation,
maintenance, and repair of the BMP or conveyance that is to be owned, operated
and maintained by a person other than the municipality, and other than the owner of
the property on which the BMP or conveyance is located;
A minimum twenty-foot-wide perimeter (or other width as determined in consultation
with the Municipal Engineer) around all BMPs and conveyances;
Sufficient vehicular ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way or roadway, as
determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer; and
Accompanying notes or other documentation as needed, and in accordance with
Article VII describing the type, purpose and total area of easements, who the
easement is granted to, and the rights, duties and obligations of the parties with
respect to every BMP or conveyance.
At its discretion the municipality may accept, in lieu of an easement described by
feet and bearings, a blanket easement that encompasses the entire subject property.
Boundaries of land areas (if any) for which deed restrictions are required for the purpose
of protecting and prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or conveyance, indicating the area to
which the restriction applies with distances shown in feet and bearings to the nearest
degree, and a written description of the type, purpose and nature of the restriction. At its
discretion the municipality may accept, in lieu of said boundaries described by feet and
bearings, a blanket easement that encompasses the entire subject property.
Other items that may be needed to comply with all other requirements of Article VII.
A written description of the following information shall be included in the SWM site plan:
Existing features, conditions, natural resources, hydrologic features, and special management
areas [as listed in § 214-27B(8)];
How the site design achieves the requirements of § 214-18, and, if applicable, where they
could not be achieved and why;
The overall stormwater management design concept for the project and how the site design
achieves the requirements of §§ 214-15 through 214-25 of Article III;
Proposed features and conditions, proposed erosion and sediment control features, proposed
BMPs, conveyances, and any other stormwater facilities;
A description of the effect of the project (in terms of flow alteration and runoff volumes, water
quality and peak flows, etc.) on existing natural resources, hydrologic features and special
management areas, adjacent and downgradient properties, and any existing municipal or
other stormwater conveyance system(s), that may be affected by or receive runoff from the
regulated activity (whether located within or outside of the area of the regulated activity), and
specifics of how erosion, water quality and flow impacts will be avoided or otherwise
mitigated;
Proposed nonpoint source pollution controls and justification and confirmation that the
proposed project will not result in any increased pollutant loadings to any existing stream or
stream impairment identified by PA DEP, or to any receiving water body;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 260/620
(7)
(8)
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
G.
H.
A.
Expected project time schedule; and
Description of construction stages or project phases, if so proposed.
A detailed site evaluation conducted by a qualified licensed professional for projects proposed in
areas of carbonate geology or karst topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas, such
as contaminated sites and brownfields, as described in § 214-15O and R of this chapter.
Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation, such as hydrologic, hydraulic, and
structural computations, assumptions, BMP loading ratios, etc., consistent with the guidelines and
criteria presented in the PA BMP Manual (as amended) or other guidance acceptable to the
Municipal Engineer, and used in the design of the BMPs, conveyances and other features
proposed to be utilized for stormwater management, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the requirements of this chapter have been met, specifically including the requirements in
§§ 214-15 and 214-18 through 214-23.
Inspections, operation and maintenance requirements. The following documents shall be prepared
and submitted to the municipality for review and approval as part of the SWM site plan, in
accordance with the requirements of Article VII, for each BMP and conveyance included in the
SWM site plan (including any to be located on any property other than the property being
developed by the applicant):
An O&M plan;
An O&M agreement;
Any easement agreements that are needed to ensure access, inspection, maintenance,
operation, repair and permanent protection of any permanent BMP(s) and conveyances
associated with the regulated activity;
Any written deed, deed amendment or equivalent document (if needed) to be recorded
against a subject property, as shown on the SWM site plan maps or plan sheets, or recorded
plan sheets for the purpose of protecting and prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or
conveyance; and
Written approval, easement agreements, or other documentation for discharges to adjacent or
downgradient properties when required to comply with § 214-15G and Article VII of this
chapter.
An erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared for and submitted to the
Conservation District and/or municipality. A letter of adequacy from the Conservation District, if
applicable, must be submitted to the municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the municipality's
final approval of the SWM site plan.
A highway occupancy permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT)
District Office must be submitted to the municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the municipality's
final approval of the SWM site plan when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is
proposed.
§ 214-28. SWM site plan submission.
A complete SWM site plan that complies with all applicable provisions of § 214-27 shall be submitted
to the municipality for review and approval, as follows:
The SWM site plan shall be coordinated with the applicable state and federal permit process and
the municipal SALDO review process. All permit approvals or letters of adequacy not yet received
by the applicant at the time of submittal of the SWM site plan to the municipality must be
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 261/620
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
submitted to the municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the municipality's final approval of the
SWM site plan.
For projects that require SALDO approval, the SWM site plan shall be submitted by the applicant
as part of the preliminary plan submission where applicable for the regulated activity.
For regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, the SWM site plan shall be submitted
by the applicant for review in accordance with instructions from the municipality.
The number of copies of the SWM site plan to be submitted by the applicant for review shall be in
accordance with instructions from the municipality.
The corresponding review fee shall be submitted to the municipality simultaneously with the SWM
site plan, per the municipality's fee schedule.
Any submissions to the municipality that are found to be incomplete shall not be accepted for
review and shall be returned to the applicant within 15 days with a notification in writing of the
specific manner in which the submission is incomplete.
Financial security, per the requirements of § 214-10, shall be submitted to the municipality prior to
approval of the SWM site plan.
§ 214-29. SWM site plan review.
The SWM site plan shall be submitted to the municipality for review by the Municipal Engineer for
consistency with this chapter and the respective PA Act 167 stormwater management plan(s). The
Municipal Engineer will review the SWM site plan for any subdivision or land development for
compliance with this chapter and the municipal SALDO provisions not otherwise superseded by
this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
If applicable, the applicant shall have received a letter of adequacy from the Conservation District
or other PA DEP approval for the proposed regulated activity prior to (or as a condition of) final
approval by the municipality.
The Municipal Engineer will notify the applicant and the municipality in writing, within 45 calendar
days, whether the SWM site plan is consistent with the requirements of this chapter. If the SWM
site plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification shall occur within the
time period allowed by the MPC[2] (as amended). If a longer notification period is provided by
other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the municipality.
If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is consistent with this chapter,
the Municipal Engineer shall forward a letter of consistency to the municipality, who shall then
forward a copy to the applicant.
The municipality may approve the SWM site plan with conditions reasonably defined to make
the SWM site plan compliant with the terms of this chapter, and, if so, shall provide the
conditions for approval in writing.
If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is inconsistent or noncompliant
with this chapter, the Municipal Engineer will forward a letter to the municipality, with a copy to
the applicant citing the reason(s) and specific chapter sections for the inconsistency or
noncompliance. Inconsistency or noncompliance may be due to inadequate information to
make a reasonable judgment as to compliance with this chapter. Any SWM site plans that are
inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised by the applicant and resubmitted in accordance
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 262/620
[2]
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
with § 214-31 when consistent with this chapter. Resubmission will commence a new
municipal review and notification time period.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
The municipality will not grant final approval to any proposed subdivision, land development, or
regulated activity specified in this chapter if the SWM site plan has been found to be inconsistent
with this chapter.
All required permits from PA DEP shall be obtained and submitted to the municipality prior to (or
as a condition of) final approval of any proposed subdivision, land development, or other regulated
activity by the municipality.
No building permits for any regulated activity will be approved by the municipality if the SWM site
plan has been found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
All required permits from PA DEP shall be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.
The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a period not to exceed five years
commencing on the date that the municipality approved the SWM site plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not been constructed, or if
constructed, as-built plans of these facilities have not been approved within this five-year time
period, then the applicant may seek reinstatement of approval of the expired SWM site plan. If the
municipality determines that the expired SWM site plan is consistent and compliant with current
regulations and requirements, then the expired SWM site plan will be reinstated; otherwise, it will
be rejected. The applicant will be prohibited from conducting any regulated activity until a
reinstated or newly approved SWM site plan is obtained in accordance with § 214-31 of this
chapter.
All or portions of the final approved SWM site plan shall be recorded (as "record plans") per the
instructions of the municipality.
Upon completion of construction, the applicant shall be responsible for completing final as-built
plans of all BMPs, conveyances, or other stormwater management facilities included in the
approved SWM site plan as per the requirements of § 214-33 of this chapter.
§ 214-30. Revision of SWM site plans.
A submitted SWM site plan under review by the municipality shall be revised and resubmitted for
any of the following reasons. The revised SWM site plan shall be resubmitted in accordance with
§ 214-28 and subject to review as specified in § 214-29 of this chapter.
A change in stormwater management BMPs, conveyances, facilities or techniques;
Relocation or redesign of stormwater management BMPs, conveyances, or facilities; or
Soil or other site conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the
Municipal Engineer, and the new conditions necessitate design changes.
A revision to an approved SWM site plan shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by
the applicable municipal review fee.
§ 214-31. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant SWM
site plans.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 263/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
Any SWM site plan deemed inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised and resubmitted with the
revisions addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented in writing. The submission shall
be addressed to the municipality in accordance with § 214-28 of this chapter, distributed accordingly,
and be subject to review as specified in § 214-29 of this chapter. The applicable municipal review fee
shall accompany a resubmission of a SWM site plan previously determined to be inconsistent or
noncompliant.
Article V. Performance and Inspection of Regulated
Activities; Final As-Built Plans
§ 214-32. Performance and inspection of regulated activities.
All regulated activities shall be conducted, operated and maintained in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Articles III, VII, and VIII of this chapter. When a SWM site plan is required
by this chapter, all regulated activities shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of
the final approved SWM site plan.
The Municipal Engineer or other municipal designee shall be provided access to the site to inspect
all phases of the erosion and sediment control measures and installation of the permanent BMPs
and conveyances at such times as deemed appropriate by the Municipal Engineer or other
municipal designee.
Periodic inspections may be made by the Municipal Engineer or other designee during
construction. A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file and available for
viewing at the site throughout the duration of the construction activity.
Inspections, including but not limited to a final inspection, of all constructed BMPs, conveyances,
or other stormwater facilities, and related improvements may be conducted by the Municipal
Engineer or other designee to confirm compliance with this chapter and with the final approved
SWM site plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit, use permit, or other form of final
approval of the project by the municipality.
Upon completion of construction, every permanent stormwater BMP, conveyance or other
stormwater facility constructed or used as part of the regulated activity shall be operated,
maintained and inspected by the landowner, or other designated person, in accordance with the
O&M plan and O&M agreement approved by the municipality.
The municipality or its designee may periodically inspect any permanent stormwater BMP,
conveyance or facility for compliance with this chapter, an approved O&M plan, or an approved
O&M agreement, per the provisions of Article IX. The municipality may inspect at any time it has
reason to believe a violation exists. The municipality may pursue enforcement for violations
consistent with the provisions of Article IX.
§ 214-33. Final as-built plans.
For regulated activities involving one acre or more of earth disturbance, the applicant shall provide
to the municipality final as-built plans (signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional) of all
BMPs, conveyances, other stormwater facilities, and related improvements shown in the final
approved SWM site plan.
The final as-built plans shall include the following for all BMPs, conveyances, other stormwater
facilities and related improvements:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 264/620
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
The location, elevations, dimensions, and as-built conditions of all BMPs, conveyances, other
stormwater facilities, and related improvements including topographic contours and all typical
details for storm drainage and conveyance systems, stormwater management facilities and
impervious surfaces (existing, proposed, or constructed) included in the approved SWM site
plan; and
Explanation of any discrepancies or variations from the final approved SWM site plan, other
related approved construction plans, calculations and specifications (and approved revisions
thereto).
The final as-built plans shall include a certification of completion signed and sealed by a qualified
licensed professional verifying that all permanent BMPs and conveyances have been constructed
according to the final approved SWM site plan and related approved construction plans,
calculations and specifications.
After receipt of the as-built plans by the municipality, the municipality or its designee may review
the as-built plans for consistency with this chapter, the final approved SWM site plan, other related
approved construction plans, and subsequent approved revisions thereto, as well as actual
conditions at the site, and the municipality may conduct a final inspection, as per § 214-32D.
The as-built plans must be received, reviewed and determined to be acceptable by the
municipality prior to:
Close out of the drainage permit or other close out of the project by the municipality;
Release of the financial security or other performance guarantee; and
Dedication of the stormwater facilities to the municipality, or conveyance to a homeowners'
association, or other person responsible for operation, maintenance and repair.
Final occupancy permit(s) or use permit or other final approval to use or operate the constructed
improvement may not be issued by the municipality until the final as-built plans have been
accepted.
Upon final acceptance of the final as-built plans by the municipality, the applicant shall review and,
if required by the municipality, revise and re-record the O&M plan and the O&M agreement to
reflect the final as-built conditions and information for each permanent BMP or conveyance, in
accordance with the requirements of Article VII.
All or portions of the final as-built plans shall be recorded if required by the municipality.
Article VI. Fees and Expenses
§ 214-34. SWM site plan review and inspection fees established.
Fees and escrow requirements have been established by the municipality, as adopted by
resolution by the governing body, or as otherwise allowed by law to defray plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the municipality. All fees listed in § 214-35A shall be paid
by the applicant at the time of SWM site plan submission.
A review and inspection fee/escrow schedule has been established by resolution of the municipal
governing body based on the size of the regulated activity and based on the municipality's costs
for reviewing SWM site plans, O&M plans and agreements and as-built plans, and conducting
inspections pursuant to § 214-32. The municipality shall periodically update the review and
inspection fee schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately reimbursed.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 265/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
§ 214-35. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required of the applicant by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
Administrative costs;
The review of the SWM site plan by the municipality, the Municipal Engineer and other
municipal consultants;
Coordination and meetings with the applicant;
The inspection of erosion and sediment control measures, BMPs, conveyances and other
related improvements during construction;
Review of project communications, reports, and additional supporting information;
Other site inspections;
The final inspection upon completion of the BMPs, conveyances, and other stormwater
management facilities and related improvements presented in the SWM site plan; and
Review of final as-built plan submission and revised calculations, and inspections as needed.
The applicant shall also reimburse all expenses incurred by the municipality for any additional
work or municipal consultant fees required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this
chapter, correct violations, and ensure proper completion of remedial actions.
Article VII. Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
Responsibilities and Easements
§ 214-36. General requirements for protection, operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs and conveyances.
The following shall apply to all regulated activities in accordance with the requirements of the
subsequent sections of this Article VII.
Continuing operations and maintenance responsibilities of all permanent BMPs, conveyances, or
other stormwater management facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the municipality along
with the SWM site plan. The municipality may require an offer of a dedication of such facilities as
part of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is not an indication
that the municipality will accept the facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject
the operations and maintenance responsibility for any portion of or all of the BMPs, conveyances
or other stormwater controls and facilities.
An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan shall be submitted to the municipality for review and
approval for all existing and proposed permanent BMPs and man-made conveyances or other
stormwater facilities identified in the SWM site plan. Multiple BMPs or conveyances may be
addressed by a combined O&M plan where all such facilities are similar in O&M requirements and
ownership.
The O&M plan(s) and O&M agreement(s) shall name the person identified in the SWM site plan
who shall be the owner of and be responsible for ongoing inspections, operation, repair, and
maintenance of each BMP or conveyance following completion of construction.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 266/620
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
H.
(1)
A.
For any BMP or man-made conveyance (including any to be located on any property other than
the property being developed by the applicant) to be owned by a person other than the
municipality:
An O&M agreement shall be submitted to the municipality for review and approval; and
The O&M plan shall be attached to, incorporated within, and recorded as a public record
along with a fully executed O&M agreement, all of which shall be recorded as a restrictive
covenant that runs with the land and shall be binding upon the landowner and any heirs,
administrators, successors in interest or assigns of the landowner.
The following shall be provided for all BMPs and conveyances (including any to be located on any
property other than the property being developed by the applicant) by an O&M or other agreement
or by otherwise establishing covenants, easements, deed restrictions, or by dedication to the
municipality:
Permanent protection of the BMP or conveyance from disturbance or alteration;
Right of entry and access for the municipality for inspection and enforcement of this chapter
(including § 214-47G) and any applicable O&M plan or O&M agreement; and
Right of entry and access for the person owning the BMP or conveyance and responsible for
fulfilling the O&M requirements when that person is not the municipality and is different from
the owner of the property on which the BMP or conveyance is located (such as may be
applicable for § 214-15G of this chapter).
All O&M and other agreements, covenants, easements and deed restrictions shall:
Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval;
Be recorded as a public record, upon approval, against each parcel(s) which is part of the
SWM site plan or otherwise contains any BMP or conveyance comprising part of the
regulated activity which is the subject of an O&M agreement; and
Run with the land and be binding upon the landowner, its heirs, administrators, successors in
interest, and assigns.
The materials, documents and content required by this Article VII may be prepared in conjunction
with and incorporated with similar materials, documents and content required for other permit or
approval applications, such as those required by PA DEP for the postconstruction stormwater
management plan.
At the discretion of the municipality, the content requirements of the operation and maintenance
(O&M) plan and O&M agreement for regulated activities with 10,000 square feet or less of
proposed earth disturbance and 2,000 square feet or less of proposed impervious surfaces may
be decreased. At a minimum, the reduced requirements must include all items required for the
reduced operation and maintenance plan map/plan sheet (§ 214-37A).
§ 214-37. Operation and maintenance plans.
The following items shall be included in the O&M plan, unless otherwise approved by the Municipal
Engineer:
A plan sheet(s) or map(s) showing each BMP and man-made conveyance and which shall
include, but not be limited to:
Property(ies) identification (owner name and address; and property address and/or lot and/or
tax parcel number, etc.), property boundaries and tax parcel number of the land parcel on
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 267/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(10)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(1)
B.
which the BMP or conveyance is located.
Name, address, phone number, date prepared, signature and seal of the licensed
professional responsible for preparation of the plan sheet or map.
Clear identification of the location, dimensions, and function of each BMP or conveyance
covered by the O&M plan.
The location of each BMP and conveyance relative to roadways, property boundaries, or
other identifiable landmarks and existing natural drainage features such as streams, lakes,
ponds, or other bodies of water within the immediate vicinity of, or receiving discharge from,
the BMP or conveyance.
Delineation of the land area, structures, impervious surfaces and conveyances draining to
and from the BMP.
Representative elevations and/or topographic contours at intervals of two feet, or other as
acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
Other features including FEMA floodplain and floodway boundaries, sinkholes, etc., located
within the immediate proximity of each BMP and conveyance.
Locations of areas of vegetation to be managed or preserved that function as a BMP or
conveyance.
The locations of all surface and subsurface utilities, on-lot wastewater facilities, sanitary
sewers, and waterlines within 20 feet of each BMP or conveyance.
The following as it pertains to any easements, covenants and deed restrictions established for
each applicable BMP or conveyance:
Boundaries delineated with bearings and distances shown that encompass the BMP or
conveyance and that includes a twenty-foot perimeter area surrounding these features
and sufficient vehicular ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way and roadway. At
its discretion the municipality may accept, in lieu of said boundaries described by feet
and bearings, a blanket easement that encompasses the entire subject property;
Labels specifying the type and purpose of the easement, covenant, or deed restriction
and who it benefits; and
Labels with reference to any corresponding easement agreement, covenant, deed
restriction or other document to be recorded.
The plan sheet or map shall be prepared at sufficient scale for municipal review, and
ultimately for the use by the person responsible for operation and maintenance, and shall also
be prepared at a legible scale that meets the requirements for recordation along with (and as
an attachment to) the O&M agreement and O&M plan at the Chester County Office of the
Recorder of Deeds.
The following information shall be included in the O&M plan and written in a manner consistent
with the knowledge and understanding of the person who will be responsible for the maintenance
activities:
The name and address of the following:
Property(ies) on which each BMP or conveyance is located;
Owner of the property;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 268/620
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
D.
E.
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
Owner of each stormwater BMP or conveyance who is responsible for implementation of
the O&M plan;
Person responsible for maintaining adequate liability insurance and payment of taxes;
and
Person preparing the O&M plan.
A description of each BMP and conveyance and how the BMPs and conveyances are
intended to function.
A description of actions necessary to operate, inspect, and maintain each BMP or
conveyance, including but not limited to:
Lawn care, vegetation maintenance, landscaping and planting;
Clean out of accumulated debris and sediment (including from grates, trash racks, inlets,
etc.); and
Other anticipated periodic maintenance and repair.
The following statement shall be included:
"The landowner acknowledges that, per the provisions of the municipality's Stormwater
Management Ordinance, it is unlawful to modify, remove, fill, landscape, alter or impair the
effectiveness of, or place any structure, other vegetation, yard waste, brush cuttings, or
other waste or debris into any permanent stormwater management BMP or conveyance
described in this O&M plan or to allow the BMP or conveyance to exist in a condition which
does not conform to this O&M plan, without written approval from the municipality."
Inspection and maintenance schedules.
Explanation of the purpose and limitations of any easements, covenants, or deed restrictions
associated with any BMP or conveyance that are to be recorded against the property.
A statement that no BMP or man-made conveyance may be used by the owner or others for any
purpose other than its intended stormwater control function, or, if approved by the Municipal
Engineer, a statement of specific allowable uses of the BMP (i.e., recreational benefits that may be
associated with certain BMPs owned by a homeowners' association, or allowable uses by an
individual residential landowner).
A statement that establishes a reasonable time frame for remedy of deficiencies found by the
owner during their inspections.
Language needed to fulfill the requirements of § 214-40B, C and D of this chapter.
§ 214-38. Operation and maintenance agreements.
An O&M agreement shall be required for any BMP or man-made conveyance to be owned by a
person other than the municipality, and the agreement shall:
Be between the owner of the BMP or conveyance and the municipality, and shall be
substantially the same as the O&M agreement in Appendix E;[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Incorporate the approved O&M plan(s) for all BMPs or conveyances to be covered by the
O&M agreement;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 269/620
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
Set forth the rights, duties and obligations of the owner of the BMP or conveyance and the
municipality, and be consistent with the approved O&M plan(s);
Be recorded as a deed restriction or restrictive covenant that runs with the land and shall be
binding upon the landowner, its heirs, administrators, successors in interest, and assigns;
Be submitted to the municipality for review prior to approval of the SWM site plan;
Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the designated owner of the BMP or
conveyance and submitted for signature by the municipality; and
When fully executed, be recorded by the landowner at the Chester County Office of the
Recorder of Deeds following municipal approval of the O&M plan and prior to the start of
construction.
Other items or conditions may be required by the municipality to be included in the O&M
agreement where determined necessary by the municipality to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all permanent BMPs and conveyances.
After approval of the final as-built plans per the requirements of Article V, the applicant shall
review and, if necessary and if required by the municipality, revise and re-record the O&M plan
and O&M agreement to reflect the final as-built conditions of each BMP and conveyance if
different from the information included in the original recorded documents.
§ 214-39. Easements and deed restrictions.
Easements shall be established in connection with any regulated activity for all permanent BMPs
and conveyances that will not be dedicated to or otherwise owned by the municipality (including
any to be located on any property other than the property being developed by the applicant) and
shall:
Include all land area occupied by each BMP or conveyance;
Include a twenty-foot-wide perimeter (or other width as determined in consultation with the
Municipal Engineer) surrounding the feature(s);
Provide sufficient vehicular ingress and egress from a public right-of-way and roadway;
Permanently protect every BMP and conveyance from disturbance or alteration where not
otherwise protected by a recorded O&M agreement, covenant, deed restriction or other
means;
Grant the municipality the right, but not the duty, to access every BMP and conveyance from
a public right-of-way or public roadway to conduct periodic inspections and to undertake other
actions that may be necessary to enforce the requirements of this chapter, or of any
applicable O&M plan or O&M agreement; where roadways will not be dedicated to the
municipality, the municipality shall be granted access to the private roadways as necessary to
access every BMP and conveyance;
Grant the owner of each BMP and conveyance the right to access, inspect, operate, maintain,
and repair the BMP or conveyance when the feature is to be owned, operated and maintained
by a person other than the municipality and other than the owner of the parcel on which it is
located;
Be shown, with bearings and distances noted, on the SWM site plan map/plan sheets, O&M
plan map/plan sheets, final as-built plans, and be signed and sealed by a qualified licensed
professional;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 270/620
(8)
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
B.
(1)
C.
Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement shall run with the land and
bind the landowner granting the easement, its heirs, administrators, successors in interest
and assigns, into perpetuity; and
Be recorded at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds following municipal
approval and prior to the start of construction.
For any BMP or conveyance to be owned by a person other than the municipality or the landowner
owning the parcel upon which a BMP or conveyance is located, an easement agreement shall be
prepared and executed between the landowner and the owner of the BMP or conveyance which
shall:
Describe the ownership interests of all parties to the easement agreement, including the
ownership of the BMP or conveyance;
Include a written legal (metes and bounds) description of the easement area, with reference
to a recorded plan sheet showing the legal boundaries of the easement area (or an
accompanying plan sheet/map), signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional;
Grant an easement from the landowner to the owner of each BMP and conveyance,
establishing the right and obligation to occupy, access, inspect, operate, maintain, and repair
the BMP or conveyance;
Include a description of the purpose of the easement and the responsibilities of the parties
involved;
Incorporate by reference or be recorded with the corresponding O&M plan and O&M
agreement;
Restrict the landowner's use of the easement area of the parcel on which the BMP or
conveyance is located, consistent with the rights granted to the owner of the BMP or
conveyance;
Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to approval of the SWM site
plan;
Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the owner of the BMP(s) or conveyance(s)
and the landowner and submitted for signature by the municipality;
Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement will run with the land affected
by the easement and that the easement agreement is binding upon the parties to the
easement agreement, their heirs, administrators, successors in interest and assigns, into
perpetuity;
Contain additional provisions or information as required by the municipality; and
When fully executed, be recorded by the landowner at the Chester County Office of the
Recorder of Deeds against all parcels affected by the terms of the easement agreement,
following municipal approval of the O&M plan and prior to the start of construction.
For any BMP or conveyance which is designed to receive runoff from another parcel or parcels
and which is owned by the landowner of the parcel upon which the BMP or conveyance is located,
in addition to any easement or easement agreement required pursuant to § 214-39A or B, an
easement agreement shall be prepared and executed between the landowner of the parcel or
parcels draining to the BMP or conveyance and the owner of the BMP or conveyance. This
easement agreement shall:
Describe the ownership interests of all parties to the easement agreement, including the
ownership of all affected parcels and of the BMP or conveyance;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 271/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
Provide for the grant of a drainage easement from the owner of the BMP or conveyance to
the landowner of the parcel(s) draining to the BMP, which shall extend from the shared parcel
boundary(ies) to the receiving BMP and shall include the connecting flow path(s) or
conveyance;
Include a written legal (metes and bounds) description of the easement area, with reference
to a recorded plan sheet showing the legal boundaries of the easement area (or an
accompanying plan sheet/map), signed and sealed by a licensed professional;
Incorporate by reference or be recorded with the corresponding O&M plan and O&M
agreement;
State that the purpose of the easement agreement is to ensure the continuous right of the
discharging parcel to discharge onto the parcel containing the BMP and into the BMP or
conveyance;
Restrict the BMP or conveyance owner's use of the easement area of the parcel upon which
the BMP or conveyance is located, consistent with the purpose of the easement granted;
Establish the duty and responsibility of the landowner of the parcel or parcels draining to the
BMP or conveyance to maintain the existing drainages on the discharging parcel or parcels
as designed and constructed to discharge to the receiving BMP;
Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement will run with the land and will
bind all parties to the easement agreement, their heirs, administrators, successors in interest
and assigns, into perpetuity;
Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to approval of the SWM site
plan;
Contain all additional provisions or information as the municipality may require upon review;
and
Be executed by the parties to the easement agreement and recorded at the Chester County
Recorder of Deeds Office against the draining parcel(s) and the parcel upon which the BMP
or conveyance is located, following municipal approval and prior to the start of construction.
For any area(s) shown on the SWM site plan maps/plan sheets or as-built plan sheets as
requiring, or area(s) that is otherwise determined to require, deed restriction(s) for the purpose of
protecting and prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or conveyance, such deed restrictions will be
incorporated into a written deed, restrictive covenant, or equivalent document. The deed or other
document shall:
Include a clear and understandable description of the purpose, terms and conditions of the
restricted use;
Include the written legal description (metes and bounds description) of the area to which the
restrictions apply that is consistent with the boundary shown on the O&M plan sheets and
SWM site plan maps/plan sheets;
Make reference to any corresponding O&M plan(s) and O&M agreement(s);
Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the terms of the restriction run with the land
and shall be binding upon the landowner, its heirs, administrators, successors in interest, and
assigns;
Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to approval of the SWM site
plan;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 272/620
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the landowner and owner of the BMP or
conveyance and submitted to the municipality; and
Be fully executed and recorded at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds within
20 days of the municipality's approval of the O&M plan.
§ 214-40. Other postconstruction responsibilities.
The provisions of § 214-44 of this chapter shall apply to any permanent BMP or conveyance that
is constructed as part of an approved SWM site plan or covered by an approved O&M plan.
The person responsible for the operation and maintenance of a BMP or conveyance shall make
records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at
least 15 years. These records shall be submitted to the municipality, if requested.
Upon final inspection, the municipality shall inform the person responsible for the operation and
maintenance whether the submission of periodic (annual or other frequency) inspection and
maintenance reports will be required.
The owner of each BMP and conveyance shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person responsible for maintenance activities and
implementation of the O&M plan. In the event of a change, new information shall be submitted by
the BMP or conveyance owner to the municipality within 30 working days of the change.
Article VIII. Prohibitions
§ 214-41. Prohibited discharges.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the municipality's
separate storm sewer system or the waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.
No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer
system or the waters of the commonwealth that are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
As provided in § 214-41C below; and
Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined by the municipality to be
significant contributors to pollution to the municipality's separate storm sewer system or to the
waters of the commonwealth:
Discharges from fire-fighting activities;
Potable water sources including waterline and fire hydrant flushings;
Irrigation drainage;
Air-conditioning condensate;
Springs;
Water from crawl space pumps;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 273/620
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not
occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used;
Diverted stream flows;
Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;
Lawn watering;
Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
Uncontaminated groundwater;
Water from individual residential car washing; and
Routine external building washdown (which does not use detergents or other compounds).
In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges identified in § 214-41C
significantly contribute pollutants to the municipality's separate storm sewer system or to the
waters of the commonwealth, or is notified of such significant contribution of pollution by PA DEP,
the municipality will notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
Upon notice provided by the municipality under § 214-41D, the discharger shall, within a
reasonable time period, as determined by the municipality consistent with the degree of pollution
caused by the discharge, cease the discharge.
Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under state law.
§ 214-42. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 214-41C above:
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter a separate storm
sewer system, and any connections to the separate storm sewer system from indoor drains and
sinks.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to a separate storm
sewer system, which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by the municipality.
§ 214-43. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pump discharges shall not be connected to sanitary sewers.
Roof drain, sump pump, foundation and footing drain discharges:
To the maximum extent practicable, shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs, or to
vegetated or other areas with adequate capacity;
May be connected to streets, storm sewers, or roadside ditches only if determined necessary
or acceptable by the Municipal Engineer; and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 274/620
(3)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
Shall be considered in stormwater management calculations to demonstrate that conveyance
and receiving facilities have adequate capacity.
§ 214-44. Alteration of BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, alter, or impair the effectiveness of any stormwater
BMPs, conveyances, facilities, areas or structures unless the activity is part of an approved
maintenance program, without the written approval of the municipality.
No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, additional vegetation, yard waste, brush
cuttings, or other waste or debris into a BMP or conveyance, or within a stormwater easement,
that would limit or alter the functioning of the stormwater BMP or conveyance, without the written
approval of the municipality.
Article IX. Enforcement; Penalties for Offenses
§ 214-45. Public nuisance.
Any regulated activity conducted in the violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed
a public nuisance.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A separate violation will be found to exist for each section of this chapter found to have been
violated.
To the extent that the municipality does not enforce any provision of this chapter, such action or
inaction shall not constitute a waiver by the municipality of its rights of future enforcement
hereunder.
§ 214-46. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized officers or agents of the municipality may
enter at reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of all erosion and sediment controls and permanent
stormwater BMPs, conveyances, or other stormwater facilities both during and after completion of
a regulated activity, or for compliance with any requirement of this chapter.
Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to temporarily locate on or in any
BMP, conveyance or other stormwater facility in the municipality such devices as are necessary to
conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such BMP or conveyance, or other
stormwater facilities.
Failure of the landowner or representative to grant access to the municipality within 48 hours of
notification, verbal or written, is a violation of this chapter.
§ 214-47. Enforcement.
The Municipal Engineer or other designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter. The municipal governing body may delegate enforcement duties,
including the initial determination of chapter violation and service of notice, if notice is given, to
such other officers or agents as the municipality shall deem qualified for that purpose.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 275/620
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
F.
G.
H.
(1)
A.
It shall be the responsibility of the landowner of the real property on which any regulated activity is
proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with the applicable terms and
conditions of this chapter.
All municipal inspections for compliance with the approved SWM site plan shall be the
responsibility of the municipality or its designee.
During any stage of the work of any regulated activity, if the Municipal Engineer or other designee
determines that the erosion and sediment control measures, permanent BMPs, conveyances or
other stormwater facilities are not being installed or maintained in accordance with the approved
SWM site plan, the municipality may suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals
until the deficiencies are corrected or until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved, if
and as determined to be necessary by the Municipal Engineer or other designee.
In the event that the Municipal Engineer or other designee finds that a person has violated a
provision of this chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit or approval issued
by the municipality, or any O&M plan or O&M agreement approved by the municipality, the
municipality may order compliance by written notice of the violation to the landowner.
Such notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs and/or forfeiture of financial
security;
Implementation of stormwater controls, BMPs, and conveyances; and
Operation, maintenance or repair of BMPs, conveyances or other stormwater facilities.
Such notice shall set forth the nature of the violation(s), citing to specific sections of this chapter
which have not been met, and establish a time limit for commencement of correction and
completion of correction of the violation(s). The notice shall provide for a right of the landowner's
appeal to the municipal governing body in accordance with § 214-50 of this chapter. Said notice
shall further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the required action within the
established deadline, possible sanctions, clearly described, may be imposed, or the work may be
done by the municipality or designee, and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
Failure to comply within the time specified in such notice shall also subject such person to the
penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not
prevent the municipality from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
§ 214-48. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by the municipality may be
suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the permit or approved SWM site
plan or O&M agreement;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 276/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other law or regulation applicable to the
regulated activity;
The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during the regulated activity that
constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, or endangers the life, health, safety, or property
of others; or
Failure to correct a violation within the allowed time period allowed per notice given by the
municipality.
Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, unless there is immediate danger or threat of such
danger to life, public health or property, at the request of the applicant, the municipality's governing
body shall schedule a hearing on the violation and proposed revocation or suspension, pursuant
to public notice. The expense of a hearing shall be the applicant's responsibility.
A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
The Municipal Engineer or other designee has inspected and approved the corrections to the
BMPs, conveyances or other stormwater facilities, or the elimination of the hazard or
nuisance; and
The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
A permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be reinstated. The
applicant may apply for a new permit or approval in accordance with this chapter.
§ 214-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or permitting the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $500 for each violation, recoverable with costs. The establishment of a
violation for purposes of setting fines or penalties for such violation shall be in accordance with a
citation to a magisterial district judge with jurisdiction and venue over the location of the violation
and such an action will be subject to the procedures provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof a violation is found to exist and may be determined for each section of
this chapter which is found to have been violated.
In addition, the municipality may, through its solicitor, institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court
of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other legal or equitable forms of remedy or relief. Such relief may
include costs, fees, and charges, including the municipality's attorney's fees (charged at the hourly
rate approved by the governing body of the municipality) and costs, as may be permitted by law.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the municipality shall have the right at any or
all times deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer or designee to enter upon any property
within the municipality to inspect and, upon determination of a violation of this chapter, to correct
the violation, with all expenses associated with correcting the violation to be charged to the
property owner responsible for the violation.
§ 214-50. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipal Engineer or other designee relative to the
provisions of this chapter may appeal to the municipality's governing body within 30 days of that
action.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 277/620
B.
[1]
[1]
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality's governing body relative to the
provisions of this chapter may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where
the activity has taken place within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
Chapter 218. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Broadband communications — See Ch. 94.
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
Cable television franchise agreement — See Ch. A270.
Article I. Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 5-20-1974 by Ord. No. 74-01]
§ 218-1. Statutory requirement.
In accordance with the provisions of Article XXIII of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
§ 67322, as amended, no railroad or street railway shall hereafter be constructed upon any Township
road, nor shall any railroad or street railway crossings, nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric conduits
or other piping, be laid upon or in, nor shall any telephone, telegraph or electric light or power poles or
any coal tipples or any other obstructions be erected upon or in any portion of a Township road except
under such conditions, restrictions and regulations relating to the installation and maintenance thereof
as may be prescribed in permits granted by the Township for such purpose.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 218-2. Application.
The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the Township and submitted to the
Township in duplicate. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the Schedule
of Fees set forth by the Department of Transportation for highway occupancy permits and restoration
charges. In addition, the applicant shall submit two copies of a sketch showing such dimensions as the
location of the intended facility, width of the traveled roadway, right-of-way lines and a dimension to the
nearest intersecting street.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 218-3. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all the aforementioned requirements have been filed.
§ 218-4. Notice as work completed.
Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall give written notice thereof to the Township.
§ 218-5. Inspection.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 278/620
[1]
[1]
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the Township shall inspect the work and, when
necessary, enforce compliance with the conditions, restrictions and regulations prescribed by the
permit. In addition to that inspection, the Board of Supervisors or its agents may reinspect the work not
more than two years after its completion, and if any settlement of the road surface or other defect
appears in the work contrary to the conditions, restrictions and regulations of the Township, the Board
of Supervisors may enforce compliance therewith. Where any settlement or defect in the work occurs,
if the applicant fails to rectify a defect which presents an immediate or imminent safety or health
problem within 48 hours or any other defect within 60 days after written notice from the Township to do
so, the Township may do the work and impose upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with an
additional 20% of such cost.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 218-6. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Any person, firm, corporation or utility which violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $600, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township. If the penalty imposed for the violation of this
article is not voluntarily paid to the Township, the Township shall initiate a civil enforcement proceeding
before a Magisterial District Judge. Upon a finding of liability for committing said violation or permitting
said violation, in such civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, the defendant shall
pay the fine, together with additional daily penalties for continuing violations, plus all court costs,
including attorneys' fees. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of determination of a violation by
a Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article II. Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair
[Adopted 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-10]
§ 218-7. Obligation of abutting property owner.
The owner of each property within the Township abutting upon a sidewalk open to the public for
pedestrian traverse or located, in whole or in part, within the right-of-way of a public or private street on
which the property abuts, shall keep the said sidewalk, together with any portion of the property paved
and used as a sidewalk or public walk, immediately in front of the property in good order and repair
and at all times free and clear of all obstruction to safe and convenient passage, including the
accumulation of snow or ice. "Good order and repair" means that sidewalks and paved areas shall be
level and free of exposed aggregate and significant holes, ridges, cracks and defects.
§ 218-8. Removal of snow and ice.
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property abutting any sidewalk or public walk as described in
§ 218-7 above shall be required to remove or cause to be removed from all of said abutting sidewalk or
public walk snow and/or ice thereon fallen or formed within 24 hours after the said snow or ice shall
have ceased to fall or be formed.
§ 218-9. Notice of violation.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 279/620
[1]
If the owner, occupant or tenant of any property neglects at any time to perform the duties herein
described, the Township Code Enforcement Officer may serve written notice of violation ("violation
notice") upon him requiring him to perform the necessary snow/ice removal, maintenance or repair.
The violation notice shall specify the required repair or maintenance, the time by which said
maintenance or repair shall be commenced and the time by which it shall be completed. The violation
notice shall be served on the owner, occupant or tenant of the property by hand delivery or by mailing
the notice by both certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail to the postal address of the
abutting property.
§ 218-10. Performance and assessment of costs of maintenance
or repair on continued violation.
If such property owner, occupant or tenant fails to comply with the requirements of the violation notice
described in the preceding section within the time period specified therein, the Township may, but is
not required to, make the necessary repairs, perform the necessary maintenance or remove any
obstruction, and the cost of the same, together with a penalty to defray administrative expenses in the
amount of 10% of the said cost, shall be paid by the property owner, occupant or tenant and may be
assessed and collected by the Township as and in the manner of a municipal lien or by any other
appropriate legal action.
§ 218-11. Violations and penalties.
If the owner, occupant or tenant of any property abutting a sidewalk or paved area, as described in
§ 218-7 herein above, fails to comply with the violation notice, the Township Code Enforcement Officer
may assess a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each violation. The notice of assessment of a fine ("fine
notice") shall be served on the owner, occupant or tenant by mailing a notice by hand delivery or by
both certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail to the postal address of the property
abutting the sidewalk. Upon failure of the owner, occupant or tenant to pay the fine within the time
period prescribed in the fine notice, an action shall be brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
same manner provided for enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure. Each day or portion of a day in which a violation is found to exist shall constitute a
separate violation. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this article shall be paid to the
Township Treasurer.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article III. Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 11-24-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03]
§ 218-12. Snow and ice not to be deposited on streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or entity (hereinafter "person") to push, dump or
deposit in any manner, or cause to be pushed, dumped or deposited in any manner, any snow or ice
which has accumulated on any sidewalk or private property onto any private street, public street, public
park or public property in Uwchlan Township.
§ 218-13. Exception.
The provisions of § 218-12 shall not apply to Uwchlan Township, its employees and contractors,
involved in snow removal and deicing operations.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 280/620
[1]
[1]
§ 218-14. Notice of violation.
Any person violating the provisions of § 218-12, upon the direction of a Township police officer, the
Township Manager, the Township Road Superintendent or their designees, shall immediately desist
from pushing, dumping or depositing snow or ice onto the street or public property and shall remove
any snow and ice from the street or public property that has been unlawfully deposited thereon. If the
person so notified fails to comply as aforesaid, the Township shall assess a fine as provided in § 218-
15 herein below.
§ 218-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the terms of this article shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof by a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs,
including reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 230. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 184.
Article I. Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 11-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-13; amended in its entirety 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 230-1. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., shall have the meanings
set forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR
The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the
tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE
January 1, 2011.
GOVERNING BODY
The Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT
The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., while such numbering and provisions remain
in effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq. when such
numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as amended in the future.
TAX
The tax imposed by this enactment.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 281/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
TAXING AUTHORITY
The Township of Uwchlan, 715 N. Ship Road, Exton, PA 19341.
TAX RETURN
A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount of tax or other amount owed or
required to be withheld, remitted, or reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR
The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC
The tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee the collection of earned income
tax within the TCD under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TCD
Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part of the taxing authority is
assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
THIS ENACTMENT
This article.
§ 230-2. Imposition of tax; rate.
General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a tax for general revenue
purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income and net profits of individual residents of the taxing
authority.
General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also imposes a tax for general
revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income and net profits derived by an individual who
is not a resident of the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity of any kind
engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the current tax year and each tax
year thereafter, without annual reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is
changed.
Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate applicable to residents of the
taxing authority, including the tax imposed by the school district and municipality in which the
individual resides, is 1%.
Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate applicable to nonresidents
working within the taxing authority based on the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated
into this enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required to be
applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically become part of this enactment
upon the effective date of such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The Tax shall be collected and
administered in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations and with policies and
procedures adopted by the TCC or by the collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and
procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 230-3. Exemption.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 282/620
[1]
Although credits and deductions against the tax are permitted under certain circumstances as provided
in applicable law and regulations, no individuals are exempt from tax based on age, income, or other
factors.
§ 230-4. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax year shall file tax returns and
pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 230-5. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit the tax, and file tax returns in accordance with the
Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 230-6. Collection of tax.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
§ 230-7. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines in accordance with the
Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by the collector in accordance with authorization by
the TCC having jurisdiction.
§ 230-8. Purpose; effect on prior provisions.
The primary purpose of this enactment is to conform the earned income and net profits tax currently
imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so
within the time frame required by Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income or net
profits of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read as stated in this enactment. Any
other prior enactment or part of any prior enactment conflicting with the provisions of this enactment is
rescinded insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in force immediately
prior to adoption of this enactment, the provisions of this enactment are intended as a continuation of
such prior enactment and not as a new enactment. If this enactment is declared invalid, any prior
enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected in any
manner by adoption of this enactment. If any part of this enactment is declared invalid, the similar part
of any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption
of this enactment. The provisions of this enactment shall not affect any act done or liability incurred,
nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or
penalty or to punish an offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to adoption of this
enactment. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, this enactment shall amend and restate
on the effective date any enactment levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately
prior to the effective date.[1]
Editor's Note: The effective date, as defined in § 230-1, is 1-1-2011.
§ 230-9. through § 230-10. (Reserved)
Article II. Realty Transfer Tax
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 283/620
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[Adopted 4-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-09]
§ 230-11. Tax levied; title.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon the transfer of real
estate or interest in real estate situated within Uwchlan Township, regardless of where the
documents making the transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D of the Local Real Estate Transfer Tax, 72
P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Uwchlan Township Realty Transfer Tax
Ordinance."
§ 230-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACQUIRED COMPANY
A real estate company upon a change in the ownership interest in the company, however effected,
if the change does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together with prior
changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total ownership
interest in the company within a period of three years.
ASSOCIATION
A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of unincorporated enterprise owned or
conducted by two or more persons other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION
A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or banking institution which is organized
under the laws of this Commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT
Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences
any transfer or demise of title to real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust
or other instrument of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to
the debtor; land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee until the total
consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the
consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely
grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a declaration of
acquisition required to be presented for recording under § 230-16 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION
A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at
least 75% of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, camping, skiing, show
competition or racing;
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets or
animals intended for use in sporting or recreational activities;
Fur farming;
Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 284/620
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY
Any individual, such individual's brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's
parents and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a spouse
of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood
or legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON
Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term "person" as applied to associations shall
include the responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township, including without limitation
buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper
or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests which by
custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached
machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation, trust or association
under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
REAL ESTATE COMPANY
A corporation or association which is primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling, leasing
real estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or disposition of real
estate; or
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the value of its entire tangible
asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable and actively traded
on an established market.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the termination of which is not
fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years, including without limitation an estate in fee
simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but which, either by reason of
the length of the term or the grant of a right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise,
consists of a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or possessory interest
under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest
or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has equity.
TRANSACTION
The making, execution, delivering, accepting or presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for actual monetary worth, the
amount of the actual consideration therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or other
encumbrances thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 285/620
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof,
where such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged
against other real estate, provided that, where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual
consideration of the contract of sale;
In the case of gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the foreclosure of a mortgage
by a judicial officer, transactions without consideration or for consideration less than the actual
monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or
possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired company,
the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting the assessed value of
the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base
calculations;
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of which is not
determinable under Subsections A or B, the actual monetary worth of such interest; or
The actual consideration of or actual monetary worth of any executory agreement for the
construction of buildings, structures or other permanent improvements to real estate between
the grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related corporation, association
or partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
§ 230-13. Imposition of tax; interest.
Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for recording any document or
in whose behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording
shall be subject to pay for, in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax at the rate of 1%
of the value of the real estate represented by such document, which tax shall be payable at the
earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of such
document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the affixing of an official stamp or
writing by the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County whereon the date of the payment of the tax,
amount of the tax and the signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed herein on a person or transfer
shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that, if any other political subdivision shall impose or
thereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or transfer, then the tax levied by the
Township under the authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of tax exists, except
as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and such 1/2 rate shall become effective
without any action on the part of Township; provided, however, that the Township and any other
political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or transfer may agree that,
instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted under
the Local Tax Enabling Act.
The tax imposed hereunder and all applicable interest and penalties shall be administered,
collected and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended,
known as "the Local Tax Enabling Act," provided that, if the correct amount of the tax is not paid
by the last date prescribed for timely payment, Uwchlan Township, pursuant to § 1102-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and
penalties.
[Added 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-01[1]]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 286/620
[1]
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Section 3(d) of Ord. No. 87-09 but continued its
provisions for documents that became subject to the tax prior to the effective date of this
ordinance. The effective date of this ordinance is applicable to any document made, executed,
delivered, accepted or presented for recording on or after 10-5-2005.
Any tax imposed hereunder that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest as
prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207,
No. 153), 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., as amended, known as "the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens
Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176), 72
P.S. § 806, as amended, known as "the Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted
under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
[Added 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-01]
§ 230-14. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political
subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 230-15. Excluded transactions.
The tax imposed by § 230-13 shall not be imposed upon:
A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities, agencies or political
subdivision, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation in
connection with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of
the property condemned to the owner of record at the time of condemnation, which
reconveyance may include property line adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made
within one year from the date of condemnation.
A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under the constitution or statutes of
the United States.
A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county pursuant to acquisition by
the municipality, Township, school district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale
or tax claim bureau sale.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or confirms a transfer
previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit existing record legal title or interest.
A transfer of division by land for no or nominal actual consideration of property passed by
testate or intestate succession and held by covenants; however, if any of the parties take
shares greater in value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were previously husband and
wife who have since been divorced, provided the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the
final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between brother
or sister or spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year
shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 287/620
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by testate or intestate
succession from a personal representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an ordinary trust where the
transfer of the same property would be exempt if the transfer was made directly from the
grantor to all of the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the recorder of deeds is
presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible
beneficiaries.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a beneficiary of an ordinary
trust.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to successor trustee.
A transfer: a) for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and agent or straw
party; or b) from or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his
principal, no tax would be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by
the grantee from or for the benefit of his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an
exemption from taxation under this cause.
A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a corporation or statutory
division of a nonprofit corporation, except where the Department reasonably determines that
the primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division, is avoidance of the tax imposed
by this article.
A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record in the name of the
corporation or association, where the grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in
the association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the association has been
held by the grantee for more than two years.
A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee of property
conveyed by the grantee to that agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee purchasing
directly from it, but only if: a) the grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing, research and
development, transportation, energy conservation, energy production, pollution control,
warehousing or agriculture; and b) the agency or authority has the full ownership interest in
the real estate transferred.
A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in default in lieu of a
foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in which the successful bidder is the bona
fide holder of a mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons holding title for a
religious organization if such real estate is not being or has not been used by such transferor
for commercial purposes.
A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status pursuant to Section 501(c)
(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has
as its primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or
open space opportunities.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 288/620
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a family farm corporation by
a member of the same family which directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock
thereof.
A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership interest in a real estate
company or family farm corporation.
A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals and assignments
thereof.
In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full and complete value of the
transfer shall be shown on the statement of value. (A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer
Tax Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose). For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
§ 230-16. Documents relating to associations, corporations and
acquired companies.
Except as otherwise provided in § 230-15 hereof, documents which make, confirm or evidence
any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations or corporations and their
members, partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this
article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall present for recording a
declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County for the purpose of noting
thereon or the affixation thereto of such documentary stamps or evidence of the payment of this
tax as required by law. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings of the
acquired company in Chester County.
§ 230-17. Credits against tax.
Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real estate broker, which property
was transferred to him within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him shall
be given to him toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was transferred to the builder
within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder
shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the grantor, a credit for the amount of
tax paid at the time of the demise shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew or extend a
lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the
rental charge is established.
Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously sold under a land
contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the
grantor toward the tax due upon the deed.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 289/620
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under this section, the difference
shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over
credit shall be allowed.
§ 230-18. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the proceeds of any judicial sale of
real estate before any other obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ
upon which the sale is made, and the sheriff or other officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax
herein imposed out of the first monies paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 230-19. Real estate or interest therein partially located in the
Township.
Where real estate or interest in real estate lying partially within the boundaries of Uwchlan Township
and partly without said boundaries is transferred, the tax herein imposed shall be calculated upon such
portion of the value as shall be represented by the portion of real estate or interest therein lying within
the boundaries of the Township as determined by the realty transfer tax statement of value filed with
the Recorder of Deeds or, if no such filing is required, by affidavit of the transferor, or as separately
stated in the document of transfer; provided, however, such value shall in no event be less than the
highest assessed valuation for local tax purposes placed upon the real estate or the interest in the real
estate in the assessment of the property within the Township.
§ 230-20. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County for recording
shall set forth therein and as part of such document the true, full and complete value thereof. When the
full, complete and actual consideration which is subject to the tax is not set forth in the document, the
person liable for the tax shall, contemporaneously with the filing of the document, file with the Recorder
of Deeds a realty transfer tax statement of value identical to that promulgated by the Department of
Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or, in the instance of an acquired company a realty
transfer tax declaration of acquisition identical to that promulgated by the Department of Revenue of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The provisions of the section shall not apply to any excludable
real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family relationship.
§ 230-21. Recorder of Deeds as agent for the Township.
The tax imposed hereby, including any amount payable to the Township based on a redetermination of
the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to § 230-23 hereof, shall be
collected by the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County, who shall act as agent for the Township in the
collection of the transfer tax as provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended. The tax thus collected shall
be payable by the Recorder to the Treasurer of Uwchlan Township at least monthly or at such other
intervals as the Township and the Recorder of Deeds shall mutually determine.
§ 230-22. Documentary stamps or other evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed by this article when received by the Recorder of Deeds shall be
evidence by the affixing of a documentary stamp or stamps or other evidence of payment as approved
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 290/620
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
§ 230-23. Determination of additional tax due or redetermination.
In the event a determination or redetermination of transfer tax due is made by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 1111-C of the Act 1986-77, 72 P.S. § 8111-C, such
determination or redetermination shall be deemed to have been also made by the Secretary of
Uwchlan Township, and there shall be due and owing to the Township as additional transfer tax
the amount determined or redetermined by the Department to be due the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Upon redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the document only when the transfer tax imposed by
this article has been paid.
§ 230-24. Township Secretary as enforcement officer.
The Secretary of Uwchlan Township is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this
article and is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations
relating to the registration and notation of transactions, the collection of transfer taxes, interest and
penalties due hereunder, the prosecution of violations hereunder, and any other matter pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article; provided, however, that the
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under 72 P.S.
§ 1101-C et seq., as the same are from time to time amended, are incorporated into and made a part
of this article and shall be deemed to have been adopted by the Township Secretary.
§ 230-25. Collection of delinquent transfer taxes and the
imposition of interest and penalties.
If for any reason a transfer tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per annum on the
amount of said tax, and additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of unpaid tax for each month
or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit
is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for
the cost of collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
The transfer tax, when due and unpaid, together with all interest and penalties thereon, shall be a
lien in favor of the Township on real estate or interest in the real estate which is described in the
document on which the tax is imposed, and upon any other property, both real and personal, of
the person failing to pay the tax due, after said lien has been entered and adopted of record by the
Prothonotary of Chester County in accordance with the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Law.
If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to fraud, there shall be added
to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected and enforced in accordance with "the Local Tax
Enabling Act." The Township Solicitor is authorized to pursue any and all remedies available by
law for collection of the tax, and all such remedies shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
§ 230-26. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05]
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 291/620
(1)
(2)
[1]
B.
Accept or present for recording or cause to be accepted or presented for recording any
document without the full amount of the tax thereon being duly paid; or
Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the provisions of this article or the rules or
regulations prescribed, adopted and promulgated by the Secretary under the provisions of
this article.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township. If the penalty
imposed for the violation of this article is not voluntarily paid to the Township, the Township shall
initiate a civil enforcement proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge. Upon a finding of liability
for committing said violation in such civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township,
the defendant shall pay the fine, together with additional daily penalties for continuing violations,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees. No judgment shall be imposed until the
date of determination of a violation by a Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Article III. Amusements Tax
[Adopted 11-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-12]
§ 230-27. Short title.
This article shall be known as "The Uwchlan Township Mechanical Devices Tax Ordinance of 1996."
§ 230-28. Definitions.
Except as otherwise indicated by the context, the following words shall have the following meanings
when used in this article. Use of the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter, and
reference to the masculine singular shall include the plural.
COLLECTOR
The person or organization appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township to collect
the mechanical devices tax levied by this article.
DEVICE
Any jukebox or mechanical amusement device, as defined herein, which is located in an area
open to the general public and used, possessed, owned or operated for profit in Uwchlan
Township.
[Amended 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-03]
JUKEBOX
Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, bill, slug,
token, plate, disc, card or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, operates or may be operated
for the emission of song, music or similar entertainment, or amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE
Any electronic or mechanical device, machine, or apparatus which, upon the insertion of a coin,
bill, slug, token, plate, card or disc, operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill,
amusement or entertainment of any kind or description, whether or not registering a score and
whether or not a prize is offered, and which may or may not contain an automatic payoff of money
or token or slugs, or which may or may not make any provision whatever for the return of money
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 292/620
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
to the player, or which may or may not provide an award of additional games or additional playing
time. Further, a mechanical amusement device includes any electronic or mechanical device,
machine or apparatus which is used or may be used as a game of skill and amusement wherein a
player initiates, employs or directs any force generated by the machine or light illustrated on a
screen, board or machine. The term "mechanical amusement device" includes electronic
television entertainment operated by coin, bill, slug, token, plate, card or disc, some of which are
known as "video games;" provided, however, that this does not include coin-operated radios or
television sets carrying regular radio and television frequencies. It is provided further that the term
"mechanical amusement device" shall not include any gambling device, the operation of which is
contrary to law.
PERSON
Any natural person, association, organization, partnership, firm or corporation.
TOWNSHIP
Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.[1]
Editor's Note: The definition of “vending machine,” as amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-06, which
immediately followed this definition, was deleted 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-03.
§ 230-29. Imposition of tax.
Under the authority of the enabling act, for the tax year beginning January 1, 1997, and each year
thereafter, there is hereby imposed a tax for general revenue purposes upon the privilege of using for
profit within the Township any device as defined herein. On or after January 1, 1997, such tax shall be
payable annually by the person owning and/or operating the establishment in which such device is
installed for use. Such tax shall be payable at the following rate: On each device, as defined herein,
$100 for the calendar year or any portion thereof.
§ 230-30. Tax payable.
For the tax year beginning January 1, 1997, the tax imposed under this article shall be payable on or
before April 30 of each calendar year for the calendar year of January 1 through December 31. Every
person subject to pay the tax under this article shall file a return on a form prescribed by the Collector
and shall pay the tax directly to the Collector. Each such person who first becomes subject to the tax
on or before March 31 of the current tax year shall file the return and pay the tax on or before April 30
of the current tax year, and each such person who first becomes subject to the tax after March 30 of
the current tax year shall file the return and pay the tax within 30 days after the person first becomes
subject to the tax. No deduction or refund of any tax payable under this article shall be granted in the
case of any tax payable for less than a full year or in the case of any device destroyed, stolen, sold or
otherwise disposed of or transferred after the payment of such tax; provided, however, in the case of
the substitution of any device by another device, the use of which is taxable under this article, no
additional tax shall be paid, provided that the total number of devices in use upon the premises
remains no greater than that upon which such tax was paid.
§ 230-31. Certificate.
The Treasurer of the Township shall procure, at the expense of the Township, a sufficient number
of certificates, upon each of which the following information shall be printed or inserted in ink, by
computer, or by typewriter:
The name of the Township.
The number of the certificate.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 293/620
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
The name and address of the person paying the tax.
The address of the premises where the device is to be operated, together with the character
of the business carried on at the premises.
The year for which the tax shall have been paid.
The name, address and telephone number of the manager or person in charge of the place of
business where the device is operated.
The date on which such tax shall have been paid.
The type of device for which the tax shall have been paid, including name of manufacturer,
the serial number, trade name and a general description of each device on which tax is levied.
The amount of the tax paid.
Whenever any tax shall have been paid under this article, the Treasurer shall prepare, in
duplicate, a certificate, as herein prescribed. The original of such certificate, to which the Township
seal shall be affixed, shall be given to the person paying such tax, and the duplicate shall be kept
on file by the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall also procure and give to each person paying such tax
a seal to be affixed to each device for the use of which such tax shall have been paid. Such seal
shall indicate the year for which such tax shall have been paid, the type of device and the
certificate number.
In case of loss, defacement or destruction of any original certificate or seal, the person to whom
such certificate or seal was issued shall apply to the Treasurer who shall issue a new certificate or
seal in replacement thereof, upon payment of a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors, and who shall amend the duplicate of the certificate first issued in cases
where a new certificate has been issued.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
In case of relocation of any establishment in which any device for the use of which a tax shall have
been paid under this article to another location in the Township or in case of a change in the
identity of the person operating or owning such establishment, the person operating such
establishment shall report such fact within five days of such change in location or personnel, and
the Treasurer shall immediately amend the certificate and duplicate certificate.
Before the removal of any device from any establishment (other than removals to another location
in the Township), the person operating such establishment shall remove the seal issued under this
article from such device. Such seal may be affixed to any other device used in such establishment
during the current year.
§ 230-32. Power and duties of Collector.
It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this
article. It shall also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him for each device
and the date of such receipt. The Collector is hereby authorized and directed to make and keep such
records, prepare such forms, make such regulations and take such other measures as may be
necessary or convenient to carry this article into effect. For such services, the Collector shall receive a
fee of 3% of the taxes collected.
§ 230-33. Fines and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 294/620
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
Failure to pay any tax imposed by this article when due shall subject the person owing such tax to
interest thereon at the rate of 6% per year and a penalty of 10% of the tax. All taxes owing under this
article, and all interest and penalties thereon, shall be collected as other taxes are collected in
accordance with the enabling act, the Local Tax Collection Law of May 25, 1945, as amended, and any
other law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania relating to the collection of taxes.
§ 230-34. Penalty for failure to file return, etc.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, including the failure to file any return or report
or pay any tax as required herein, or violate any regulations of the Collector, or who shall knowingly file
any incomplete, false or fraudulent report or return under this article, or do or attempt to do anything
whatever to evade full disclosure or payment of the full amount of tax due hereunder, shall, upon
conviction in a civil proceeding, pay a civil penalty of not more than $500.
§ 230-35. Disposition of funds.
All taxes, interest and penalties collected or received under the provisions of this article shall be paid
into the Treasury of the Township for the use and benefit of the Township.
§ 230-36. Effective date.
This article shall be effective January 1, 1997.
Article IV. Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-04[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded Ord. No. 2004-11, adopted 12-29-2004, the Emergency and
Municipal Services Tax Ordinance.
§ 230-37. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "The Uwchlan Township Local Services Tax
Ordinance of 2008."
§ 230-38. Imposition of tax.
Every individual who engages in an occupation within the Township of Uwchlan shall pay a local
services tax to the Township in the amount of $52 per individual per calendar year.
In the event that an individual is engaged in more than one occupation, or in an occupation which
requires his working in more than one political subdivision during the calendar year, then the
provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, Section 2, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 6902, shall determine the priority of Uwchlan Township's claim to collect such
local services tax.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all interest, penalties and costs, shall be
recoverable by the Solicitor of Uwchlan Township as debts of like amounts are recoverable by law.
The tax imposed under this article shall be used for police, fire or emergency services, road
maintenance or real estate tax reduction purposes, as provided for under the provisions of the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 295/620
E.
Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, Section 22.6, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 6922.6.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended (53 P.S.
§ 6901 et seq.).
§ 230-39. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated except where the context
or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Use of the masculine gender shall
include the feminine and neuter, and reference to the masculine singular shall include the plural.
EARNED INCOME
Shall have the same meaning as provided for in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, Section 13, Division I, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913.
EMPLOYEE
An individual whose compensation is subject to the withholding of federal income tax and who
performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER
An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental body, agency or other entity
employing one or more individuals on a salary, commission or other compensation basis, including
a self-employed individual.
INDIVIDUAL
Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or profession of any nature within
the corporate limits of Uwchlan Township, whether in the employ of another or self-employed.
LOCAL SERVICES TAX COLLECTOR
The Treasurer of Uwchlan Township, his designated representative or a person or corporation
engaged for this purpose by contract with Uwchlan Township.
NET PROFITS
Shall have the same meaning as provided for in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, Section 13, Division I, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913.
OCCUPATION
Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services,
domestic or other, carried on or performed within the corporate limits of Uwchlan Township for
which compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages, commission,
fees or otherwise, for services rendered.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED SERVICES
The United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania
Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
SCHOOL DISTRICT
The Downingtown Area School District.
TAX
The local services tax in the amount of $52 levied by this article on each individual engaged in any
occupation, as hereinbefore defined, within the corporate limits of Uwchlan Township.
YEAR
The calendar year.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 296/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
§ 230-40. Collection and payment of tax.
Duty of employer to collect and make payment. Each employer within Uwchlan Township, as well
as each employer situated outside of Uwchlan Township but who engages in business within
Uwchlan Township, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting from each employee engaged by
the employer and performing for the employer within Uwchlan Township the tax of $52 per annum
and making a return and payment thereof to the Local Services Tax Collector. Subject to the
withholding requirements of this section, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct the tax
from the compensation of each employee in its employ, whether said employee is paid by salary,
wages or commissions and whether or not part or all of such services are performed within
Uwchlan Township. Each employer shall pay the tax to the Local Services Tax Collector, as
provided herein, whether or not the tax was deducted from the compensation of each employee in
its employ.
An employer required hereunder to collect the tax shall withhold a pro-rata share of the total
tax per annum for each payroll period in which the person is engaged in an occupation. The
pro-rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll period shall be determined by
dividing the combined rate of the local services tax levied for the calendar year by the number
of payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro-rata share, an employer shall round down the amount of the tax collected
each payroll period to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar. Collection of the local services
tax levied under this section shall be made on a payroll period basis for each payroll period in
which the person is engaging in an occupation, except as provided for in Subsection A(3).
Upon notification to an employer by the person or by Uwchlan Township that a person has
received earned income and net profits from all sources within Uwchlan Township equal to or
in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax
exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of earned
income within Uwchlan Township in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax from the person for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first
payroll period after receipt of the notification hereunder, a lump sum equal to the amount of
tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption claimed by the person under
this section, plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax
withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the
same amount withheld for other employees. In the event that the employment of a person
subject to withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in that calendar
year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due, and Uwchlan Township
may pursue collection of the tax.
In the case of an employee who has concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax if the employee provides a recent pay stub from a principal
employer that includes the name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the
amount of the local services tax withheld, and a statement from the employee that the pay
statement is from the employer's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two weeks of its occurrence.
Returns; responsibility for payment. Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a
computation of the tax on forms to be supplied to him by the Local Services Tax Collector. It is
further provided that, if the employer fails to file said return and pay said tax, whether or not he
makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to said employee, the
employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had originally
been levied against the employer. A tax return must be filed for each calendar quarter, regardless
of whether withholdings were completed or any tax liabilities exist.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 297/620
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
A.
Dates for determining liability and payment. Each employer shall use his employment record as of
each payroll period in the calendar year to determine from whom the tax shall be deducted. An
employer shall be required to remit quarterly payments of the tax to the Local Services Tax
Collector on or before the 30th day after the end of each quarter of a calendar year on forms
prescribed by the Local Services Tax Collector.
Self-employed individuals. Every taxpayer who is self-employed and has not filed an exemption
certificate with the Tax Collector, or whose tax for any other reason is not collected under § 230-40
of this article, shall file a return on a form prescribed by the Tax Collector and shall pay a pro-rata
share of the tax directly to the Tax Collector within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
The pro-rata share of the tax assessed on a taxpayer for a calendar quarter shall be determined
by dividing the rate of the tax levied under this article for the year by four.
Persons residing outside the Township. All self-employed individuals and employers residing or
having their place of business outside the corporate limits of Uwchlan Township and engaging in
an occupation within the Township do by virtue thereof agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated hereunder with the
same force and effect as though they had their place of business in or were residents of Uwchlan
Township. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within Uwchlan Township and as an
employee of a nonresident employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a selfemployed
person, but in the event the tax is not paid, the Local Services Tax Collector shall have
the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection as hereinafter
provided.
Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
Each employee who shall have more than one occupation within Uwchlan Township shall be
subject to the payment of this tax on his principal occupation, and his principal employer shall
deduct this tax. The principal employer shall deliver to such employee evidence of deduction.
This evidence of deduction, showing that payment having been made and when presented to
any other employer, shall be authority for such employer to not deduct this tax from the
employee's wages but to include such employee on his return by setting forth his name,
social security number and the name of the employer who deducted this tax.
In the event that an individual is engaged in more than one occupation or an occupation
which requires his working in more than one political subdivision during the calendar year, the
priority of claim to collect such local services tax shall be in the following order: first, the
political subdivision in which an individual maintains his principal office or is principally
employed; second, the political subdivision in which the individual resides and works if such a
tax is levied by that political subdivision; third, the political subdivision in which an individual is
employed and which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the individual's home. The place of
employment shall be determined as of the day the taxpayer first becomes subject to the tax
during the calendar year.
It is the intent of this provision that no individual shall pay more than $52 in any calendar year
as a local services tax, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which such
individual may be employed within any given calendar year. In case of dispute, a proof of
payment that the tax has been paid for that calendar year shall constitute prima facie
certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
Each employer shall ensure that exemption certificate forms are readily available to employees at
all times and shall furnish each new employee with an exemption certificate form at the time of
hiring and prior to the first payroll period of each year.
§ 230-41. Administration and enforcement.
Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 298/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
[1]
C.
A.
B.
C.
It shall be the duty of the Local Services Tax Collector to accept and receive payments of the
tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him from each employer or
self-employed individual, together with the date the tax was received.
The Local Services Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement
of this article and is hereby charged and empowered to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
article, including provisions for the examination of the books, accounts and payroll records of
any employer subject to this article, the examination and correction of any return made in
compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
overpayment is claimed and found to have occurred.
The Local Services Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, accounts and
payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by an
employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby
directed and required to give the Local Services Tax Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examination.
Late payment; recovery. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty of 10% shall be
added to the tax, and interest at the rate of 1% per month or fraction thereof shall also be added.
Where legal action is brought for the recovery of the tax, the individual or employer thereafter
shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for collection costs including attorneys' fees.
Violations and penalties. Any person who makes any false or untrue statement on any return or
record required by this article refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts in his custody
and control, fails or refuses to file any return required by this article or fails to pay the tax due shall
be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $600, for each offense, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township. Upon a finding of liability for
committing said violation, or permitting said violation, in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, the defendant shall pay the fine plus costs and attorneys' fees. No
judgment shall be imposed until the date of determination of a violation by a court of competent
jurisdiction. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. It is further provided that
the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may be instituted against any person in
charge of the business of any employer who has failed or refuses to file a return required by this
article.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 230-42. Exemptions.
Any person whose total earned income and net profits from all sources within Uwchlan Township
is less than $12,000 per calendar year in which the tax is levied shall be exempt from this tax upon
the filing of an exemption certificate with the Local Services Tax Collector.
Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which the United States was engaged
and is honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active services if, as
a result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple amputee or has
a service-connected disability declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability shall be exempt from this tax upon the filing
of an exemption certificate with the Local Services Tax Collector.
Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the armed forces and is called to
active duty at anytime during the taxable year shall be exempt from this tax upon the filing of an
exemption certificate with the Local Services Tax Collector.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 299/620
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
The Local Services Tax Collector is hereby charged and empowered to adopt regulations for the
processing of claims for exemptions under this article.
A person seeking exemption from the tax under § 230-42 must annually file an exemption
certificate with the employer and the Local Services Tax Collector. If a person claims an exemption
from the tax under § 230-42A, the exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all of
the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within Uwchlan Township for the
calendar year prior to the calendar year for which the employee is requesting to be exempt from
the tax. The exemption certificate for any exemption under § 230-42 must be in a form
substantially similar to the uniform exemption certificate prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development.
§ 230-43. Refund of tax.
A person who overpaid the local services tax for a calendar year shall be entitled to a refund of the
tax by filing a refund request with the Local Services Tax Collector. A person shall only be entitled
to a refund of tax for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that exceed $1.
The Local Services Tax Collector is hereby charged and empowered to adopt regulations for the
processing of refund claims for overpaid local services tax consistent with 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8425, as
amended (relating to refunds of overpayments), and 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426, as amended (relating to
interest on overpayments).
A person shall not be entitled to interest on the amount of refunded tax if the Township pays the
refund within 75 days of the refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer is required
to remit the local services tax for the last quarter of the calendar year under § 230-40C, whichever
is later.
§ 230-44. Collection of Downingtown School District local
services tax.
If the Downingtown Area School District levies a local services tax during the year on persons
employed within Uwchlan Township, and the combined rate of the Township's local services tax
and the School District's local services tax exceeds $10, then the Local Services Tax Collector
shall collect the tax on behalf of the School District based on payroll periods as provided for under
§ 230-40A(1).
The Local Services Tax Collector is hereby authorized to pay to the School District the tax
revenues collected under § 230-44 on a quarterly basis within 60 days of receipt of the tax
revenues by the Local Services Tax Collector.
§ 230-45. Continuing effect of previous ordinance.
The provisions of Ordinance No. 86-04, known as the "Uwchlan Township Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax Ordinance of 2005," shall remain in full force and effect until December 31, 2007.
§ 230-46. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on or after five days after enactment and shall apply to tax years
commencing on or after January 1, 2008.
Chapter 238. Vehicles and Traffic
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 300/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 137.
Motorcycles and minibikes — See Ch. 158.
Parking — See Ch. 174.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 209.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 238-1. Definitions and interpretation.
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or articles to which different or
additional definitions apply, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except that in
this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway" and shall
have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and include New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the
masculine shall include the feminine.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
[Added 10-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
ENGINE BRAKE RETARDER
A device or mechanism which is part of a motor vehicle designed and used to decrease the
speed of the motor vehicle by means other than friction or magnetic braking including release
of engine compression (known as "Jake braking"), and exhaust restrictions and obstructions.
ROUTE 100 (also known as Pottstown Pike)
A portion of a state highway (SR 0100), which, within the municipal limits of Uwchlan
Township, is owned and maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-05]
ROUTE 113 (also known as West Uwchlan Avenue)
A portion of a state highway, which, within the municipal limits of Uwchlan Township, is owned
and maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 238-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as ordinances or as parts of
ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the Township of Uwchlan.
§ 238-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
The police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of
emergency:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 301/620
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish temporary traffic and/or
parking regulations.
In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited scope or duration, to restrict
or prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the Township and the police in
the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation
of any such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be
liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
§ 238-4. Experimental regulations.
The Township may, from time to time, designate places upon and along the streets in the
Township where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those locations by
proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as
if they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who violates
any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental determination of the feasibility and
desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
§ 238-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
The Township shall have authority to close any street or specific part of a street to vehicular traffic
and to place barriers or station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction
or maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted on the closed portion. It
shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
The Township shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic area upon any street where
construction or maintenance work is underway and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted
portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area
at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that
vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
§ 238-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the Township, at intersections in public
and in other places where the Vehicle Code or this chapter applies.
Article II. Traffic Regulations
§ 238-7. Speed limits.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 302/620
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts thereof shown on the Uwchlan
Township Sign Location Map is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated on said map. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that
street or part of a street.
§ 238-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of the following streets:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 238-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street)
when facing a steady red signal at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Direction of Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red Signal
Onto
(Reserved)
§ 238-10. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at
any of the following intersections:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Prohibited Turn Hours At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 238-11. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of the following streets or parts
of streets:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 238-12. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby designated as one-way streets in
the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street
other than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Dowlin Forge Road West From Filman Road and Jones Pond Park
§ 238-13. No-passing zones.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 303/620
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of streets described in this
section, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to
drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing zone described in said schedule:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Concord Avenue Both From Devon Drive to Marchwood Road
§ 238-14. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby established as through streets; and
the driver of any vehicle, upon approaching any such street at any intersection thereof (except for such
intersections where there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals), shall come to a
full stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case may be, before entering any such through street:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 238-15. Stop intersections.
The intersections shown on the Uwchlan Township Sign Location Map (in addition to intersections with
the through streets established by this chapter) are hereby established as stop intersections, and
official stop signs shall be erected as indicated on said map. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any
such intersection in the direction or directions indicated on said map shall come to a full stop before
entering any such intersection.
§ 238-16. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in this section (in addition to intersections with the through streets
established by this chapter) are hereby established as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall
be erected in such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such
intersection upon the first-named street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow
down or stop the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time that the
driver is moving across or within such intersection.
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Conservatory Way Southbound Graystone Lane
§ 238-17. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger vehicle (but not including
any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or towing any other vehicle), upon any of the following
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 238-18. Vehicle weight limits.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 304/620
[Amended 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03; 11-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or other tractor, trailer or tractortrailer
combination, having a gross weight in excess of that respectively prescribed, upon any of the
streets or bridges, or portions thereof, described in this section, except for the driving and operation of
school buses, emergency vehicles, and vehicles, tractors, and tractor-trailer combinations making local
deliveries to or pickups from properties located on said streets.
Name of Street or Bridge
Maximum Gross
Weight
(pounds) Location
Andover Drive 11,000 From Concord Avenue to South Village
Avenue
Autumn Drive 11,000 From Sharp Lane and Pickering Way, thence
through its entirety
Bridge 38,000 trucks;
44,000
combination
Dowlin Forge Road over Shamona Creek
Concord Avenue 11,000 From the east end of Devon Drive to the west
end of Devon Drive
Devon Drive 11,000 From PA Route 113 to Concord Avenue
Dorlan Mill Road 11,000 Entire length
Dowlin Forge Road 11,000 From Filman Road to Shelmire Road, with the
addition of buses and school buses that are
equipped to legally seat in excess of 22
passengers
Lionville Station Road 10,000 From Byers Road to Route 113
North Milford Road 11,000 From Pennypacker Road to cul-de-sac
Sharp Lane 11,000 From the intersection of Autumn Drive and
Pickering Way, thence through Worthington
Road
Valley Hill Road 11,000 Entire length
Village Avenue 11,000 From the northernmost point where it
previously intersected with PA Route 100
through its intersection with PA Route 113,
continuing in a southerly direction to a point
where it intersects PA Route 100 (north of the
intersection of PA Route 100 and Rutgers
Drive)
Article III. Stopping, Standing and Parking Regulations
§ 238-19. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle
parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of
this article for any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 238-20. Angle parking.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 305/620
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in this section, except
at the angle designated and only within the painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where
angle parking is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 238-21. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Andover Drive East From Crump Road to Princeton Drive
Calvary Lane East From Woodland Drive to West Devon Drive,
except for church visitors
Concord Avenue West From Fairfax Drive to Devon Drive
Davis Road South Along the Davis Road property line of Holly Tree
Development along the Davis Road frontage in its
entirety (as it lies within Uwchlan Township)
Devon Drive Both From PA Route 113 to Whitford Road
Gordon Drive Both Entire length, from PA Route 100 to its terminus
with the Pennsylvania Turnpike
Hawthorne Street North Along the property line of the Welsh Ayres
Development between house numbers 800 and
806
Kimberly Lane East From Welsh Ayres Way to Travis Court
Maple Street Both Beech Street
Marchwood Road exit roadway
(jughandle)
Both From PA Route 100 to its terminus with
Marchwood Road
PA Route 100 Both Entire length, from Uwchlan/Upper Uwchlan
Township boundary line to Uwchlan/West
Whiteland Township boundary line
PA Route 113 Both Entire length, from Uwchlan/East Caln Township
boundary line to Uwchlan/West Pikeland Township
boundary line
Peck Road Both From PA Route 113 to Norwood Road
Princeton Road South From Andover Drive to Crump Road
Rutgers Drive Both From PA Route 100 west for 250 feet, more or less
Rutgers Drive/Gordon Drive exit
(jughandle)
Both From PA Route 100 to its terminus with Rutgers
Drive
Sharp Lane Both From Worthington Road to the juncture of
Pickering Way and Autumn Drive
Taylor Road Both From Deep Willow Drive to Spring Run Lane
Village Avenue Both From South Village Avenue and Welsh Pool Road
in an easterly direction on the north side for 251
feet and on the south side for a distance of 455
feet
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 306/620
Name of Street Side Location
Welsh Pool Road Both From Gordon Drive to Sheree Boulevard
Welsh Pool Road Both From PA Route 100 to South Village Avenue
Wharton Boulevard North From Eagleview Boulevard to Braceland Drive
Wharton Boulevard West 50 feet north of the end of its corner radius with
Ferncastle Drive
Williamsburg Boulevard South From Burdette Drive to Tremont Drive
Worthington Drive exit
(jughandle)
Both From southbound/east PA Route 100 to its
terminus with Worthington Drive
Worthington Road exit
(jughandle)
Both From northbound/west PA Route 100 to its
terminus with Worthington Road
§ 238-22. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in this section,
during the hours specified in said schedule, on any day except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Allen Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
From Whitford Road to Glendale Road
Arianna Lane Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Ashland Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Balderston Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Bauman Circle Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Biddle Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Calvary Lane Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Concord Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
From Glendale Road to Devon Drive
Deep Willow Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
From West Devon Drive to Woodland
Drive
Devon Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Edgewood Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Edward Circle Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Horne Place Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Karrens Way Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Longwood Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 307/620
(1)
A.
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Lori Circle Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Louis Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Oakland Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Reber Circle Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Robin Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
West Devon Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
From PA Route 113 to Deep Willow Drive
Westfield Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Wooded Eagle Court Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
Woodland Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
From Deep Willow Drive to PA Route 113
Woodview Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
§ 238-23. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in this section, between the hours specified, for longer than the time indicated in said
schedule.
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Lionville Park --- 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri.,
from August 15
to June 15
Lionville Park
§ 238-24. Special purpose parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the same to remain parked in any
special purpose parking zone established in this section, except as specifically provided for such zone.
Resident-only parking restrictions.
Resident-only parking restrictions shall be in effect as follows.
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Hours/Days Location
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 308/620
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Hours/Days Location
Allen Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
From Whitford
Road to Glendale
Road
Arianna Lane Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Balderston Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Bauman Circle Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Biddle Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Calvary Lane Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Concord Avenue Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
From Glendale
Road to Devon
Drive
Deep Willow Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
From West Devon
Drive to Woodland
Drive
Devon Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Edgewood Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Edward Circle Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Glendale Road Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
From Allen Drive
to Concord
Avenue
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 309/620
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Hours/Days Location
Horne Place Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Karrens Way Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Longwood Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Lori Circle Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Louis Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Oakland Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Reber Circle Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Robin Road Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Steeplewood
Drive
Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
West Devon Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
From PA Route
113 to Deep
Willow Drive
Westfield Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Wooded Eagle
Court
Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 310/620
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Hours/Days Location
Woodland Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
From Deep Willow
Drive to PA Route
113
Woodview Drive Both Resident parking 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri., from Aug. 15
to June 15
Entire length
Stickers. No person shall be permitted to park a motor vehicle on any of the designated
roadways (streets) unless there appears in a specified location on the vehicle a valid resident
parking sticker which allows/authorizes parking of said vehicle.
Any person living in a residence abutting the streets in the various permitted areas as set
forth in Subsection A(1) hereof shall be entitled to receive a residential parking sticker for
the specific permitted area in which the person resides, which permit shall be
nontransferable and effective only for the specific permitted area for which it was issued,
provided that the person applying for such sticker presents not only two items constituting
proof of residency in the specific permitted area but also proof of ownership (joint owners
shall be treated as one) of a motor vehicle registered to that person.
The sticker shall designate the specific permitted parking area to which it applies, shall
be in such a size and design as the Township, from time to time, deems appropriate, and
shall be displayed in such a manner on the registered vehicle as the Township, from time
to time, deems appropriate.
Guest cards. Each single-family home and apartment unit in the permit area is eligible to be
issued temporary guest cards. An applicant for guest cards must provide proof of residency
required in Subsection A(2)(a). The guest card's effectiveness and validity shall be limited to
the specific address for which it was issued, and such address shall be noted on the face of
the guest card. Guest cards shall be issued on an as-needed, per-event, time-specific basis.
Professional use cards. Each professional use (e.g., doctors, lawyers, home occupations)
shall be entitled to be issued up to five guest cards. The applicant must provide proof of the
location of the professional use within the resident parking district. The professional use guest
card's effectiveness and validity shall be limited to the specific address for which it was
issued, and such address shall be noted on the face of the guest card.
Special event cards. Upon special application to the Chief of Police or his designate, special
permission may be obtained for special cards to be used for limited hours during special
events. Such application must note the purpose of the event, date and times, the number of
vehicles expected, and the name of the responsible person to contact with respect to said
event.
Issuance. All resident parking stickers, guest cards, professional use cards, and special event
cards shall be issued by the Chief of Police, his designate, or other such official as the Board
of Supervisors may designate from time to time.
Misuse. Misuse or falsification of or misrepresentation to obtain any parking stickers shall be
a violation of this section.
§ 238-25. Penalties for parking violations.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 311/620
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
A.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon issuance of a parking ticket, pay a
fine of not more than $25 and costs. It shall be the duty of the police officer, Fire Marshal, Building
and Zoning Officer, or any other official person authorized by the Township of Uwchlan to indicate
in each case the location, make of vehicle, color of vehicle, displayed registration plate, and the
section violated. It may also include any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a
clear understanding of the circumstance attending the violation. The police officer, Fire Marshal,
Building and Zoning Officer, or any other official person authorized by the Township of Uwchlan
shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle was parked
in violation of this article. The notice shall contain instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle
on how to proceed and where to appear as required.
Any person violating Chapter 174, Parking, of the Uwchlan Township Code, and failing to pay said
amount as listed in § 174-6 of the chapter, shall be issued a Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
traffic citation for violation of Title 75, Chapter 33, Subchapter E. Any person violating any
provision of this section is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $50.
§ 238-25.1. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited.
No stopping, standing or parking at any time shall be established at the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Braceland Drive West From the corner radius on the south side of the
intersection with Andrew Alley to a point 50 feet south
thereof
No motor vehicle shall stop, stand, or park on any Township roadway (street) when a NO
STOPPING, NO STANDING, NO PARKING or any combination of the wording or recognized
symbols is posted by sign on said roadway (street) where such activity is intended to be
prohibited.
Emergencies. No motor vehicle shall be left standing or parked on any Township roadway (street)
when the roadway is snow covered, any emergency is declared by the Chief of Police, his
designate, or the Township Manager that requires the roadway to be free of obstruction, or when
the owner or owners of said vehicle have been given written notice that said vehicle is creating a
hazard to traffic movement or is an impediment to the safe movement of traffic during any snow or
other activity.
From and after the effective date hereof, no person shall operate, stop, stand or park any vehicle
contrary to the provisions of this section as set forth herein.
Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the proceeding and penalties as
set forth in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[1]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 238-25.2. Engine brake retarders.
[Added 10-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
The use or activation of engine brake retarders is prohibited on the following street segments:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 312/620
B.
C.
D.
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Pottstown Pike
[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-05]
Northbound From the boundary line between Uwchlan
Township and West Whiteland Township to a
point 560 feet north of the traffic signal at the
Eagleview Boulevard intersection
Pottstown Pike
[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-05]
Southbound From a point 268 feet south of the boundary
line between Uwchlan Township and Upper
Uwchlan Township to a point 138 feet south
of Cadwalader Drive
West Uwchlan Avenue Northbound 150 feet north of Whitford Hills Road to 90
feet south of 518 West Uwchlan Avenue
West Uwchlan Avenue Southbound 150 feet south of Northwood Drive to 200 feet
north of Peck Road
Exceptions. The prohibition of this § 238-25.2 shall not apply to situations requiring the use or
activation of a brake retarder to avoid an accident or in the event of friction or magnetic brake
failure.
Signage. After the enactment of this section, Uwchlan Township shall erect or cause to be erected
such signage as authorized and required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation in order to notify the operator of any motor vehicle that the use or activation of
engine brake retarders is prohibited on the road segments listed in Subsection A above within the
municipal limits of Uwchlan Township; the dimensions, colors, etc., of any signs shall be
substantially in accordance with applicable Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation regulations pertaining to "engine brake retarder" signs.
Penalties for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution, and such other costs as may be authorized by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Article IV. Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 238-26. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code and gives authority to the
Township to remove and impound vehicles that are parked overtime on any street in the Township, or
in metered and unmetered parking lots in the Township, in violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 238-27. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound or to order the removal and impounding of
any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were
within the conditions stated in § 238-26 of this article and provided that no such vehicle shall be
removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this article.
§ 238-28. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 313/620
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only by approved storage
garages that shall be designated from time to time by the Township. Every such garage shall submit
evidence to the Township that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory
to the Township as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to
those vehicles while in the custody of the garagekeeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The
approved storage garage shall submit to the Township its schedule of charges for towing and storage
of vehicles under this article, and when the schedule is approved by the Township, those charges shall
be adhered to by the approved storage garage. No different schedule of charges shall be adopted
without approval of the Township, and no different charges shall be demanded of or collected from any
person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this article by any approved storage garage.
The Township shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any
unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 238-29. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority granted by this article, notice of
the fact that the vehicle was removed shall be sent by the Township to the owner of record of the
vehicle. The notice shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason for its
removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 238-30. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article shall, unless payment is
made under protest, be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the
money so paid. If payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the offender shall
be entitled to a hearing before a Magisterial District Judge. Payment of towing and storage charges
shall not relieve the owner or driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 238-31. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under this article and shall be
able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with
information as to the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 238-32. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time of the intended removal,
the owner or the person for the time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a
willingness and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
Article V. Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 238-33. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of snow and ice on the snow
emergency routes named pursuant to this article, the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, in his or
her discretion, may declare a snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow
emergency"). Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Township
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 314/620
A.
B.
A.
B.
through radio, newspaper or other available media, and information on the termination of the
emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 238-34. Parking and driving restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time during the continuance of the
emergency, for any person:
To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked anywhere on any snow
emergency route designated pursuant to this article; or
To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless that vehicle is equipped
with snow tires or chains.
§ 238-35. Snow emergency routes.
The streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby designated as snow emergency
routes.
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 238-36. Snow emergency violations and penalties.
If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this article a person shall park a
motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be punishable as
provided in § 238-25 of this chapter.
If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this article a person shall drive a
motor vehicle upon a snow emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable as provided in § 238-37 of this chapter.
Article VI. Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 238-37. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or
except as herein specified, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any
supplement thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
Chapter 244. Vehicles, Sale of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 5-14-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-07. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking — See Ch. 174.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 315/620
A.
B.
A.
§ 244-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless the
context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
MOTOR VEHICLE
A vehicle which is self-propelled and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle and tractor.
PERSON
Every natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or organization of any kind.
STREET
The entire width between boundary lines of every publicly maintained right-of-way when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
TOWNSHIP
Uwchlan Township, Chester County.
§ 244-2. Display on public property.
Display for sale of motor vehicles on public property prohibited. No person shall park or display for any
length of time a motor vehicle for the purpose of offering said vehicle for sale to the public on any
street or public property in the Township.
§ 244-3. Display on private property.
Display for sale of motor vehicles on private property prohibited. Except as provided in § 244-4 of this
chapter, no person shall park or display for any length of time a motor vehicle for the purpose of
offering said vehicle for sale to the public on private property in the Township.
§ 244-4. Exceptions.
Motor vehicle sales shall be permitted on private property in the Township zoned for motor vehicle
sales and where the owner of the property and/or the operator of the business has obtained all
required approvals, permits and licenses to operate a motor vehicle sales business.
A single motor vehicle may be displayed for sale on private property owned by the registered
owner of the motor vehicle being displayed for sale for a period not exceeding 30 days per
calendar year.
§ 244-5. Removal of motor vehicles unlawfully displayed for sale.
Any sworn police officer of the Township and any other Township employee designated by the
Board of Supervisors who has reasonable grounds to believe that a motor vehicle has been
displayed in violation of § 244-2 or 244-3 above shall affix to the windshield or other prominent
part of the vehicle a "violation and tow warning" emblem. The emblem shall be five inches by
seven inches or larger, bright orange in color, with the printed words "violation and tow warning" in
bold letters at least two inches high, and also state that the vehicle is unlawfully displayed in
violation of this chapter and that, unless the vehicle is removed before ______ a.m./p.m. of the
_____ day of _______________, 20____, (at least 48 hours from the time the sticker is affixed), a
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 316/620
B.
C.
D.
E.
summary criminal citation will be issued against the owner of the vehicle in the amount of $100 per
day and the vehicle will be impounded at ______a.m./p.m. on the _____day of _____, 20_____
(at least seven days from the time the sticker is affixed) and taken to (insert name of approved
storage garage) and after 30 days it will be sold to recover the cost of the removal, storage and
sale. The emblem shall be self-adhesive, and the blanks above-stated shall be completely filled in
with permanent dark ink indicating the required details. The time set for the issuance of a citation
shall be at least 48 hours after the emblem is affixed. The time set for removal shall be at least
seven days after the emblem is affixed. After the relevant time period has expired, any designated
Township employee or police officer shall issue the citation and cause the motor vehicle to be
removed to the towing facility set forth in the notice.
If the motor vehicle in violation of this chapter bears a registration plate by which the last
registered owner of the vehicle can be determined, at the same time the emblem is affixed to the
motor vehicle as set forth in § 244-5A of this chapter, the Police Department shall send a written
notice by regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last registered owner of the vehicle informing the
owner that, unless the vehicle is removed from the subject property within seven days after being
tagged, the vehicle will be removed as set forth in § 244-5A above.
Upon arrival at the towing facility, the vehicle shall be impounded and its contents inventoried by
the approved storage garage. The Township Police Department shall obtain and keep a copy of
the contents' inventory.
If a motor vehicle is displayed in violation of § 244-2 or 244-3 above for a second time in any
twelve-month consecutive period, citations may be issued immediately, and the motor vehicle may
be removed to an approved storage garage by a Township police officer or designated employee
without affixing the violation and tow warning emblem referred to in § 244-5A above and without
prior notice to the last registered owner.
The Township Police Department shall keep a record of all motor vehicles issued violation and tow
warning emblems and/or towed pursuant to this chapter, including the year, make, model,
registration number and last registered owner of the vehicle.
§ 244-6. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
The removal and impounding of vehicles under this chapter shall be done only by approved storage
garages that shall be designated from time to time by the Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township.
Every such garage shall submit evidence to the Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township that it is
bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Board as sufficient to
indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage of those vehicles while in the custody
of the approved storage garage for the purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage
shall submit to the Board its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this chapter,
and when the schedule is approved by the Board, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved
storage garage; no different schedule of charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person
whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this chapter by any approved storage garage. The
Board shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved
charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this chapter.
§ 244-7. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage charges to the approved
storage garage in accordance with the Township-approved schedule of towing and storage charges.
§ 244-8. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 317/620
[1]
A.
B.
In addition to the Township's right to remove and tow vehicles and the owner's responsibility to pay for
towing and storage costs, any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per day, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township. Enforcement shall be by action brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for in the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. In default of payment, the defendant
shall be liable to imprisonment for up to 90 days. Each day of a violation shall be a separate offense
and subject to the daily fine set forth herein. All fines and penalties for the violation of this chapter shall
be paid to the Township.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Chapter 250. Vending Machines
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Cigarette Vending Machines
[Adopted 1-28-1991 by Ord. No. 91-02]
§ 250-1. Findings.
The General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has prohibited the sale of tobacco
products to any minor under the age of 18 years (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6305). It is determined by the
Board of Supervisors that the use of tobacco products by minors poses a danger to their and the
general public's health, safety and welfare.
It is determined by the Board of Supervisors that many minors illegally purchase cigarettes by
means of vending machines. It is determined by the Board of Supervisors that regulating cigarette
vending machines to prevent use by minors will significantly reduce consumption of tobacco
products by minors and benefit public health, safety and welfare.
§ 250-2. Definition of terms.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE
Any automatic vending machine for the sale of cigarettes, controlled by the insertion of legal
tender. It shall not include machines or devices used solely for the vending of service, food or
confections.
INDUSTRIAL WORK LOCATION
Includes any factory, office, warehouse or other place of employment. Said terms shall not include
retail establishments, hotels or other businesses open to the general public.
PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION OR ASSOCIATION
Includes the following: any person, firm, corporation or association which owns any such machine;
the person, firm, corporation or association in whose place of business any such machine is
placed for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation or association having control over
such machine.
§ 250-3. Prohibitions and restrictions.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 318/620
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
[1]
No person, firm, corporation or association shall permit persons under 18 years of age to operate
any cigarette vending machines as defined in this article.
No cigarette vending machine shall be located, displayed or operated at any location unless said
location prohibits minors from its premises, permits minors only with adult supervision, or is an
industrial work location as defined herein.
Cigarette vending machines shall only be placed in locations wherein the person, firm, corporation
or association or their designees can, in the normal course of their employment, view any person
using said machine. Industrial work locations will be exempt from this rule.
Cigarette vending machines shall not be placed in patron rest rooms or rest room areas, foyers or
vestibules, pantry or waiting rooms, or any other inconspicuous areas. Industrial work locations
will be exempt from this rule.
§ 250-4. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05[1]]
Any person, firm, corporation or association who or which violates or permits the violation of any
provision of this article shall be subject to a criminal fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000, plus the
costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees. In default of payment, the defendant shall
be liable to imprisonment for up to 90 days. Enforcement of this article shall be by action brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township Solicitor may assume
charge of the prosecution without the consent of the District Attorney.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Part III: Land Use
Chapter 260. Subdivision and Land Development
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 4-8-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-01.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 51.
Communications towers and facilities — See Ch. 94.
Construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Transportation impact fee — See Ch. 126, Art. I.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See Ch. 153.
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 214.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
ATTACHMENTS
260a Appendix A
260b Appendix B
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development,
adopted 6-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-02, as amended.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 101. Short title and effective date.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 319/620
101.1
101.2
102.1
102.2
102.3
102.4
102.5
102.6
102.7
102.8
102.9
[1]
102.10
[1]
103.1
103.2
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "Uwchlan Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance of 2013."
This ordinance shall become effective five days after adoption and shall remain in effect until
modified, amended, or rescinded by the Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township.
§ 102. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to support the policies of the Uwchlan Township Comprehensive Plan
Update of 2010, as amended, the Uwchlan Township Open Space, Recreation, and Environmental
Resources Plan (1993), as amended, and to support and complement the provisions of the Uwchlan
Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009, as amended, and for the following purposes:
To assist in the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of land in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan.
To provide for a safe, convenient, and functional system of vehicular traffic on streets of such
width, grade, and location as to accommodate prospective traffic as determined by existing and
probable future land and building uses.
To ensure coordination and conformance of subdivision and land development plans with the
public improvement plans of the Township.
To provide for the proper planning of community services and facilities at minimum cost and
maximum convenience.
To establish uniform standards and procedures, thereby assuring equitable and just processing
of subdivision and land development plans and charging of review fees.
To provide for arrangement of lots, units, open space and streets so as to assure open spaces
for traffic, recreation, light, and air and the proper distribution of population, thereby creating
conditions favorable to the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township.
To assure that sites proposed for subdivision or land development are suitable for development
and human habitation.
To encourage subdivisions and land development to be harmonious with and protective of the
existing natural features and resources of Uwchlan Township.
To provide for the planning and reservation of adequate areas for recreational use in new
subdivisions according to prescribed standards.
To provide for regulations to carry out such other purposes as are enabled by Article V, Section
503, of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,[1] and regulated hereunder.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 103. Authority and subdivision and land development control.
As stated in Article V, Section 501, of Act 247,[1] the Board of Supervisors may regulate
subdivisions and land development within the Township by enacting a Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501.
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land or land development shall be effected, and no
street, alley, sanitary sewer, stormwater sewer, water main, or other facilities in connection
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 320/620
103.3
107.1
107.2
107.3
107.4
therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened, or dedicated for public or private use, except in
strict accordance with these regulations.
No lot or unit in a subdivision or land development may be conveyed, no boundary line may be
changed, no permit to erect, alter, or repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land
development may be issued, and no building may be erected in a subdivision or land development
unless and until a subdivision or land development plan has been approved and, where required,
recorded and until the required improvements in connection therewith have either been
constructed or the completion thereof has been secured by the providing of financial security, in
form satisfactory to the Township, for 110% of the costs of completion as estimated by or
approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 104. Scope.
A subdivision and/or land development shall be in conformity with this ordinance and all standards and
specifications adopted as part of such ordinance.
§ 105. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of the provision of this ordinance, the said provisions shall be held
to be minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
Where the provisions of this ordinance and all standards and specifications adopted under it impose
greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance, or regulations, the provisions of this
ordinance and its standards and specifications shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any
statute, other ordinance or regulations impose greater restrictions than this ordinance, the provisions of
such statute, ordinance, or regulation shall be controlling.
§ 106. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, or provision of this ordinance shall be declared by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any remaining provisions of this ordinance.
§ 107. Jurisdiction.
The Board of Supervisors shall have jurisdiction and control of subdivision and land development
within the Township limits. In order that the actions of the Board of Supervisors under this Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance may be correlated with all relevant data and procedures, the Board
of Supervisors hereby designates the Township Planning Commission as the agency of the Board of
Supervisors:
To which all applications relating to either preliminary or final approval of subdivision and land
development plans shall be referred upon submission to the Board of Supervisors;
With which applicants shall hold all preliminary consultations relating to the plans;
Which shall make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning approval,
disapproval, modification and conditions of approval of such plans; and
Which shall make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning the interpretation of
and the granting of waivers to provisions and standards of this ordinance.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 321/620
§ 108. Repealer.
All ordinances and part of ordinances inconsistent herewith are herby repealed to the extent that such
ordinances or parts of ordinances are inconsistent herewith. Ordinance No. 79-2, Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, Uwchlan Township, of 1979, and subsequent amendments thereto, are
hereby specifically repealed.
Article II. Definitions
§ 201. Tense, gender and number.
Words in the singular include the plural, and those in the plural include the singular; words in the
present tense include the future tense; words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter.
§ 202. General terms.
The words "person," "subdivider" and "owner" include a corporation, unincorporated association and a
partnership, or other legal entity, as well as an individual. The word "street" includes thoroughfare,
avenue, boulevard, court, expressway, highway, lane, arterial and road. The word "building" includes
structures and shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof." The word
"watercourse" includes channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry run, spring and stream. The words "should"
and "may" are permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and directive.
§ 203. Terms or words not defined.
Where terms or words are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as
the context may imply.
§ 204. Specific terms.
Terms or words used herein, unless otherwise expressly stated, shall have the following meanings:
AGENT
Any person, other than the developer, who, acting for the developer, submits to the Township
subdivision or land development plans for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof.
ALLEY
An accessway, which will not be dedicated, primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or
side of two or more properties otherwise abutting on a street.
ALTERATION
Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities of a building or
structure, or any enlargement thereof, whether by extension on any side or by an increase in
height, or the moving of such building from one location or position to another.
APPLICANT
A landowner, developer, contract purchaser, or his authorized agent, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed a complete application for subdivision and/or land development, including heirs,
successors, assigns and grantees.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 322/620
a.
b.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
Every application for subdivision or land development, whether sketch, preliminary or final, either
recommended (sketch) or required (preliminary and final) to be filed and approved prior to the start
of construction or development, including but not limited to an application for a building permit, for
the approval of a subdivision plat or plan, or for approval of a development plan.
ARCHITECT
A licensed architect registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
AREA
The quantity of land projected on a horizontal plane enclosed by the boundaries or extremities of a
lot, parcel, tract, etc.
AUTHORITY
A body politic (political body) and corporate (corporate policy) created pursuant to the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.[1]
BERM
A mound of earth which serves purposes such as: directing the flow of surface water runoff;
preventing soil erosion; or supporting plant materials or fencing to aid in screening or buffering.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs)
Management practices or methods for controlling stormwater runoff which provide hydrological
(i.e., reduction of runoff volumes) and water quality (i.e., reduction of pollutants) benefits.
BLOCK
A tract of land or two or more contiguous lots bounded by streets, public parks, railroad rights-ofway,
watercourses or bodies of water, boundary lines of the Township, unsubdivided land, or by
any combination of the above.
BLOCK OR LOT FRONTAGE
That portion of a block or lot which fronts on a single street.
BOARD
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania, or the official,
person, or committee designated by the Board of Supervisors to act with respect to a particular
matter set forth herein.
BUFFER (AREA)
A defined portion of a parcel or lot proposed for development appropriate for the planting of, or
retention of, suitable hardwood and/or evergreen trees, including modifications to existing
contours, where appropriate, to create an acceptable transition between potentially incompatible
land uses or reduce the potential for conflicts between them. See § 608 of the Township Zoning
Ordinance.
BUILDING
Any combination of materials forming any structure which is erected on the ground and
permanently affixed thereto, designed, intended, or arranged for the housing, shelter, enclosure,
or structural support of persons, animals, or property of any kind. The following dwelling unit types
are depicted at the end of this article:
SINGLE-FAMILY
A building arranged, designed, or intended for and occupied exclusively by one family.
TWO-FAMILY
A building arranged, designed, and intended for occupancy by two families living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 323/620
c.
d.
a.
MULTIFAMILY
A building arranged, designed, and intended for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein, including apartment houses,
apartment hotels, flats, garden apartments, and group houses.
LOW-RISE APARTMENT
A detached multifamily building three to five stories in height with access to all dwelling units
from one or more common entranceways and which has a common hallway for all dwelling
units on the same floor.
BUILDING AREA
The maximum horizontal cross-sectional area to the exterior.
BUILDING COVERAGE
The percentage which, when multiplied by the lot area, will determine the permitted building area
for all roofed structures and buildings.
BUILDING LINE or BUILDING SETBACK LINE
A line established by the required front yard, defining the minimum distance between any building
or structure or portion thereof to be erected or altered and an adjacent right-of-way, street line or
lot line. Such line shall be measured at right angles from the street right-of-way line and shall be
parallel to said right-of-way line.
BUILDING PERMIT
An approval statement signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, indicating compliance with the
Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance[2] and any other ordinances or regulations, authorizing the
construction, alteration, reconstruction, restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any
building or structure within the Township.
CALIPER
The diameter of a tree trunk measured at a point six inches above ground level.
CARPORT
A roofed-over structure open on two or more sides and used in conjunction with a dwelling for the
storage of private motor vehicles.
CARTWAY
The surface of a street or alley available for vehicle traffic.
CLEAR CUTTING
The felling of all trees on a tract of land, or any portion thereof, at one time.
CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE
A line of unobstructed vision from a point 4 1/2 feet above the center line of a road to the farthest
visible point on the top of an object four inches high on the same center line. See Pennsylvania
Code, Title 67, Transportation, Chapter 441, "Access To and Occupancy of Highways by
Driveways and Local Roads."
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE
An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a
given distance from the intersection down the center lines of the road.
COMMON OPEN SPACE
A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water, within a
development site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of the public or of
residents of the development. In the calculation of the area or proportion of a development
site devoted to common open space, the following shall not be included:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 324/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
b.
c.
d.
Areas within any lot, yard, or required setback;
Areas within any public or private street or street right-of-way, sidewalk, driveway, parking
area, or utility easement;
Areas or portions thereof less than 50 feet in width, unless part of a trail corridor or
required buffer;
Following exclusion of all areas not to be included as common open space and described
in Subsection a(1) through (3) above, contiguous areas less than 1/4 acre in area, unless
acceptable and approved by the Township.
The common open space within a development site shall be designed and arranged so as to
be conveniently accessible to all residences, and all areas thereof shall be interconnected by
a means of pedestrian access and circulation acceptable to the Board.
Common open space shall be free of structures other than those approved by the Board
consistent with the provision of active and passive recreational opportunities together with
vehicular access and parking as required in connection therewith. Only those stormwater
management facilities designed so as to be consistent with the active or passive recreational
purposes of the open space may be constructed within required common open space.
Common open space shall be the subject of recorded encumbrances in form and substance
satisfactory to the Township Solicitor and sufficient to ensure that the purposes and
restrictions with respect thereto are maintained in perpetuity, which governing documents
shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds in and for the County of Chester prior to the first
issuance of a building permit or the conveyances of a lot with respect to lands or buildings
within the development and adjacent thereto.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
A long-range policy plan intended to guide the growth and development of the Township, adopted
as the current Uwchlan Township Comprehensive Plan Update by the Board of Supervisors, as
amended.
CONSTRUCTION
The construction, reconstruction, erection, rebuilding, renovation, repair, extension, expansion,
alteration, demolition or relocation of a building or structure, including the placement of mobile
homes.
COUNTY
The County of Chester, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
The Chester County Planning Commission.
CROSSWALK
A marked or specially constructed crossing of a public or private road or other vehicular
accessway designed to enhance pedestrian safety and facilitate pedestrian circulation.
CUL-DE-SAC
A form of a single access street with access at one end and terminated at the other by a paved
vehicular turnaround.
CULVERT
A structure, including appurtenant works, which carries water under or through an embankment or
fill.
CUT
The removal of soil or rock from its natural or predevelopment location.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 325/620
DAM
An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of impounding
or storing water or another fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad,
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DATE OF FILING
Date on which a completed application, together with all required information, fees, etc., is
received by the Township Secretary.
DBH (dbh)
The diameter of a tree at breast height, measured 4 1/2 feet from the ground surface at the point
of highest elevation in contact with the trunk of such tree.
DECISION
Final adjudication of any board or other body granted jurisdiction under this ordinance or the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended)[3] to do so, either by reason of
the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations.
DEDICATION
The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general and public use, reserving to
himself no other rights than those that are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the
public uses to which the property has been devoted.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Regulations adopted pursuant to this ordinance imposing standards by which a subdivision or land
development is developed.
DETENTION BASIN
An impoundment structure designed to manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff
and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER
Any landowner, agent of such landowner, contract purchaser, or tenant with the permission of
such landowner, or equitable owner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a
land development.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading, and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials;
and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN
A sketch, preliminary or final plan, submitted in compliance with the requirements of the Uwchlan
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, showing the provision for development
of a tract of land.
DRAINAGE
The flow of water or liquid waste and the methods of directing such flow, whether natural or
artificial.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT
A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management purposes.
DRAINAGE FACILITY
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 326/620
Any ditch, gutter, pipe, culvert, storm sewer, retention basin, detention basin, or other structure
designed, intended, or constructed for the purpose of controlling or diverting surface waters or
carrying surface waters off roads, public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas, or any part of any
subdivision, land development, or contiguous land areas.
DRIPLINE
A generally circular line, the circumference of which is determined by the outer reaches of a tree's
widest branching points.
DRIVEWAY
Private access to a street from any use.
DRIVEWAY, SHARED OR COMMON
A driveway which is shared by separate lots.
DWELLING UNIT
A building or portion thereof providing one or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit and having no cooking or sanitary
facilities in common with any other dwelling unit.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not
limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavation, embankments, road maintenance, building
construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EASEMENT
An interest in land, owned by a party other than the owner of the fee interest in the land, that
entitles the holder to a specific use, purpose, or enjoyment of the land, or to enforcement of
restriction(s) on the use of the land or structures thereon.
ENDORSEMENT
The application of the reviewing and/or approving authority's stamp and the signatures of the
appropriate authority on the record plan.
ENGINEER
A licensed professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EROSION
The wearing away of soil, bedrock or land surface by water, wind, ice, chemical, or other natural
force.
EROSION, ACCELERATED
The removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of man's activity and the
natural processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
EXCAVATION
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried,
uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or moved, and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXISTING CONDITIONS
The initial condition of a project site prior to the proposed construction.
FILL
Material, exclusive of structures, placed or deposited so as to form an embankment or raise the
surface elevation of any portion of the land.
FINISHED GRADE
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 327/620
The final vertical elevation of the ground surface after development.
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN
The low area adjoining and including any water or drainagecourse or body of water subject to
periodic flooding or overflow. The limits of a floodplain shall be as mapped by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development as part of the National Flood Insurance Program. In the
absence of such maps, the floodplain shall be determined through the mapping of alluvial soils as
determined by the USDA Soil Conservation Service Soil Survey for Chester and Delaware
Counties, Pennsylvania (May 1963, as amended).
GOVERNING BODY
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
GRADE
The arithmetic mean of the maximum and minimum finished ground elevation adjoining the
buildings.
GRADING
The changing of the surface of the ground by excavation or fill or a combination thereof; the act of
moving earth.
HEDGEROW
A linear plant community dominated by trees and/or shrubs. Hedgerows often occur along roads,
fence lines, property lines, or between fields and may occur naturally or be specially planted (e.g.,
as a windbreak).
HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS
The building's vertical measurement from the grade plane of the ground surrounding the building
to a point midway between the highest and lowest points of the roof, provided that chimneys,
spires, towers, elevators, tanks, and similar projections shall not be included in calculating the
height.
HEIGHT OF SIGNS OR OTHER STRUCTURES
The vertical distance measured from the grade at the front of the structure or sign to its highest
point. The highest point in the case of a sign shall include the supporting structure.
HISTORIC RESOURCE
A resource defined in § 612.3.a of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION
A nonprofit organization of homeowners or property owners, planned and operated under
Township-approved rules and regulations, for the purpose of administering to the needs of
residents through the maintenance of community-owned property.
HYDRIC SOILS
Any soil inventoried or described as hydric or as a soil with hydric inclusions according to the Soil
Survey of Chester and Delaware Counties, Pennsylvania, or other information provided by the
U.S. Soil Conservation Service (SCS). In Uwchlan Township, hydric soils shall include, but are not
limited to:
Hydric Soils Soils with Hydric Inclusions
Wedhadkee (We) Chewacla (Ch)
Worsham (WoA, WoB, WoB2) Conagree (Cn)
Glenville (GnA, GnB, GnB2, GnC2)
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 328/620
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE
The percentage of lot area covered by any and all impervious materials, such as buildings, paved
parking areas, paved walks, terraces, and similar surfaces which do not normally absorb rainfall.
IMPOUNDMENT
A retention or detention basin designed to retain or detain stormwater runoff and release it at a
controlled rate.
IMPROVEMENTS
Physical addition and changes to land, such as grading, paving, curbing, fire hydrants, water
mains, sanitary sewers, stormwater management systems, culverts, sidewalks, monuments,
crosswalks, bridges, earthworks, road lights, wells, sewage disposal systems, road trees and
other plantings, and other structures that may be necessary to produce usable and desirable land
development.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE
A structure designed to direct runoff into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage beds, seepage
trench, and biofiltration swale).
INLET
A surface connection to a closed drain; a structure at the diversion end of a conduit; the upstream
end of any structure through which water may flow.
LAKES and PONDS
Natural or artificial bodies of water that retain water year-round. Artificial ponds may be created by
dams or may result from excavation. The shoreline of such water bodies shall be measured from
the spillway crest elevation.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any
purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
A subdivision of land.
LAND DISTURBANCE
Any activity which exposes soils, alters topography, and/or alters vegetation, except for the
removal of hazardous or alien vegetation. Customary agricultural practices, such as tilling,
plowing, mowing, and harvesting, are excluded from the definition of "land disturbance."
LANDOWNER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or contract to
purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he/she is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a "landowner" for the purposes of this
ordinance.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT
A professional landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 329/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
a.
b.
LANDSCAPE PLAN
A plan for the installation and maintenance of plantings, prepared according to the provisions of
this ordinance.
LANDSCAPING
The planting of turf or other appropriate ground cover or the planting of deciduous and evergreen
trees and shrubbery, including the maintenance thereof, for the control of erosion, the retention of
precipitation, protection against the elements, and promotion of human comfort and welfare.
LICENSE
When applied to mobile home parks, shall mean written approval by the Township of Uwchlan, a
prerequisite of which shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations of this and other
applicable ordinances, and the posting of a liability insurance policy or an indemnity bond in an
amount not less than $10,000, payable to the Township of Uwchlan, in a form satisfactory to the
Township Solicitor.
LOADING SPACE
A space, accessible from a street or way, in a building or on a lot, for the temporary use of
vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT
A tract or parcel of land, regardless of size, held in single or joint ownership, not necessarily a lot
or lots shown on a duly recorded map, which is occupied or capable of being occupied by
buildings, structures, and accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged,
designed, or required, which is intended for transfer of ownership, use, lease, improvement or for
development, regardless of how it is conveyed. The term "lot" shall also mean parcel, plot, site, or
any similar term.
LOT AREA
That portion of a lot or parcel of land within all bounding property lines on which a building or
buildings and any accessory building or buildings are or may be located. The term "lot area," when
used herein in the determination or calculation of permitted development or its intensity, shall
include required yard and setback areas (except when and to the extent they are also included in
Subsections a through e below), but shall not include:
Steeply sloped areas more than 1,000 square feet in area and having a slope in excess of
15% measured over three or more two-foot contour lines established by field survey.
Floodplains as defined in § 510.3.a of the Zoning Ordinance or wetlands as determined by the
criteria promulgated from time to time by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
In the case of flag lots only, portions of the lot which are not of the required width.
Existing street rights-of-way.
Stormwater management basins, except basins and berms serving only the individual lot on
which they are located.
The terms "lot size," "square footage" and similar terms used in the Zoning Ordinance in
the above-referenced zoning districts to describe the minimum land area required for a
lot shall have the same meaning as "lot area."
LOT, INTERIOR
Any of the following:
A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which do not abut a street.
An interior lot (e.g., flag lot) which does not adjoin a street but is connected thereto by an
access strip of required minimum width. Minimum lot area and other dimensional
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 330/620
requirements shall be those of the applicable zoning district.
NOTE: No more than two contiguous interior lots shall be formed. The creation of such
lots shall be minimized and limited to those circumstances dictated by the configuration
of the site; in general, interior lots shall not be considered an acceptable site design
alternative to the creation of an interior residential street. Also, in no case will more than
one tier of interior lots be permitted behind those lots whose entire or substantially
entire lot width fronts on a street.
LOT LINE
Any line dividing one lot from another.
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE
A lot having frontage on two parallel or nearly parallel streets. A minimum setback of 75 feet shall
be provided from the rear lot line or rear road right-of-way line to the principal structure on the lot.
Accessory buildings and structures shall have a setback from both road frontages equal to the
normal front yard setback required for the district or approved for the subdivision. Only structures
permitted under § 601.2 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be placed in the required front yard setback
area or reverse front yard setback for accessory structures.
LOT, THROUGH
An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
MARKER
A metal pipe or pin at least 3/4 inch in diameter and at least 36 inches in length.
MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of
assembly contained in one unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable
of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed
so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT
A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the
park owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement
of mobile homes for nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
MONUMENT
A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four inches in diameter or square and at
least 24 inches in length (preferred 30 inches to 36 inches). A stone monument shall contain an
indented cross or one-fourth-inch drilled hole. Concrete monuments shall contain a copper or
brass dowel (plug). The bottom sides or radius shall be at least two inches greater than the top, to
minimize movements caused by frost.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC)
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Uwchlan, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
NATIVE PLANT SPECIES
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 331/620
A species of plant that currently or previously inhabited or grew in a specified location, and which
was not introduced to that location as a result of human activity, either intentional or accidental.
The term "native" species generally refers to a species whose range was located within a large
area like a continent or a nation. The term "indigenous" species is typically used to refer to a
species whose original range extended into a smaller area like a state, county, or watershed.
NATURAL CONDITION
In the context of a site, the condition of the site prior to development as determined by the plans of
the required environmental impact assessment site (EIA) identifying the following: geological,
topographical, soil, hydrological, biological, and land use conditions of the site.
NPDES
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the system whereby the federal government
issues permits in accordance with the Federal Clean Water Act, which authority is delegated in
Pennsylvania to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
OBSTRUCTION, WATER
Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel,
culvert, building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or flood-prone area, which may impede, retard, or change the
direction of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water, or which is placed where the flow of the water might carry the same downstream.
OLD FIELD
An area undergoing natural succession, characterized by the presence of shrubs and small trees
(seedlings) whose branches do not form a complete or nearly complete aerial canopy.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent
chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
A system serving a single lot, collecting and disposing of wastewater on the lot where such system
is used.
OPEN CHANNEL
A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open surface. Open channels include, but
shall not be limited to, natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, and
canals.
OPEN SPACE
Unoccupied space open to the sky and on the same lot with the principal use.
OPEN SPACE MANAGEMENT PLAN
A plan which provides for the long-term management over time of private, public, or common open
space, in accordance with § 617 of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
OPEN SPACE OPTION
A use in a residential use district, which may be a conditional use or a use by right, that may be
granted to a landowner or developer which would enable said landowner or developer to subdivide
a parcel of land into lots for building purposes which do not conform to the minimum requirements
of the district, provided open space is included in the plan designed for passive or active
recreational purposes.
PADEP
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, formerly Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 332/620
PARCEL
See "lot."
PARKING LOT
An off-street, hard-surfaced area designed solely for the parking of motor vehicles, including
driveways, passageways, and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto.
PARKING SPACE
An off-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle and measuring a minimum of
9 1/2 feet by 20 feet, exclusive of driveways, and passageways and maneuvering space
appurtenant thereto; except in the case where parked vehicles would abut a grass strip of at least
four feet in width, in which case the parking space may be 9 1/2 feet by 18 feet. Up to 50% of the
parking spaces shall be 10 feet wide if deemed necessary at the sole discretion of the Board.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PIPE
A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLAN, AS-BUILT
A corrected final plan, showing dimensions and locations of all streets and other improvements as
actually constructed.
PLAN, FINAL
A complete and exact subdivision and/or land development plan, including all required
supplementary data, complete and prepared for official recording in accordance with the
requirements of this ordinance and with any conditions of approval imposed by the Township, to
define property rights, proposed roads and other improvements. See Article IV of this ordinance
for final plan content.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of Uwchlan Township; Chester County, Pennsylvania.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY
A subdivision and/or land development plan presented to the Uwchlan Township Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors demonstrating compliance with existing ordinances and
regulations and showing existing features, proposed road and lot layout, stormwater management
facilities and engineering detail sufficient to ensure proper functioning of proposed improvements.
See Article IV of this ordinance for preliminary plan content.
PLAN, SKETCH
An informal plan indicating existing features of a tract and its surroundings and, with respect for
those features, the general layout of the proposed subdivision or land development submitted to
the Township for discussion purposes only with the Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors. See Article IV of this ordinance for sketch plan content.
PLANTING, SCREEN
A strip of planting sufficient to provide an effective screen, having an initial height of not less than
five feet, the ultimate heights and width of which shall be not less than 10 feet, and consisting of
not less than 50% evergreen vegetation distributed throughout the length of the strip. See § 608 of
the Township Zoning Ordinance.
PLAT
The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or final.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 333/620
PLAT, RECORD
An exact copy of the approved final plan, which contains the original endorsements of the
Township and County Planning Commission, to be recorded with the Chester County Recorder of
Deeds.
PNDI
Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory, which provides an inventory of threatened and/or
endangered animal and plant species.
PUBLIC GROUNDS
Includes parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas, and
sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated
facilities, and publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING
A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Board of Supervisors, the Planning
Commission, or the Zoning Hearing Board, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to
taking action in accordance with this ordinance.
PUBLIC MEETING
A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986, P.L. 1988, known as the "Sunshine
Act" (65 Pa. C.S.A. § 701 et seq.).
PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Township, stating the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to
be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing. Where the hearing to
be held will include consideration of a proposed zoning amendment to the Zoning Map, then such
proposed amendments must be additionally noticed by posting along the perimeter of the affected
tract at least one week prior to the date of hearing.
RARE, THREATENED, ENDANGERED (RTE) SPECIES SITES
Sites which have been identified on the PNDI, or the Chester County Natural Areas Inventory, as
possessing floral or faunal species of concern or sites in which federally and/or state recognized
RTE species of flora and/or fauna are present.
REAL PROPERTY
All land, whether publicly or privately owned, whether improved or not improved, with or without
structures.
RECREATION, ACTIVE
Those recreational pursuits which require physical alteration to the area in which they are
performed. Such areas are intensively used and include, but are not limited to, playgrounds, ball
courts, and swimming pools.
RECREATION, PASSIVE
Recreational pursuits which can be carried out with little alteration or disruption to the area in
which they are performed. Such uses include, but are not limited to, hiking, biking and picnicking.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The one-hundred-year flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPORT
Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing made by any body, board, officer or
consultant other than a solicitor to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of
assisting the recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 334/620
a.
b.
RESERVE STRIP
A parcel of land which is parallel to and between a road right-of-way and a tract of land.
RESUBDIVISION
Any replatting or resubdivision of land, limited to changes in lot lines on the approved final plan or
recorded plan as specified in § 311 of this ordinance. Other plattings shall be considered as
constituting a new subdivision of land. See "subdivision."
REVERSE-FRONTAGE LOT
See "lot, reverse-frontage."
REVIEW
An examination of a plan to determine compliance with this ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, and
other pertinent requirements.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a street, crosswalk, or for other public or
semipublic purposes.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING
The legal right-of-way as established by a governing authority and currently in existence.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, FUTURE/ULTIMATE
The right-of-way deemed necessary to provide adequate width for future road or street
improvements.
RIPARIAN SETBACK AND BUFFER AREA
An undeveloped, vegetated corridor 50 feet in width, generally parallel to any permanent or
intermittent stream, river, brook, creek, lake, pond, one-hundred-year floodplain, or wetland (as
determined by the criteria promulgated from time to time by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers), measured outward from either the top of the stream or other bank, edge of the lake,
pond or wetlands, or from the boundary of the one-hundred-year floodplain associated therewith
(whichever yields the greater buffer width).
RISER
A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to control the discharge rate from
the pond for a specified design storm.
SEEPAGE BEDS/SEEPAGE TRENCH
An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface
water is directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEMI-IMPERVIOUS
Any surface or material which is partially penetrable or able to absorb water, including but not
limited to areas paved with stone, gravel, sand, paver block, or other porous paving material, as
determined by the Township Zoning Officer and/or Township Engineer.
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any waste products or excrementatious matter or other discharge
from the bodies of human beings or animals and laundry, bathroom, and kitchen waste water.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
ON-SITE
Any structure designed to biochemically treat sewage within the boundaries of an individual
lot.
OFF-SITE
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 335/620
A sanitary sewage collection system in which sewage is carried from individual lots, by a
system of pipes, to a central treatment and disposal facility.
SHEET FLOW
Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST
A field test conducted by a person or firm qualified according to the rules and regulations of the
Chester County Department of Health to determine the suitability of the soil for sanitary sewage
disposal facilities by measuring the absorptive capacity of the soil at a given location and depth.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION
A use permitted with special permission, granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, to occupy and use
land and/or a building for specific purposes in accordance with this ordinance when such use is
not permitted by right.
STABILIZATION
The proper placing, grading and/or covering of soil, rock, or earth to ensure its resistance to
erosion, sliding or other movement.
STEEP SLOPE
Those land areas with slopes of 15% or greater; the methodology for delineation of steep slopes is
established in § 618 of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
STORM SEWER
A system of pipes or other conduits which carries intercepted surface runoff, road water and other
waters, or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage or wastewater and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER
The precipitation reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY
Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include,
but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and
infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
The plan prepared by the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater will be
managed in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
STREAM
A watercourse.
STREET
A public (dedicated) or private (undedicated) right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended for use
as a means of vehicular or pedestrian circulation to provide access to more than one lot. The word
"street" includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway, lane, alley,
service street, and road or similar terms.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on land or water, whether or not
affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER
See "developer."
SUBDIVISION
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 336/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
a.
b.
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of
ownership, or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land
for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or
easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Uwchlan Township, Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR
Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision, and any land development that does not
include subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR
Any plan providing for a lot line adjustment or rejoining of lots where no land development is
proposed, or any subdivision or land development application in which all of the following apply:
No public or private street is constructed or is required to be widened;
No earthmoving activities except those incidental to construction of a single-family dwelling on
each proposed lot will take place;
No public improvement or guaranty thereof is required other than as may relate to on-lot
stormwater management systems or sewer or water lines serving an individual lot; and
No more than three lots shall result from any subdivision.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the total cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage (or
repetitive loss when repetitive loss language is used) regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
SUPERVISORS
The Board of Township Supervisors of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
SURFACE RUNOFF
Water flowing from a specific site or land area, typically from defined precipitation events, such as
a twenty-four-hour storm, including flows from pervious natural surfaces in excess of soil
permeability rates and flows from fully and partially impervious developed surfaces.
SURVEYOR
A professional land surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 337/620
a.
b.
SWALE
A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
SWIMMING POOL
PRIVATE
Any reasonably permanent pool or open tank, not located within a completely enclosed
building, and containing, or normally capable of containing, water to a depth at any point
greater than 24 inches. Farm ponds and/or lakes are not included, provided that swimming
was not the primary purpose for their construction.
PUBLIC
A public bathing place shall mean any open or enclosed place, open to the public for amateur
and professional swimming or recreative bathing, whether or not a fee is charged for
admission or for the use thereof.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan; the Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township or the official, person,
or committee designated by the Board of Supervisors to act with respect to a particular matter set
forth herein.
TOWNSHIP AUTHORITY
An Authority created by the Board of Supervisors, responsible for, but not limited to, the
construction, operation, and/or maintenance of water storage and distribution and/or sewage
collection and treatment facilities.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
A duly registered professional engineer employed by the Township or engaged as a consultant
thereto, or his duly authorized representative.
TOWNSHIP SOLICITOR
The attorney appointed by the Board of Supervisors, or his duly authorized representative.
TRACT
One or more contiguous lots within the Township, assembled for the purpose of unified
development, including a planned residential development, multiple-family development, planned
shopping center, planned office park, industrial park, cluster development or lot-averaging
development, or a mobile home park.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE
An area surrounding a tree or tree mass in which no construction, construction activity or other
disturbance shall take place.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to
new construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the code
adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, which are revised every three years, as the construction standard applicable with the
commonwealth floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are
made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
USABLE OPEN SPACE
An unenclosed portion of the area of a lot which is not devoted to driveway, parking spaces, or
principal structures, including common buildings such as shelters, pavilions, or recreational
structures centrally located, accessible to occupants of the building or buildings.
USE
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 338/620
a.
b.
The specific purpose for which land, sign, structure, or building is designed, arranged, intended, or
for which it may be occupied or maintained, or any activity, occupation, business, or operation
which may be carried on thereon or therein. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be
deemed to include any nonconforming use.
VARIANCE
An exception, granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, from the terms and conditions of this
ordinance where literal enforcement would create unnecessary hardship as a result of peculiar or
unique conditions, or circumstances pertaining only to the lot in question, and when granting of the
exception would maintain the spirit of the ordinance and original intent and not be contrary to the
public interest.
WATERCOURSE
That channel on the land surface, or other plainly observable evidence on the ground, where
water flow is visibly definable, but not necessarily present, as a result of seasonal or ongoing
hydrologic events, such as, but not including, runoff, melting, springs, or ponding.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, rivulets, dammed water, ponds, springs, and all other
bodies of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or in
the boundaries of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WATER SYSTEM
ON-SITE
A system for supplying and distributing water to a single dwelling or other structure from a
source located on the same lot.
OFF-SITE
A public or private system for supplying and distributing water from a common source to
buildings and other structures, installed and constructed in accordance with the specifications
of Aqua Pennsylvania.
WETLANDS
Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and under normal conditions do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar
areas. Wetlands include all lands regulated as wetlands by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. In the event there is a
conflict between the definitions of these agencies, the more-restrictive definition shall apply.
WOODLAND
A tree mass or plant community covering an area of 1/4 of an acre or more in which tree species
are dominant or codominant and the branches of the trees form a complete or nearly complete
aerial canopy. For the purposes of this ordinance, the extent of any woodland plant community or
any part thereof shall be measured from the outermost dripline of all the trees in the community.
Woodland shall include any area where timber has been harvested within the previous three years
and/or woodland disturbance has occurred within the previous three years which would have met
the definition of woodland prior to timbering or disturbance. Woodlands do not include nursery
stock, orchards, or old fields, except where natural succession has been allowed to occur and
where most naturally occurring trees are larger than six inches dbh.
WOODLAND DISTURBANCE
Any activity which alters the existing structure of a woodland or hedgerow. Alterations include the
cutting or removal of canopy trees, subcanopy trees, understory shrubs and vines, and woody and
herbaceous woodland floor species. It also includes any activity which constitutes a land
disturbance (exposes soils, alters topography) within a woodland or hedgerow. Woodland
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 339/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
301.1
disturbance does not include the removal of vegetation that constitutes hazardous condition(s),
nor the selective cutting or removal of invasive alien trees, shrubs, vines or herbaceous species.
YARD, FRONT
An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of the
lot, and situated between the front line of the lot and the front line of the building projected to the
side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the
building and the street right-of-way line. Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall
be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard.
YARD, REAR
An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of the
lot, and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the
side lines of the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured between the rear line of the lot
and the rear line of the building. A building shall not extend into the required rear yard.
YARD, SIDE
An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building, situated between the building and
the side line of the lot, and extending from the front line to the rear lot line shall be deemed a side
line. A building shall not extend into the required side yards.
ZONING ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER or ZONING OFFICER
The agent or official designated by the Board of Supervisors to administrate and enforce the
Zoning Ordinance of the Township.
ZONING HEARING BOARD
The Zoning Hearing Board of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING MAP
The Official Zoning Map of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING ORDINANCE
The Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009, as may be amended from time to time.[4]
Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 was repealed by Act 22 of 2001 (6-19-2001, P.L.
287, No. 22). See now Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Zoning.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Zoning.
Article III. Plan Submission and Review Procedure
§ 301. General provisions.
The Township has adopted the procedures set forth herein which shall be observed by all applicants,
developers, and their agents.
Authority for plan approval. Final authority for approval or denial of approval of all subdivision
and land development plans shall be vested in the Township Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the procedures set forth herein. Prior to action by the Board, all plans shall be referred for
review and recommendation to the Township Planning Commission, the Township Engineer, and
such other agencies as deemed pertinent by the Board or as required by law. However, the failure
to make such referral and/or the failure by any reviewing party to review and/or make
recommendation with respect to any plan shall not affect the validity of any action taken by the
Board with respect to such plan. In addition, in the course of its review, the Township Planning
Commission may solicit review and reports from any official Township consultant or entity it
considers to be affected by the subject plan.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 340/620
301.2
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
301.3
301.4
301.5
301.6
301.7
301.8
Plan classification. For purposes of procedure, all applications filed pursuant to this ordinance
shall be further classified as either major or minor as defined below:
Minor: Any plan providing for a lot line adjustment or rejoining of lots where no land development
is proposed, or any residential subdivision or land development application in which all of the
following apply:
No public or private street is constructed or is required to be widened;
No earthmoving activities except those incidental to construction of a single-family dwelling on
each proposed lot will take place;
No public improvement or guaranty thereof is required other than as may relate to on-lot
stormwater management systems or sewer or water lines serving an individual lot;
No more than three lots shall result from any residential subdivision;
Plans are not filed pursuant to the residential open space design option; and
No more than two minor subdivisions shall be approved over any period of time for any
original tract or parcel of ground. Any subsequent subdivision approval submission after the
two minor subdivisions are approved shall be considered major and subjected to the related
provisions herein, regardless of size or scale.
Major: Any subdivision or land development application not classified as minor as provided
above.
Overview of plan submission and review process. The following plan review steps represent the
standard approach used in Uwchlan Township. Plan contents shall be as set forth in Article IV, and
the number of plan sets to be submitted shall be as specified herein.
Minor Subdivision or Land
Development
Major Subdivision or Land
Development
Preapplication meeting Recommended Recommended
Sketch plan Recommended Recommended
Preliminary plan Not required Required
Final plan Required Required
Recommended conceptual lot and street layout for remaining lands. When an application
includes only a portion of a landowner's entire tract, or where lands subject to application are
contiguous to an adjoining tract of the same landowner, the Planning Commission and/or the
Board of Supervisors may require the applicant to include a conceptual layout showing future
potential subdivision or land development of all the contiguous lands belonging to the landowner
to ensure that future development may be accomplished in accordance with current codes and
with appropriate access. Submission and review of the conceptual lot and street layout described
in this section does not constitute approval of the future subdivision or land development shown
thereon.
Municipalities Planning Code requirements. Preliminary and final plans shall be reviewed in
accordance with the requirements of the latest version of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (MPC) and as set forth herein.
Site access for purposes of plan review. The owner of the parcel of land to be subdivided or
developed shall, as part of initial submission in regard to the subject property, submit a written
statement granting the Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors, its authorized agents and
representatives, and the Planning Commission the right to enter the parcel of land for the purpose
of evaluating the site and the proposed development thereof. The Township shall make a
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 341/620
a.
b.
301.9
a.
b.
c.
301.10
a.
b.
301.11
reasonable effort to contact the applicant to notify him of the Township's scheduled site access at
least two days in advance of such site visit.
Plan review by adjacent municipalities.
The Township may solicit comments from an adjacent municipality for any subdivision or land
development plan application for tracts of land along the Township boundary, in which case
an additional plan set and accompanying documents may be required for the Township to
forward to the adjacent municipality for its comments.
The Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors will review the reports from the
adjacent municipality as part of the plan review process when comments are solicited.
However, if any adjoining municipality fails to report thereon prior to the time that the
Township Planning Commission or Board moves to make a recommendation or decision, then
the Township Planning Commission or Board, as the case may be, may officially act without
having received and considered such report.
Refiling of plans. Any plan which meets any one of the criteria below shall be considered to be
a new plan and shall be accompanied by an application, fees and all required information.
A plan which is submitted after a previous plan for the same property has been withdrawn
shall constitute a new plan.
A plan which is submitted after a plan for the same property has been approved or rejected
shall constitute a new plan, unless the plan is a final plan following preliminary plan approval.
A plan which is resubmitted during the course of plan review by the Planning Commission or
Board of Supervisors, and is deemed by either to represent a substantially altered lot layout,
road configuration, building location(s) or use, for the same land that was included in a prior
plan submission, shall constitute a new plan. Plans considered by the Township as a major
revision pursuant to the provisions of § 304.4.d(4), in the case of preliminary plans, or
§ 305.5.d(4), in the case of final plans, and starting a new ninety-day time period for formal
review and notification, may not need to resubmit an application or fees but may require new
supplemental plans or impact studies.
Township review and escrow fees. No application for preliminary or final plan review shall be
deemed to have been officially submitted until the application fee and escrow deposit, as set forth
below, shall have been paid by the applicant.
Subdivision and land development application fees (nonrefundable) and initial escrow
deposits to cover the costs for plan review and processing shall be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors by resolution. The escrowed funds shall be used to reimburse the Township for
actual expenditures incident to these processes, including but not limited to engineering,
inspection, consultant, and legal fees. Any costs incurred by the Township in excess of the
amount held in escrow shall be fully reimbursed by the applicant prior to the issuance of any
permits. Any costs not paid within the time specified by the Township shall be assessed an
interest penalty as established by the Board and may result in the suspension of reviews of
the applicant's plans. Any unexpended balance in the review escrow deposit shall become
part of the escrow deposit required by § 306 herein.
If problems arise requiring more-extensive involvement of the Township Engineer, any
resulting costs that exceed the initial escrow deposit or subsequent deposits will be assessed
against the applicant.
§ 302. Preapplication procedures.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 342/620
302.1
302.2
303.1
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
303.2
The following procedures are to be followed for all subdivision and land development plan applications
submitted to Uwchlan Township. The content of required plan submissions is set forth in Article IV.
Preapplication meeting. Prior to any formal plan submission, it is strongly recommended that the
applicant for any subdivision or land development approval schedule and meet the Township
Manager or the designated representative. The purpose of the preapplication meeting is to
introduce the applicant to the Township's planning objectives and applicable regulations and
procedures and to discuss the applicant's objectives.
Site visit. Applicants for subdivision or land development approval may be requested by the
Township Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors to arrange for a site visit of the property
by Township representatives that may include the Township Engineer and any other federal, state,
or county representatives or consultants as the Township deems appropriate. Applicants shall
agree to reimburse the Township for any reasonable costs charged by Township consultants in
relation to such site visit when such consultants have been requested by the Township to attend.
Applicants are encouraged to accompany Township representatives. The site visit may be
requested by the Township at any time during which a subdivision or land development application
filed in accordance with this ordinance is pending Township approval. Comments made by the
Township or its staff and consultants during the site visit shall be only advisory and are not binding
on either the Township or the applicant. It shall be understood by all parties that no formal
recommendations can be offered, and no official decisions can be made, at the site visit or during
the sketch plan process.
§ 303. Sketch plans.
Purpose and applicability. The purpose of the sketch plan, which is an optional but strongly
encouraged submission for all plans, is to afford the applicant the opportunity to consult early and
informally with the Planning Commission and the Township before submission of formal plans
(preliminary or final, as applicable) for subdivision or land development approval. The sketch plan
is an important, valuable, and highly recommended submittal that can speed the review process
and may result in lower costs for the project. It is strongly recommended that all applicants for
sketch plan review follow the preapplication procedures set forth in § 302.
Sketch plan submission and review.
The applicant shall submit seven copies of the sketch plan application to the Township.
Submitted applications shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements contained in
§ 401 hereof. Where submitted, the sketch plan and supporting materials shall be filed with
the Township at least the Friday prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which they are
to be discussed.
Where feasible, and at the request of the Township upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, the sketch plan also may be submitted to the Township electronically in
the format specified by the Township Engineer.
Copies of the sketch plan application will be distributed by the Township to the Township
Planning Commission and Township Engineer.
At the next regularly scheduled public meeting subsequent to submission in accordance with
§ 303.2.a above, the applicant shall present the sketch plan and supporting materials to the
Township Planning Commission.
The Township Planning Commission will review the sketch plan. As a result of its review, the
Planning Commission may offer comment to the applicant of the extent to which the proposed
subdivision or land development conforms to the relevant Township ordinances, to Township
planning, design and historic preservation objectives, and to environmentally responsible
design, and may suggest plan modifications.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 343/620
f.
g.
a.
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
d.
304.1
Prior to making recommendations on the proposed sketch plan, the Planning Commission
may request the preliminary input of the Township Engineer or planning consultant and other
Township commissions or committees, where relevant, and may hear comments from
surrounding or affected landowners present at its public meeting(s). All planning and
engineering review fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
All comments and recommendations made by Township representatives in regard to sketch
plan review are nonbinding. No comment or recommendation, nor the failure of the Planning
Commission or any Township representative to proceed or act in accordance with this section,
shall be deemed to be a decision with respect to any subdivision or land development plan or
to vest any rights in the applicant.
§ 304. Preliminary plans.
Purpose and applicability.
Except as provided in § 304.1.a, all applicants for major subdivision or land development
approval shall submit a preliminary plan application. Applicants for minor subdivision or land
development approval are not required to submit a preliminary plan application but may
proceed with final plan application.
[Amended 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
All applicants for preliminary plan approval are recommended to follow the preapplication
procedures set forth in § 302, and submit a sketch plan as set forth in § 303, prior to formal
submission of a preliminary plan application. Applicants who choose to submit preliminary
plans without taking advantage of preapplication and sketch plan options may incur added
engineering expenses. Evaluation of planning design and ordinance issues occurring during
preapplication and sketch plan review can facilitate the preliminary and final plan review
processes by addressing a number of issues at an early stage during plan preparation.
Preliminary plan applications shall conform to any recommendations made during sketch plan
review and all information requirements and procedures set forth herein.
An applicant may request that the Board permit the filing of a combined preliminary/final
application for major subdivision or land development, subject to the following requirements:
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
The applicant shall schedule and attend a preapplication meeting as described in § 302.1
hereof. The Township Manager and his/her designees shall provide a recommendation to
the applicant regarding the applicant's proposal to submit a combined preliminary/final
application.
If the applicant intends to proceed with submission of a preliminary/final application, the
applicant shall prepare and file a sketch plan in accordance with the procedures and
requirements of § 401 hereof and the requirements of §§ 402.1 and 402.2.c applicable to
a preliminary plan.
The sketch plan shall be reviewed in accordance with § 303.2 hereof. The sketch plan
shall not be considered an official filing with the Township and shall not be subject to the
requirements of § 508 of the Municipalities Planning Code[1] and §§ 304.4.a or 305.5.e(1)
hereof.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
The applicant shall submit filing, review and escrow fees with the sketch plan in
accordance with the Township fee schedule.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 344/620
(5)
(6)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
304.2
304.3
a.
(a)
(1)
b.
304.4
The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Board on the applicant's
request under this § 304.1.d.
The Board may authorize the filing of the preliminary/final application if it is
recommended by the Planning Commission, all of the requirements of this § 304.1.d
have been complied with, and the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board
that the filing of a preliminary/final application will fulfill all the requirements of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and will not be contrary to the public
interest and the purpose and intent of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
The preliminary/final application and plan shall comply with all of the requirements for
final plans in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Preliminary plan submission and acceptance for review.
The preliminary plan application shall include all information as set forth in § 402. Submitted
plans and accompanying documentation shall be clearly marked "Preliminary Plans."
Applicants shall submit one copy of the preliminary plan application, 10 copies of the
preliminary plan sets, and two copies of all required supporting information and materials to
the Township. The preliminary plan application shall be submitted to the Township at least the
Friday prior to the regularly scheduled Board of Supervisors meeting at which the preliminary
plan is first to be discussed.
If requested by the Township, plans in the preliminary plan application also shall be submitted
to the Township electronically in the format specified by the Township Engineer.
Upon receipt of the preliminary plan application, the Township shall determine whether the
submission is administratively complete. To be considered administratively complete, all of the
documentation required by this ordinance shall be included with the application and required
escrow and review fees shall be paid to the Township in accordance with the municipal fee
schedule, along with any required fees for Chester County Planning Commission review.
The date upon which a preliminary plan application is determined to be administratively
complete shall be considered the date of filing, and on that date the submission shall be
accepted for review. If a preliminary plan application is determined not to be administratively
complete, it shall be returned to the applicant with a specific indication of the missing
materials or fees which rendered it incomplete.
Distribution of preliminary plans. The Township will forward copies of the preliminary plan to the
Township Planning Commission and one copy of the preliminary plan and required supporting
information and materials to the Township Engineer. The Township will file the preliminary plan
and accompanying documentation, as appropriate, with the Chester County Planning
Commission, appropriate emergency services representatives, and other agencies as deemed
appropriate and requested by the Township.
Review of the preliminary plan and rendering of decision.
Official review period. The Board of Supervisors shall render a decision in regard to the
preliminary plan application not later than 90 days following the date of the next regular
meeting of the Township Planning Commission following the date of filing, provided that,
should the next regular meeting be more than 30 days following the date of filing, said ninetyday
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the date of filing.
Review by Township Engineer and other Township staff and consultants.
The review by the Township Engineer shall assure the following:
That all information required by this ordinance is presented in the plans submitted;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 345/620
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
c.
(1)
(2)
d.
Compliance with all other Township ordinances;
Compliance with the sketch plan recommendations, where requested by the
Township;
That any sketch plan recommendations offered to the applicant have been
considered or addressed;
That any conditions set forth in any previous order of approved conditional use,
special exception, or variance approval have been complied with, if applicable;
That, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the various schemes presented for the
location, alignment and grade of roads, stormwater management/best management
practices, erosion and sedimentation control, physical site constraints, site grading,
sanitary sewers, water supply, and any other proposed improvements are feasible
from an engineering perspective.
The Township Engineer shall submit his or her written comments to the Township. The
Township's engineering review fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
The Township may request additional review by the Township Engineer, Township staff,
Township commissions or committees, land planning consultant, or other consultants to
ascertain the accuracy of the preliminary plan and submitted supplementary data or
materials, as it may deem necessary based on the specific circumstances. All additional
review fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
Review by Chester County and other agencies.
Chester County Planning Commission. The Chester County Planning Commission will be
provided with the opportunity to review and comment on the preliminary plan as required
by the MPC.
Chester County Health Department. The CCHD will be provided with the opportunity to
review and comment on matters relating to water and sewer systems, as applicable.
Other agencies. County, state, federal, or other reviewing or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over all or a portion of the property subject to the application will be provided
the opportunity to review and comment on permit or other agency-specific matters.
Review by the Township Planning Commission.
The Township Planning Commission will, at its regularly scheduled public meetings,
review the preliminary plan application in accordance with this ordinance and any other
applicable ordinances, with any conditions of approval contained in any applicable order
or conditional use approval, with the results of any sketch plan review or discussion, and
in consideration of the comments submitted by the Township Engineer and any other
Township consultants, where applicable.
The applicant or designated representative should be present at such meeting. The
Planning Commission will advise the applicant of the extent to which the proposed
subdivision or land development conforms to the relevant standards of this ordinance and
the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance, any conditions contained in any applicable
order or conditional use approval, the need for or acceptability of any waivers or
modifications of design standards contained herein, and any suggested plan
modifications that would increase the subdivision's or land development's degree of
conformance in order to obtain a Planning Commission recommendation of approval.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 346/620
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
e.
Prior to communicating its recommendations to the Board of Supervisors regarding any
preliminary plan application, the Commission may request the input and/or may review
the written comments or testimony of any of the Township Engineer or consultants or
other agencies involved in the review of the subject plan as provided in § 304.4.b and c
above; it may receive comments from surrounding or affected landowners; and it may
also conduct a site visit(s) to facilitate its review.
During the course of the Planning Commission's review of the preliminary plan and prior
to any action by the Board within the required ninety-day period, the preliminary plan may
be revised by the applicant. Such plans shall note the dates of any revisions. The revised
plans shall be submitted to the Township not later than the Friday prior to the regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission. The revised plan will be distributed by
the Township as required by § 304.3.
Except where an extension of time is requested in writing by the applicant, the Planning
Commission shall communicate its comments and recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors by the time of the last scheduled meeting of the Board of Supervisors prior to
the expiration of the ninety-day review period. The communication from the Planning
Commission to the Board of Supervisors may include any recommended conditions of
approval and may cite specific sections of the ordinance or other reasons relied upon for
the Planning Commission's recommendations. Failure of the Planning Commission to
communicate its recommendations to the Board of Supervisors within the prescribed time
frame shall not affect the status of the preliminary plan application nor cause any
extension of the applicable review period.
Review and decision by the Board of Supervisors.
Prior to the expiration of the ninety-day review period, as set forth above, unless an
extension of time is requested in writing by the applicant, the Board of Supervisors shall
render a decision in regard to the preliminary plan application.
The decision shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant
personally or be mailed via registered or certified mail to him at his last known
address not later than 15 days following the decision.
When the application is not approved as filed, the decision shall specify the defects
in the application, shall describe requirements which have not been met, and shall
cite the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
When the application is approved with conditions, and upon the applicant's receipt
and review of such conditions, the applicant shall inform the Township in writing that
the conditions imposed by the Board of Supervisors and set forth in the approval
communication are accepted, or shall appeal the conditions within 30 days of the
date of approval. Failure to so accept or appeal any condition(s) shall void the plan
approval, and the subject preliminary plan application shall be considered denied.
The Board of Supervisors may require that final plan application for the subject property
be submitted within 12 months of the date of preliminary plan approval. In such case, the
applicant may request an extension beyond the 12 months subject to approval by the
Board of Supervisors.
Upon approval of the preliminary plan application, the Board of Supervisors will designate
one copy of the preliminary plan as the official copy. This copy shall include all necessary
corrections as required by the Board of Supervisors. It will be retained in the Township
files.
Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan or authorize
the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 347/620
305.1
a.
b.
c.
[1]
d.
e.
f.
305.2
a.
b.
c.
305.3
§ 305. Final plans.
Purpose. The purpose of the final plan application for subdivision or land development is to
assure full compliance with this ordinance, with applicable zoning provisions and with all other
applicable laws and regulations prior to formal recording of all relevant planning documents and
land records and to ensure long-term proper functioning, maintenance and funding for all
proposed improvements.
Applicability. Upon submission of any final plan application, the Township shall determine
whether the plan is a major or minor plan submission, as defined in § 301.2, and whether the
submitted plans are administratively complete as provided in § 305.3.
If the application is a major plan submission, but no preliminary plan application has
previously been submitted and approved, the application shall be returned to the applicant or,
upon the request of the applicant, submitted as a preliminary plan in accordance with § 304
hereof.
If the application is a major plan submission following a preliminary plan application previously
submitted and approved, or if the application is a minor plan submission, the application shall
be retained by the Township for review in accordance with this section.
For a major plan application, the final plan shall conform to the terms of the approved
preliminary plan.
For a major plan application, the Board of Supervisors may permit submission of the final plan
in sections, consistent with Section 508 of the Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
Final plan applications shall conform to any conditions in any applicable order or approval for
a conditional use, special exception or zoning variance.
Where preliminary plan approval includes a condition imposed by the Board of Supervisors
requiring the final plan to be filed within one year of the date of preliminary plan approval [see
§ 304.4.e(2)], failure of an applicant to make timely submission of such final plan (within one
year of preliminary plan approval) shall render void the preliminary plan approval. Applicants
with final plans subject to such a filing deadline condition may request from the Board of
Supervisors a reasonable extension of the one-year time limit for filing when good cause can
be shown. Otherwise, the applicant shall be required to file a new application for preliminary
plan approval.
Final plan submission and acceptance for review.
The final plan application shall include all information in § 403. Steps which have been
satisfactorily completed during the preapplication, sketch plan, or preliminary plan review
stages, as applicable, and that meet applicable criteria for final plan submission, need not be
repeated. Submitted plans and accompanying documentation shall be clearly marked "Final
Plans."
The applicant shall submit one copy of the final plan application, 10 copies of the final plan
sets, and two copies of all required supporting information and materials to the Township. The
final plan application shall be submitted to the Township at least the Friday prior to the
regularly scheduled Board of Supervisors meeting at which the final plan is first to be
discussed.
Where specifically requested by the Township, plans included in the final plan application also
shall be submitted to the Township electronically in the format specified by the Township
Engineer.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 348/620
d.
e.
305.4
a.
(1)
(2)
b.
(1)
(2)
(3)
c.
305.5
Upon receipt of the final plan application, the Township shall determine whether the
submission is administratively complete. To be considered administratively complete, all of the
documentation required by this ordinance shall be included with the application and required
escrow and review fees shall be paid to the Township in accordance with the municipal fee
schedule, along with any required fees for Chester County Planning Commission review.
The date upon which a final plan application is determined to be administratively complete
shall be considered the date of filing, and on that date the submission shall be accepted for
review. If a final plan application is determined not to be administratively complete, it shall be
returned to the applicant with a specific indication of the missing materials or fees which
rendered it incomplete.
Distribution of final plans. The Township will forward copies of the final plan to the Township
Planning Commission and one copy of the final plan and required supporting information and
materials to the Township Engineer. The Township will file the final plan and accompanying
documentation, as appropriate, with the Chester County Planning Commission, appropriate
emergency services representatives, and other agencies as deemed appropriate and requested
by the Township.
Review of the final plan and rendering of decision.
Official review period. The Board of Supervisors shall render a decision in regard to the final
plan application not later than 90 days following the date of the next regular meeting of the
Township Planning Commission following the date of filing, provided that, should the next
regular meeting be more than 30 days following the date of filing, said ninety-day period shall
be measured from the 30th day following the date of filing.
Review by Township Engineer and other Township staff and consultants.
The review by the Township Engineer will assure that all information required by this
ordinance is presented in the plans submitted, that all applicable laws and regulations are
complied with, that the final plan conforms with the approved preliminary plan, as
applicable, and that any conditions set forth in any previous order or approval for any
applicable conditional use, special exception, or zoning variance have been complied
with. The Township Engineer will submit his or her written comments to the Township.
The Township's engineering review fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
The Township may request additional review by the Township Engineer, Township staff,
Township commissions or committees, land planning consultant, or other consultants to
ascertain the accuracy of the final plan and submitted supplementary data, materials, or
documentation, as it may deem necessary based on the specific circumstances. All such
additional review fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
Review by Chester County and other agencies.
Chester County Planning Commission. The Chester County Planning Commission shall
be provided with the opportunity to review and comment on the final plan submission as
required by the MPC.
Chester County Conservation District. The Chester County Conservation District shall be
provided with the opportunity to review and comment on matters relating to site drainage,
control and abatement of soil erosion and sedimentation, stormwater management/best
management practices, open space management where applicable, and compliance with
NPDES and NPDES Phase II requirements.
Chester County Health Department. The CCHD will be provided the opportunity to review
and comment on matters relating to requirements for water and sewer systems.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 349/620
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
d.
(1)
(2)
e.
Other agencies. County, state, federal or other reviewing or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over all or a portion of the property subject to the application will be provided
with the opportunity to review and comment on permit or other agency-specific matters,
as applicable.
Review by the Township Planning Commission.
The Township Planning Commission will, at its regularly scheduled public meetings,
review the final plan application for consistency with any applicable preliminary plan
approval and in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable ordinances, with any
conditions of approval contained in any applicable order or approval of any conditional
use, special exception, or zoning variance, with the results of any relevant sketch plan
review or discussion, and in consideration of the comments submitted by the Township
Engineer and any other Township consultants, where applicable.
The applicant or designated representative should be present at such meeting. The
Commission shall advise the applicant of the extent to which the proposed subdivision or
land development conforms to the relevant standards of this ordinance and the Uwchlan
Township Zoning Ordinance, any conditions of approval contained in any applicable order
or approval of any conditional use, special exception, or zoning variance, the need for or
acceptability of any waivers or modifications of design standards contained herein, and
any suggested plan modifications that would increase the subdivision's or land
development's degree of conformance in order to obtain a Planning Commission
recommendation of approval.
Prior to communicating its recommendations to the Board of Supervisors regarding any
final plan application, the Planning Commission may request the input and/or may review
the written comments or testimony of any of the Township's planning and engineering
consultants or other agencies involved in the review of the subject plan as provided in
§ 305.5.b and c above, and it may conduct a site visit(s) to facilitate its review.
During the course of the Planning Commission's review of the final plan and prior to any
action by the Board within the required ninety-day period, the final plan may be revised
by the applicant. Such plans shall note the dates of any revisions. The revised plans shall
be submitted to the Township not later than the Friday prior to the regularly scheduled
meeting of the Planning Commission. The revised plan shall be distributed by the
Township as required by § 305.4.
Except where an extension of time is requested in writing by the applicant, the Planning
Commission shall communicate its comments and recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors by the time of the last scheduled meeting of the Board prior to the expiration
of the ninety-day review period. The communication from the Planning Commission to
the Board of Supervisors may include any recommended conditions of approval and may
cite specific sections of the ordinance or other reasons relied upon for the Commission's
recommendations. Failure of the Planning Commission to communicate its
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors within the prescribed time frame shall not
affect the status of the final plan application nor cause any extension of the applicable
review period.
Review and decision by the Board of Supervisors.
Prior to the expiration of the ninety-day review period, as set forth above, unless an
extension of time is requested in writing by the applicant, the Board of Supervisors shall
render a decision in regard to the final plan application.
The Board of Supervisors may specify conditions, changes, modifications, or additions to
the application which the Board deems necessary.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 350/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
[2]
(e)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(1)
f.
All final plan approval shall be subject to the following conditions, as applicable:
The applicant shall execute a written agreement, in accordance with § 801 herein,
agreeing to install all the improvements as required by this ordinance and all
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
The applicant shall also provide a performance guaranty in accordance with § 801
herein.
The applicant shall agree, if requested, to tender a deed of dedication to the
Township for such roads, easements for sanitary sewers, water lines, or storm
sewers, public open space(s) and public improvements, including stormwater basins,
road paving, sidewalks, trails, shade trees, roadscape amenities, water mains, any
fire hydrants, sanitary and storm sewers, as may be required for the promotion of the
public welfare, after all said improvements are completed and such completion is
certified as satisfactory by the Township Engineer. The Board of Supervisors may
require that the applicant supply a title insurance certificate or policy (in such amount
as the Township shall reasonably require) from a reputable company before any
property is accepted by the Township.
The applicant shall have applied for all required permits from agencies having
jurisdiction over ancillary development, such as the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT), the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP), the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, and the CCHD.
No plan which proposes access onto a road under the jurisdiction of PennDOT shall
be finally approved unless the plan contains a notice that a highway access permit is
required therefor pursuant to Section 420 of Act 428, known as the "State Highway
Law,"[2] before access to a state road is permitted.
Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and shall be communicated
to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known address not later than 15
days following the decision.
When the application is not approved as filed, the decision shall specify the defects
in the application, describe requirements which have not been met and shall cite the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
When the application is approved with conditions (i.e., but not as filed), the decision
shall contingently comply with § 305.5.e(4)(a) above. The applicant shall inform the
Township in writing within 30 days of the date of such approval whether the
condition(s) imposed by the Board of Supervisors are acceptable or not to the
applicant. Failure to so timely inform the Township of the applicant's acceptance of
such condition(s) shall void the plan approval, and the subject final plan shall be
deemed denied for the reasons so specified in such decision.
Application for any subsequent permit (e.g., building permit) or initiation of any
construction in accordance with the approved plan prior to the passage of 30 days of
its approval shall constitute acceptance of any conditions so imposed upon the final
plan approval.
Approved final plan.
Upon approval of the final plan application, the Board of Supervisors will designate one
copy of the final plan as the official copy. This copy shall include all necessary corrections
as finally approved by the Board, shall be certified by the applicant's appropriate
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 351/620
[3]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
305.6
306.1
306.2
306.3
306.4
professional(s) and shall be endorsed by signature of the applicant and Board of
Supervisors. It will be retained in the Township files.
A minimum of nine copies of the final plan as finally approved, certified and endorsed, as
provided above, shall be distributed by the applicant as follows:
Nine copies to the Chester County Planning Commission for signing. The County
Planning Commission will keep two copies. Seven copies shall be recorded within 90
days at the office of the Chester County Recorder of Deeds, consistent with the
provisions of Section 513(a) of the MPC.[3]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10513.
The office of the Chester County Recorder of Deeds will retain three signed and
recorded copies.
One recorded copy will be returned to the applicant.
One signed and recorded copy shall be returned to the Township, together with one
copy of all supporting materials that were recorded with the plan.
Where specifically requested by the Township, the approved final plan also shall be
submitted to the Township electronically in the format specified by the Township
Engineer.
The Township may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing proceedings authorized by
this section. In exercising such an option, the Township and mediating parties shall meet the
stipulations and follow the procedures set forth in Article IX of the MPC.
§ 306. Guarantee of installation of improvements.
Prior to final approval of the final plan, the subdivider shall guarantee the installation of all required
improvements by one of the following methods:
By installing the improvements required by Article VI of this Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer and the Board of Supervisors and
obtaining a certificate from the Township Engineer that all improvements have been installed in
accordance with the standards and requirements contained in this ordinance or other
requirements of the Township.
In lieu of completing all of the improvements required as a condition for the final plan approval,
including improvements or fees required pursuant to this section, the subdivider or developer shall
post a performance guaranty with the Township in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of such
improvements or common amenities, including, but not limited to, roads, stormwater detention
and/or retention basins and other related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space
improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be required.
When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the Board of Supervisors shall
furnish the developer with a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plan
contingent upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plan shall not be
signed nor recorded until the financial improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or
letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial security
agreement is not executed within 90 days, unless a written extension is granted by the Board of
Supervisors; such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at
the request of the developer.
The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the required improvements
shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 352/620
306.5
306.6
306.7
306.8
306.9
scheduled for completion by the developer. Said amount may be adjusted annually by the
Township by comparing the actual cost of improvements which have been completed and the
estimated cost of the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th
day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion.
Subsequent to said adjustment, any additional security shall be posted by the developer in order
to assure that the financial security equals 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by the
developer in accordance with this subsection.
The performance guaranty may be either a performance bond with corporate surety or other
security acceptable to the Board of Supervisors. Federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending
institutions or bonding companies must be authorized to conduct business within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Performance guaranties shall be submitted in a form and with a
surety approved by the Township Solicitor guaranteeing the construction and installation of all
improvements within a stated period, which shall not be longer than three years from the date of
final subdivision or land development approval. However, upon written application signed by both
the obligor and the surety of the performance guaranty, in a form approved by the Township
Solicitor, the Board of Supervisors may, at its discretion, extend said period by not more than three
additional years, but, in any event, the Township shall still be entitled to adjust said security on an
annual basis.
The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of
completion of the required improvements submitted by the developer or subdivider and prepared
by a professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such engineer
to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the
Township's Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the developer
or subdivider and the Township are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in this
commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Township and the developer or subdivider. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the
final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, the fees for the services for said
engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and the subdivider or developer.
If the applicant or developer requires more than one year from the date of posting financial
security to complete the required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from
posting the financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the
required improvements as established on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period
by using the above procedure.
In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the Board of Supervisors
may authorize the submission of final plans by sections or stages of development, subject to such
requirements or guaranties as to improvements in future sections or stages of development as it
finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the development.
As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial
security may request the Board of Supervisors body to release or authorize the release, from time
to time, of such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing addressed to the Board of
Supervisors, and the Board of Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within
which to allow the Township Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such
portion of the work upon the improvements has been competed in accordance with the approved
plan. Upon such certification, the Board of Supervisors shall authorize release by the bonding
company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer fairly
representing the value of the improvements completed or, if the Board of Supervisors fails to act
within said forty-five-day period, the Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have approved the
release of funds as requested. The Board of Supervisors may, prior to final release at the time of
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 353/620
306.10
306.11
306.12
307.1
307.2
307.3
completion and certification by the Township Engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated
cost of the aforesaid improvements.
The amount of the performance guaranty may be reduced by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution as and when portions of the required improvements have been installed as detailed in
§ 306.9 above. In the event of default, the obligor and surety shall be liable thereon to the
Township for the cost of the improvements or parts thereof not installed. Upon receipt of the
proceeds thereof, the Township shall install the improvements. If cost of the improvements
exceeds the amount of the performance guaranty, then the subdivider shall be liable for the
amount in excess which the Township has actually expended for such improvements. In case the
amount of the performance guaranty exceeds the actual cost of improvements made, the
Township shall return the unused sum to the surety or the person who has paid or deposited the
performance guaranty.
If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or facilities related thereto,
are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility
or municipal authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial security to assure proper
completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the
controlling public utility or municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial security
as otherwise required by this section.
If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of improvements required as a
condition for the final plan approval plat as set forth in this section, the Township shall not
condition the issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement of
improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted upon the final plat upon
actual completion of the improvements depicted upon the approved final plan. Moreover, if said
financial security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected
shall not be withheld following: the improvement of the streets providing access to and from
existing public roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as depicted upon the
approved plan, either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot or lots in question, if such
improvements are necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
§ 307. Release from performance guaranty.
When the subdivider has completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements, the
subdivider shall notify the Board of Supervisors, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township
Engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall, within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and
authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Township
Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Board of Supervisors and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the subdivider by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made
and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization
from the Board of Supervisors; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection
of said improvements, either in whole or in part; and if said improvements, or any portion thereof,
shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
The Board of Supervisors, within 15 days of receipt of the Engineer's report, shall notify the
subdivider in writing, by certified or registered mail, of its action.
If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to comply with the time limitation
provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been approved, and the
developer shall be released from all liability pursuant to his performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 354/620
307.4
307.5
307.6
307.7
a.
b.
c.
d.
307.8
If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Board
of Supervisors, the subdivider shall proceed to complete the same; and, upon completion, the
same procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
Before the release of any performance guaranty, the subdivider shall, upon completion of all
improvements, submit one set of reproducible as-built drawings to the Township Engineer and one
copy of the subdivision plat at a scale of one inch equals 600 feet.
Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the developer's right to contest or
question, by legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the Board of Supervisors or the
Township Engineer.
Where herein reference is made to the Township Engineer, he/she shall be a duly registered
professional engineer employed by the Township or engaged as a consultant thereto.
The Township may prescribe that the applicant shall reimburse the Township for the reasonable
and necessary expense incurred in connection with the inspection of improvements. The applicant
shall not be required to reimburse the Board Supervisors for any inspection which is duplicative of
inspections conducted by other governmental agencies or public utilities. The burden of proving
that any inspection is duplicative shall be upon the objecting applicant. Such reimbursement shall
be based upon a schedule established by ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the Township's
professional consultant for work performed for similar services in the community, but in no event
shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the professional consultant to the Township for
comparable services when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
The Board of Supervisors shall submit to the applicant an itemized bill showing the work
performed in connection with the inspection of improvements performed, identifying the
person performing the services and the time and date spent for each task. In the event the
applicant disputes the amount of any such expense in connection with the inspection of
improvements, the applicant shall, no later than 30 days after the date of transmittal of a bill
for inspection services, notify the Township and the Township's professional consultant that
such inspection expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary and shall explain the
basis of his/her objections to the fees charged, in which case the Township shall not delay or
disapprove a request for release of financial security, a subdivision or land development
application or any approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's dispute of
inspection expenses. Failure of the applicant to dispute a bill within 30 days shall be a waiver
of the applicant's right to arbitration of that bill under this section.
Subsequent to the final release of financial security for completion of improvements for a
subdivision or land development, or any phase thereof, the professional consultant shall
submit to the Board of Supervisors a bill for inspection services, specifically designated as a
final bill. The final bill shall include inspection fees incurred through the release of financial
security.
If, the professional consultant and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses
which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant shall have the right, within 45 days of
the transmittal of the final bill or supplement to the final bill to the applicant, to request the
appointment of another professional consultant to serve as an arbitrator. The applicant and
professional consultant whose fees are being challenged shall, by mutual agreement, appoint
another professional consultant to review any bills the applicant has disputed and which
remain unresolved and make a determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable
and necessary. The arbitrator shall be of the same profession as the professional consultant
whose fees are being challenged.
The arbitrator so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such documentation as the
arbitrator, in his or her sole opinion, deems necessary and shall render a decision no later
than 50 days after the date of appointment. Based on the decision of the arbitrator, the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 355/620
e.
f.
308.1
308.2
401.1
a.
b.
401.2
applicant or the professional consultant whose fees were challenged shall be required to pay
any amounts necessary to implement the decision within 60 days. In the event the Township
has paid the professional consultant an amount in excess of the amount determined to be
reasonable and necessary, the professional consultant shall, within 60 days, reimburse the
excess payment.
In the event that the Township's professional consultant and applicant cannot agree upon the
arbitrator to be appointed within 20 days of the request for appointment of an arbitrator, then,
upon application of either party, the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of the
judicial district in which the municipality is located (or if at the time there be no President
Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such arbitrator, who, in that
case, shall be neither the Township's professional consultant nor any professional consultant
who has been retained by, or performed services for, the Township or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
The fee of the arbitrator shall be paid by the applicant if the review fee charged is sustained
by the arbitrator; otherwise it shall be divided equally between the parties. If the disputed fees
are found to be excessive by more than $5,000, the arbitrator shall have the discretion to
assess the arbitration fee in whole or in part against either the applicant or the professional
consultant. The Board of Supervisors and the consultant whose fees are the subject of the
dispute shall be parties to the proceeding.
§ 308. Dedication; maintenance guaranty.
All streets, parks or other improvements shown on the subdivision plan, recorded or otherwise,
shall be deemed to be private until such time as the same have been offered for dedication to the
Township and accepted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some of the required improvements
following completion, the Board of Supervisors may require the posting of financial security to
secure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final plat for a term not to
exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall be of the
same type as otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such improvements as
approved by the Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors, and the amount of the financial
security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
Article IV. Plan Content and Supplemental Study
Requirements
§ 401. Required contents of sketch plans.
A sketch plan shall consist of and be prepared in accordance with the following standards:
Drafting standards. Specific drafting standards are not required for sketch plan submission;
however, to the extent practicable at the time of sketch plan submission, it is strongly suggested
that the drafting standards set forth in § 402.1 for preliminary plan submission be employed.
Required contents of sketch plan.
Name and address of the owner of record, the equitable owner, and/or the applicant.
Tax parcel number(s) from current Chester County Tax Assessor's records.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 356/620
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
402.1
Name and address of the professional engineer, surveyor, planner, landscape architect, or
site designer responsible for preparing the plan.
Graphic scale (not greater than one inch equals 100 feet) and true North arrow. Precise scale
and dimensions are not required at the time of sketch plan submission; however, the subject
plan shall clearly be titled "Sketch Plan."
Approximate tract boundaries and tract size.
Location map at a scale of not less than 800 feet to the inch.
Applicable zoning district(s), including any overlays.
Locations and names of existing and proposed streets on, adjacent to, or within 100 feet of
the subject tract.
A brief narrative description of the subdivision or land development proposal.
Topographic, physical, and cultural features identified within the environmental impact
assessment (EIA) in § 406.1, where available. Where aerial photogrammetry or on-site
topographic survey has not been completed at the time of sketch plan submission, USGS
topographic information or data from the Chester County GIS Department may be utilized.
Minor subdivision or land development applications use generalized information to identify
relevant site features consistent with those required in the EIA.
Schematic layout indicating a general concept for development, including lot lines, if any,
proposed locations of buildings and other major structures, parking areas, roads and other
vehicular and pedestrian accessways, necessary utilities and proposed stormwater
management locations, including any BMP if known, landscape, recreational improvements,
and any other improvements; for major subdivision or land development applications.
§ 402. Required contents of preliminary plans.
A preliminary plan shall consist of and be prepared in accordance with the following minimum
standards:
Drafting standards.
The plan shall be drawn on a scale equal to or larger than one inch equals 50 feet.
Dimensions shall be set in feet, bearing in degrees, minutes, and seconds, with errors of
closure not to exceed one part per 10,000.
Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total number of sheets.
The plan shall bear an adequate legend to indicate clearly which features are existing and
which are proposed.
The original drawing, and all submitted prints thereof, shall be made on sheets no larger than
30 inches by 42 inches and no smaller than 22 inches by 34 inches.
If the preliminary plan requires more than one sheet, a master sheet at a scale not smaller
than one inch equals 200 feet showing the location of each section shall accompany the plan.
If more than one scale is used in the plan, a key must be provided that indicates the
difference in scale.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 357/620
a.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
b.
402.2 Required contents of preliminary plan, improvements construction plan and supplementary
documentation.
A location map and North arrow for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided or
developed, at a scale of not less than 800 feet to the inch, showing the relation of the tract to
adjoining property and to all roads and municipal boundaries existing within 1,000 feet of any
part of the property proposed to be subdivided or developed.
A series of plan sheets prepared in accordance with the drafting standards set forth above,
with accompanying narrative as needed, showing the following existing conditions:
Proposed subdivision or land development name or other identifying title.
Name, address and telephone number of the owner of record, equitable owner and the
applicant.
Name, address and telephone number of the registered engineer or surveyor responsible
for the plan. If a registered engineer, architect or landscape architect collaborated in the
preparation of the plan, his name and address and seal shall also appear. All plans
showing the subdivision of land must be signed and sealed by a registered surveyor.
Zoning information, including applicable district, lot size and yard requirements, proof of
any variance which may have been granted, and any zoning boundaries that traverse or
are within 100 feet of the tract.
Conditions of approval from any conditional use, special exception, variance application
or other form of zoning relief granted by the Township for all or part of the application
property.
All waivers or modifications being requested by the applicant, as well as all waivers or
modifications granted to the applicant by the Township Board of Supervisors, shall be
clearly stated on the first sheet of the preliminary plan submission and also filed
simultaneously in letter form to the Township.
Original date of preparation and revision dates, with concise descriptions of each
revision.
North arrow and scale, both written and graphic.
Total lot or tract boundaries showing bearings and distances and along all existing rightsof-
way within and adjacent to the tract, prepared by a registered professional land
surveyor.
Total area of the subject lot or tract to the nearest hundredth of an acre or square foot.
The applicable area and bulk requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) shall be
shown for the existing lot, parcel, or tract, including any applicable required setbacks
from pipeline rights-of-way or other utilities.
The parcel numbers and names of all current owners of all adjacent lands, the names of
all proposed and existing subdivisions adjacent, and the locations and dimensions of any
roads or right-of-way easements.
The locations and dimensions of all existing roads, railroads, sewers and sewage
systems, water mains and feeder lines, fire hydrants, gas, electric, and oil transmission
lines, watercourses, sources of water supply, easements, historic resources, and other
significant features within the property and within 100 feet of any part of the subject lot or
tract.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 358/620
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
c.
Topographic, physical, and natural features as required for submission of an EIA,
prepared in accordance with § 406.
Location and elevation of the datum to which contour elevations refer; datum used shall
be a known established local benchmark. Assumed datum elevations will not be allowed.
Any proposed improvements or land disturbances requiring a permit from the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or the
Chester County Conservation District shall be so indicated.
Locations of all existing structures on the tract, and distance thereof from lot lines.
A boundary survey and certification as to the accuracy of the survey shall be provided for
all subdivisions and/or land developments.
All notations on the plan must be readable. Illegible notations will be considered
incomplete data on the plan.
A full plan of the proposed subdivision or land development, prepared in accordance with the
drafting standards set forth above, including at a minimum:
Location and width of all streets, alleys, and rights-of-way, with a statement of any
conditions governing their use, including distance to the nearest intersection; proposed
dedicated rights-of-way and reserved ultimate rights-of-way; street names; and state or
municipal road numbers.
Existing and proposed street and utility easement locations with approximate dimensions.
All proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot areas, both gross and net,
indicating those limitations excluded in the lot area definition; impervious and vegetative
coverage calculations.
Building setback lines along each street, minimum side and rear yard limits in accord with
the existing or proposed zoning district(s).
A statement of the intended use of all lots and parcels.
Lot numbers, and a statement of the total number of lots and parcels; addresses of each
lot as provided by the Township.
Locations of all stormwater management facilities, including but not limited to storm
sewers, bioretention areas, and other drainage improvement measures. Specific design
of such facilities shall be demonstrated in the required stormwater management plan.
Locations of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers and any other sewage
conveyance, treatment or disposal facilities.
Locations of all existing and proposed water supply facilities.
Location of existing and/or proposed sidewalks, paths and trails throughout the property
and on neighboring property within 100 feet.
Proposed parks, playgrounds, and other open space areas to be dedicated or reserved
for public use, with any conditions governing such use, ownership and maintenance.
The Pennsylvania One-Call number and a table showing all affected utilities, with a
notation on the plan showing the ownership and/or beneficiary of the easement or rightof-
way.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 359/620
(13)
(14)
(1)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(2)
d.
(1)
e.
Any underground tanks, including, but not limited to, storage tanks, chemical and
petroleum tanks, empty tanks or any other form of underground structure comprised of a
tank which is known to the applicant.
A grading plan, showing existing and proposed contours, for all proposed improvements,
including preliminary grades for all house-lot locations. The plan shall reflect proposed
limits of clearing and grading and demonstrate compliance with the grading provisions of
this ordinance, the erosion and sedimentation control provisions of § 510, and all other
applicable ordinance provisions.
Improvement construction plan. An improvement construction plan shall be required to
accompany preliminary and final plans whenever an improvement is to be constructed or
installed.
Scale. The improvement construction plan shall have the same scale as required for a
preliminary and final plan.
Data. The improvement construction plan shall contain sufficient information to provide
working plans for the layout and construction of proposed streets, utilities, stormwater
retention structures, and other improvements. Such a plan shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
A horizontal plan showing layout of proposed improvements, including stations
corresponding to those shown on the profiles, horizontal curves, location and size of
inlets and manholes, horizontal location of proposed utilities, and existing contours.
A profile plan indicating the final grades of streets and sewers and the extent of cut
and fill operations.
The profile plan shall show the vertical section of the existing grade and
proposed grade along the center line and rights-of-way of the proposed street.
Where storm drainage and/or sanitary sewer lines are to be installed, they shall
also be indicated on the profile plan.
The horizontal scale of the profile plan shall be not less than one inch equals 50
feet, and the vertical scale shall be not less than one inch equals five feet.
A typical cross-section street construction shall be shown on the profile plan and
shall indicate the following:
Right-of-way width and the location and width of paving within the right-ofway.
Type, thickness and crown of paving.
The location, width, type, and thickness of curbs and sidewalks to be
installed, if any.
Typical location, size and depth of any underground utilities that are to be
installed in the right-of-way, where such information is available.
All storm sewer, sanitary sewer, public water, gas line, and other existing utility
crossings shall be shown by profile.
The preliminary plan shall also be accompanied by the following supplementary
documentation:
A preliminary erosion and sedimentation control plan, prepared in accordance with § 510
of this ordinance.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 360/620
[1]
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
403.1
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
403.2
A preliminary stormwater management plan, prepared in accordance with the Township's
Stormwater Management Ordinance of 2005 or successive ordinance, as amended.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 214, Stormwater Management.
A preliminary landscape plan demonstrating compliance with the requirements of § 602.8
of this ordinance.
Where applicable, an open space management plan prepared pursuant to § 409 herein
and § 617 of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
If the preliminary plan or land development application is filed in accordance with an
existing conditional use, special exception, variance or other form of zoning relief, then
the applicant's supplementary documentation shall include any order or approval for
conditional use, special exception, zoning variance or other form of zoning relief, any
conditions of approval, and all plans submitted and approved as part of the order or
approval.
Where applicable, an historic resource impact study prepared pursuant to § 405 herein.
Where applicable, an environmental impact study prepared pursuant to § 406 herein.
Where applicable, a traffic impact study prepared pursuant to § 407 herein.
§ 403. Required contents of final plans.
Final plans shall conform in all important details to approved preliminary plans where applicable,
including any conditions of approval specified by the Board of Supervisors. A final plan shall consist of
and be prepared in accordance with the following:
Drafting standards. Final plans shall conform to the drafting standards set forth in § 402.1.
Required contents of final plan, final improvement construction plan, supplementary
documentation. Final plan submissions shall include all information and data set forth below,
except that the Township may waive any specific submission requirement where deemed not
relevant to the subject application upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer.
Information and data already supplied at the time of preliminary plan submission, where
applicable, and satisfactorily meeting all requirements for final plan submission need not be
resubmitted except to the extent that additional copies are needed by the Township to facilitate
review.
Final plan submissions shall include all information and data required under § 402.2, except
that preliminary supplementary documentation required under §§ 402.2.e(1) through (8) need
not be resubmitted and instead shall be supplanted by the required supplementary plans set
forth in § 403.2.q below.
All final lot area calculations, density calculations, and lot line dimensions, including straight
lot lines and chords and radii of curved lot lines, defined in feet and hundredths of a foot by
distances, and in degrees, minutes and seconds either by magnetic bearings or by angles of
deflection from other lot and road lines.
A statement of restrictions of any type which exist as covenants in the deed(s) for all lots
contained wholly or partly in the subdivision and, if covenants are recorded, including the
deed book and page number.
The specific proposed placement of each building and all water and sewer facilities.
The location of all existing and proposed monuments.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 361/620
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
(1)
(2)
(3)
m.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
n.
All easements or rights-of-way for any purpose, including written legal descriptions, and any
limitations on such easements or rights-of-way. Easements or rights-of-way shall be
specifically described on the plans. Easements should be located in cooperation with the
appropriate public utilities, where applicable.
If the subdivision proposes a new street intersection with a state legislative route, the
intersection permit number(s) shall be indicated for all such intersections.
A certification of ownership, acknowledgement of plan and offer of dedication shall be affixed
on the plan and shall be duly acknowledged and signed by the owner(s) of the property and
notarized.
All waivers being requested by the applicant, as well as all waivers granted to the applicant by
the Board of Supervisors, any conditional use decision and order, variance or special
exception, shall be clearly stated on the first sheet, or subsequent sheets to be recorded, of
the final plan submission.
Certificate for approval of the plan by the Board of Supervisors and by the Township Planning
Commission shall be presented, as well as any other certificates required by the Township.
The name (or number) and cartway width and lines of all existing public streets and the name
and location of all other streets within the property, as applicable.
Any fees, whether required or agreed to by the developer, shall be clearly noted on the plan.
The following data for the center line of the cartway and both right-of-way lines of all recorded
and proposed streets within and adjacent to the property:
Courses and distances with length in feet and hundredths of a foot of all straight lines
and of the radius and the arc (or chord) of all curved lines with delta angles including
curved lot lines, and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds for all straight lines, and
chord distances and bearings.
The width in feet of the cartway, right-of-way and of the ultimate right-of-way, and (in
degrees, minutes and seconds) of the delta angle of all curved lines, including curved lot
lines.
A boundary survey and certification as to the accuracy of the survey shall be provided for
all subdivisions and/or land developments.
Final improvement construction plan:
Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets. Cross-section drawings
may be shown either on the final plan or on the profile sheets.
Profile sheets for all proposed streets within the tract. Such profiles shall show at least
the following information, properly labeled:
Existing (natural) profile along the cartway edges or along the center line of each
street; all high and low points.
Proposed finished grade (at fifty-foot stations) of the center line, or proposed finished
grade at the top of both curbs, or proposed finished grade at both cartway
(pavement) edges.
The length of all vertical curves, including stations of beginning and ending points; all
high and low points.
Existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains and manholes.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 362/620
(e)
(f)
(3)
o.
p.
(1)
[1]
(2)
(3)
(4)
q.
1.
2.
3.
4.
A.
B.
Existing and proposed storm sewer and drainage facilities with invert and surface
elevations.
The horizontal scale of the profile plan shall be not less than one inch equals 50 feet,
and the vertical scale shall be not less than one inch equals five feet.
Final designs of any bridges or culverts required.
All offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation and maintenance of
undedicated open space shall bear the certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor as to
their legal sufficiency.
Such private deed restrictions, including building setback lines, as may be imposed upon the
property as a condition to sale, together with a statement of any restrictions previously
imposed which may affect the title to the land being developed.
The final plan shall be accompanied by the following supplementary documentation:
A final erosion and sedimentation control plan, prepared in accordance with § 510 of this
ordinance.
A final stormwater management plan, including a stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan, prepared in accordance with Ordinance 2005-02,[1] or successive
ordinance.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 214, Stormwater Management.
A final landscape plan demonstrating compliance with the requirements of § 602.8 of this
ordinance.
A final open space management plan per § 409 herein and § 617 of the Uwchlan
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
§ 404. Impact studies and assessments.
The Township shall require any preliminary plan application for major subdivision or land
development plan approval to be accompanied by submission of the following, as applicable, and
may require submission of specific portions thereof with minor plan submissions, to the extent
deemed applicable:
An historic resources impact study in accordance with § 405 herein and § 612.6 of the
Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
An environmental impact study in accordance with § 406 herein.
A traffic impact assessment in accordance with § 407 herein.
An open space management plan in accordance with § 409 herein and § 617 of the Uwchlan
Township Zoning Ordinance.
Each impact study or assessment shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors. In making its evaluation, the Planning Commission or
Board may request any additional information as it deems necessary to adequately assess
potential impacts. The Township may also contract with a qualified consultant to assist in
evaluating the study or assessment. When contracted, the Township's consultant shall deliver to
the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors a written report on the adequacy of the study
in identifying impacts, evaluating appropriate impact alternatives, and include an assessment of
the applicant's proposed mitigations.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 363/620
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
a.
b.
c.
d.
406.1
Any fees incurred by the Township for consultant review of any submitted impact study prepared in
accordance with the provisions herein shall be billed to the applicant and deducted from the
escrow deposit.
Following the report of the Township consultant(s) on any submission of any impact study or
assessment, if requested, or prior to reaching a decision on the preliminary or final subdivision or
land development application, the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors shall either
accept the findings and recommendations of the study or assessment, accept them with
conditions, or reject them. The Board's decision on whether compliance has been achieved shall
take into consideration the findings and recommendations of the Planning Commission and be
made part of its decision on the subdivision or land development application.
§ 405. Historic resource impact study.
As required by the § 612.6 of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance, an historic resource impact
study shall be required, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, when any of the following are
proposed:
Subdivision or land development plans which include an on-site historic resource as identified on
the Township Historic Resource Inventory.
Any construction, improvement, or land disturbance being undertaken in conjunction with
subdivision or land development of land within 100 feet of the exterior walls of any Class 1 historic
resource or on which historic resources are located, as identified on the Historic Resource
Inventory.
General bridge or road construction, or substantial repair passing within 100 feet of the exterior
walls of any Class 1 historic resource.
§ 406. Environmental impact study.
In order to more effectively evaluate subdivision and/or land development proposals, the
applicant shall be required to disclose the environmental consequences or effects of such
proposals through the submission of an environmental impact assessment (EIA) report at the time
of submission and filing of a preliminary subdivision or land development application. The EIA
report is intended to provide the Township with the information to objectively evaluate potential
adverse impacts of a project and, most importantly, to require mitigation of adverse impacts. The
EIA report shall be a means of ensuring that the overall objectives of the Zoning Ordinance are
met and that existing features and conditions are not destroyed or degraded. The EIA report is
also intended to better address the environmental protection objectives set forth in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and Article I, Section 27, of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The EIA report shall contain text, tables, maps and analysis prepared by qualified individuals
or firms, including land planners, architects and engineers, which document the probable
impact resulting from the proposed subdivision and/or land development in accordance with
the format and content outline specified in § 406.1.d through m below.
Two copies of the EIA report shall be submitted to the Township. The report shall list the
individuals and firms, and their qualifications, responsible for preparation of the report.
The EIA report shall include both a narrative and map at the same scale as required for the
preliminary plan for the information described in § 406.1.d through m below.
An identification of the physical resources associated with the natural environment of the
tract, including such features as geology, topography, and soils, which may be combined on a
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 364/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
(6)
e.
(1)
f.
single plan sheet or series of sheets.
A plan depicting the geological characteristics of the tract. Such plan shall define the
location and boundaries of the rock formations at or influencing the tract and features
such as suitability for construction, faults and/or fractures.
A plan depicting the topographical characteristics of the tract. Such plan shall contain
contours with at least two-foot intervals and shall depict slopes ranging from: 0% to 15%,
15% to 25%, and greater than 25%.
A plan depicting the soil characteristics of the tract. Such plan shall depict all soil types
based on maps contained in the Soil Survey of Chester and Delaware Counties,
Pennsylvania, U.S. Department of Agriculture, as last revised, and shall include a table
identifying soil characteristics pertinent to the proposed subdivision and/or land
development, such as depth of bedrock, depth of water table, alluvial soils, and hydric
soils. Soil descriptions for all soil types shall be provided and may be in the form of plan
notes.
A plan depicting the hydrological characteristics of the tract. Such plan shall depict the
following:
Streams, watercourses, lakes, ponds, and all natural drainage areas. Boundaries
between drainage areas shall be indicated along with the names of any named stream to
which drainage flows and all minor/major drainage basin(s).
Watershed boundaries and applicable stream classifications (i.e., EV, HQ) per PA DEP
Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, latest version.
Floodplain areas per § 510 of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
Wetlands as defined by the Zoning Ordinance shall be indicated. Wetland boundaries
within the tract shall be determined from on-site delineation in accordance with the 1987
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual, as amended. All wetlands
shall be classified as one of the following: exceptional value, important, or limited value.
Wetlands delineation and classification shall be conducted by professional(s) acceptable
to the Township and shall be plotted from actual field survey.
If any wetland disturbance is proposed, a detailed wetland delineation report shall be
provided.
The wetland delineation must have been completed within one year of the
submission of the preliminary plan and shall be deemed valid for five years from the
date of submission.
Riparian setback and buffer area, as defined by the Uwchlan Township Zoning
Ordinance.
Groundwater resources, such as aquifers, aquifer recharge areas and existing wells,
within and directly adjacent to the proposed subdivision or land development.
The biological resources associated with the natural environment of the tract, including such
features as vegetation, wildlife and Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI)
sites/resources.
A plan depicting the vegetation characteristics of the tract. Such plan shall depict the
locations and boundaries of the woodlands, hedgerows and specimen trees as defined
by § 204 of this ordinance, along with the tree protection zones required by § 512.1 of
this ordinance, and shall note the species types of vegetation. In addition, all trees 15
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 365/620
(2)
(3)
g.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
inches in caliper or greater shall be accurately located on the map either as freestanding
trees or as tree masses.
In addition to depicting the vegetation characteristics of the tract, a woodland
management plan in accordance with § 512.2 shall be provided as part of this submittal.
A plan depicting characteristics associated with wildlife habitats and PNDI
sites/resources per the Pennsylvania Natural Heritage Program (PNHP). Such plan may
draw upon vegetation, hydrology and soil maps in order to express habitat characteristics
associated with terrestrial and aquatic wildlife on the tract and the relationship of the
overall habitat(s).
The visual resources and scenic roads associated with the tract, such as areas which have a
particular amenity value and areas which offer interest in viewing the tract.
The land use conditions and characteristics associated with the tract, such as current and
past use, land cover and encumbrances, and the relationship of these to adjacent tracts.
A plan depicting the land cover characteristics of the tract. Such plan shall define existing
features, including paved or other impervious surface, woodland areas, cultivated areas,
pasture, old fields, lawns, landscaped areas, and existing structures, including an
indication of their historical significance and the like.
A plan depicting any encumbrances to the tract. Such plan shall define easements,
rights-of-way, underground and aboveground utilities and other areas where certain use
privileges exist.
A plan depicting the land uses adjacent to the proposed tract. Such plan may be the
same scale as the location map.
A plan depicting all existing and proposed trails.
Historic resources as defined by § 612.3 of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
Except for a minor residential subdivision as defined by § 301.3 of this ordinance or a
revision to existing lot lines, a report indicating the past or existing absence or presence
of hazardous materials or hazardous waste. A Phase I environmental report, indicating
no evidence of contamination or hazards, shall satisfy the requirements of this
subsection. In the event the Phase I report indicates the necessity for further
investigation and testing, or the potential presence of contamination or hazards, the
applicant shall demonstrate that the property has been cleaned up and remediated in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations such that the property does not pose
a risk to human health or the environment.
Photographs of the site, including views from all abutting public roads and an aerial
photograph of the site, the most recent available from the Delaware Valley Regional Planning
Commission or the Chester County GIS Department.
The Board of Supervisors may waive certain requirements of this section upon determining
that the submission of information subject to any particular requirement is not relevant to the
application or is duplicated by other materials.
In addition to the identification of the resources, alternatives and measures to mitigate the
impact of prospective development upon the environmental resources of the Township shall
be required.
Alternatives to the proposed subdivision and/or land development. To indicate such
alternatives, the applicant shall submit exhibits or diagrams which will depict the type of
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 366/620
(1)
(2)
m.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
407.1
407.2
a.
b.
407.3
alternatives described in narrative form. The applicant shall comment on how alternatives,
such as revised location, redesign, layout or disposal and water supply, reduction in the size
of proposed lots or structures or numbers of lots or structures and the like, would preclude,
reduce or lessen potential adverse impact or produce beneficial effects.
Measures to mitigate adverse effects. To indicate such measures, the applicant shall submit
exhibits or diagrams which will depict the type of remedial, protective and mitigative measures
described in narrative form. These measures shall include those required through existing
procedures and standards and those unique to a specific project, as follows:
Mitigation measures which pertain to existing procedures and standards are those
related to current requirements of federal, state, county, and/or Township agencies for
remedial or protective action, such as sedimentation and erosion control, stormwater
runoff control, water quality control, creation of compensatory wetlands, air quality
control, and the like.
Mitigation measures related to impacts which may be unique to a specific subdivision
and/or land development are those related to efforts such as revegetation, screening,
fencing, emission control, traffic control, noise control, environmental cleanup, reduction
in lots, buildings or other structures, land acquisitions, and the like.
§ 407. Traffic impact study.
Applicability. Unless waived or modified by the Board of Supervisors, traffic impact studies shall
be required for all preliminary plan applications for major subdivision or land development when
any of the following uses are proposed or circumstances apply:
Residential development of five or more lots and/or units.
Nonresidential development of 5,000 square feet or more of gross floor area.
Any project which will affect roads as determined by the Township to have safety or design
deficiency.
Any project which will be developed in phases with a cumulative effect of falling within the
required categories outlined above.
No traffic impact study is required for those development projects that were the subject of a
conditional use approval where a traffic analysis was submitted within two years before the
date that a preliminary plan was filed, except upon request of the Township, when, in the
opinion of the Township traffic consultant, traffic conditions have significantly changed to
warrant a new study.
Purpose. The purpose of the study is to identify any traffic problems likely to result from the
proposed development in relation to ingress/egress, road capacities, off-site traffic flow, public
transportation, and pedestrian and other nonvehicular circulation.
Contents.
The contents of the study shall be such as to enable the Board of Supervisors to assess the
likely impacts of the proposed development on the existing transportation network of the
Township and surrounding areas.
The study shall be prepared in accordance with the Institute of Transportation Engineers'
(ITE) recommended practice "Traffic Access and Impact Studies for Site Development,"
current edition, FHWA Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, current edition, and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 367/620
c.
d.
e.
408.1
408.2
408.3
PennDOT Publication 212 (Official Traffic Control Devices) and Publication 282 (Highway
Occupancy Permit Guidelines), current editions.
The study shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, an analysis of expected traffic
generation to, from, and upon surrounding roads within a radius of two miles from the
proposed development site, particularly showing a.m. and p.m. peak hours of existing traffic
flow during a normal business day, in comparison with that which is anticipated after the
proposed development is fully completed and, if applicable, upon the completion of each
stage. Estimated peak-hour trip generation shall be based on procedures established in the
most-recent edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual. Existing traffic flows shall be based on
actual counts; if these cannot be obtained, an alternative source, subjected to review and
approval by the Township traffic consultant, may be used.
The Township Engineer and/or Township traffic consultant shall review the methodology,
assumptions, findings, and recommendations of the study and report his or her conclusions to
the Planning Commission and to the Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation from the Township Engineer and/or
Township traffic consultant, may impose upon the applicant additional on-site improvements
deemed necessary to accommodate impacts of the proposed development and require a fee
as prescribed within the Uwchlan Township Transportation Impact Fee Ordinance, No. 92-7
and 2009-09, as amended, enacted pursuant to the MPC, for off-site public transportation
capital improvements deemed necessary to accommodate impacts of the proposed
development.
§ 408. Fiscal impact study.
With respect to any proposed development consisting of five residential dwelling units or lots or
5,000 square feet of gross floor area to be devoted to nonresidential uses, the preliminary plan
submission shall be accompanied by a fiscal impact statement reporting the results of a study of
the fiscal impact of the proposed development on the Township of Uwchlan performed by a
qualified professional and projecting the primary costs that will be incurred by the Township and
the immediate revenues that will be generated to the Township as a consequence of the proposed
subdivision or land development. The fiscal impact study and analysis shall employ the per capita
multiplier method in the case of proposed residential development and the case study method in
the case of proposed nonresidential development, as described in the most-recent edition of the
Practitioner's Guide to Fiscal Impact Analysis published by the Center for Urban Policy Research.
Demographic information by housing type, average expenditures, including budgetary information
and operating costs, and estimates of excess or deficient service capacity and expected local
service responses, if available, for use in the fiscal impact analysis may be obtained from the
Township staff. Any demonstrated adverse fiscal impact shall be borne by the developer in the
form of some combination of contributions, payments in lieu of taxes, and/or the provision of offsite
public improvements.
In lieu of the submission of a fiscal impact study as described in this section, a developer may
submit a written undertaking, in a form satisfactory to the Township Solicitor, to make an
unrestricted contribution to the Township at the time of application for building permits necessary
to commence construction of the proposed development and in an amount promulgated from time
to time by resolution of the Board.
The contributions and payments described in §§ 408.1 and 408.2 above shall be in addition to
and shall not be offset by any voluntary contributions or donations of the developer; on-site public
or quasi-public improvements, including without limitation open space lands and active or passive
recreation facilities, utilities and utility easements, and public or private roads; or improvements,
whether on- or off-site, necessary to implementation of the development proposal, including
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 368/620
408.4
501.1
501.2
501.3
501.4
501.5
501.6
502.1
without limitation access highway improvements, including acceleration and deceleration lanes
and traffic signals, access road widening, utilities and utility easements.
All unrestricted monies received by the Township pursuant to §§ 408.1 and 408.2 above shall be
maintained in a separate interest-bearing account (or alternative investment instrument), shall be
expended only for the purpose of ameliorating the identified adverse fiscal impact of the
developments concerning which the funds have been contributed, and shall be the subject of an
annual report to the Board of Supervisors by the Township Secretary or Manager demonstrating
compliance with this subsection.
§ 409. Open space management plan.
As required by § 617 of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance, an open space management plan
shall be prepared by the applicant detailing the long-term management of all open space areas.
Article V. Design Standards
§ 501. Application and general standards.
The standards and requirements contained in Article V are intended as the minimum for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare and shall be applied as such by the
Township Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors body in reviewing all subdivision and
land development plans.
Whenever other Township ordinances and/or regulations impose more-restrictive standards and
requirements than those contained herein, such other ordinances and/or regulations shall be
observed; otherwise, the standards and requirements of this ordinance shall apply.
The standards and requirements of this ordinance may be modified by the Board of Supervisors,
upon submission to the Township Planning Commission for review and recommendation, where
such modifications achieve substantially the objectives of this ordinance and which are further
protected by such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and
achievement of the subdivision and land development plan.
Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property such as may arise from fire, floods, disease,
or other causes shall not be subdivided for building purposes unless such hazards have been
eliminated or unless the subdivision plan shall show adequate safeguards against them which
shall be approved by the appropriate regulatory agencies.
Subdivision and land development plans shall give due recognition to the official plans of
Uwchlan Township and of the county or to such parts thereof as may have been adopted pursuant
to statute.
Land proposed for subdivision shall not be developed or changed by grading, excavating, or by
the removal or destruction of the natural topsoil, trees, or other vegetative cover unless adequate
provisions for minimizing erosion and sediment are provided under Title 25, Chapter 102, Rules
and Regulations, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and § 510 of this
ordinance.
§ 502. Streets.
General standards.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 369/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
502.2
502.3
The location and width of all streets shall conform to the Official Map or to such parts thereof
as may have been adopted by the Township Board of Supervisors.
The proposed street system shall extend existing or proposed streets on the Official Map at
the same width or larger but in no case at less than the required minimum width in § 502.3.
Where, in the opinion of the Township Planning Commission, it is desirable to provide for
street access to adjoining property, street stubs and utilities shall be extended, by dedication,
to the boundary of such property.
New minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic, but the subdivider
shall provide for the extension and continuation of major and collector streets into and from
adjoining properties.
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of improper width or alignment, the
Township Planning Commission shall require the dedication of land sufficient to widen the
street or correct the alignment.
Private streets (streets not to be offered for dedication) are prohibited unless they meet the
construction standards in this ordinance.
Partial and half streets. New half or partial streets shall be prohibited except where essential to
reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards of
these regulations and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining
part of the street can be obtained. The subdivider shall provide the entire required cartway width
within his property.
Street widths. Minimum street right-of-way and pavement widths shall be as shown on the
official plans or, if not shown on such plans, shall be as follows:
Street Type
Required Width
(feet)
Minor street
Right-of-way 50
Cartway 28
Collector street
Right-of-way 60
Cartway 38
Major street (Routes 100 and 113)
Right-of-way 120
Cartway See note
Permanent cul-de-sac street
Right-of-way 50
Cartway 24
Service street (alley)
Right-of-way 25
Cartway 20
Private street
Right-of-way See note
Cartway 24
(a)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 370/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
502.4
a.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
b.
c.
502.5
a.
(1)
b.
502.6
NOTES:
No on-street parking permitted.
As specified in the official plans or as determined after consulting with the Township, the
County Planning Commission and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
See § 502.10 for those culs-de-sac longer than 750 feet when permitted by the Board of
Supervisors.
Variable, depending on approvals.
Face of curb to face of curb.
Additional right-of-way and pavement widths may be required by the Township Planning
Commission or Board of Supervisors for the purpose of promoting the public safety and
convenience or to provide parking in commercial and industrial areas and in areas of highdensity
residential development.
Restriction of access.
Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed street with an ultimate
right-of-way of 50 feet or more or contains or abuts an existing or proposed collector street,
the Township Planning Commission or the Board of Supervisors may require restriction of
access to said street by:
Provision of reverse-frontage lots.
Provision of service streets along the rear of the abutting lots, together with prohibition of
private driveways intersecting the major streets.
Provision of marginal access streets, provided that the reserve strips establishing such
marginal access streets shall be definitely placed within the jurisdiction of the Township
under an agreement meeting the approval of the Township.
Except as specified under § 502.4.a(3) above, reserve strips shall be prohibited.
Street grades.
There shall be a minimum center-line grade of 1%.
Center-line grades shall not exceed the following:
Minor street: 7%.
Collector street: 7%.
Major street: 5%.
Street intersection: 5%.
Grades up to 10% may be permitted on a through minor street where access to the street is
possible over streets with grades of 7% or less.
Horizontal curves.
Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 5°, connection shall be made by horizontal
curves.
To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum center-line radii for horizontal curves shall be as
follows:
Minor streets: 250 feet.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 371/620
(2)
(3)
c.
d.
a.
b.
c.
502.7
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
f.
g.
502.8
(1)
a.
502.9
Collector streets: 350 feet.
Major streets: 500 feet.
A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be introduced between all horizontal curves on collector
and major streets.
To the greatest extent possible, combinations of the minimum radius and maximum grade
shall be avoided.
Vertical curves. At all changes of street grades where the algebraic difference exceeds 1%, the
following stopping sight distance for crest and headlight stopping sight distances for sag vertical
curves shall be provided:
Minor streets: 200 feet.
Collector streets: 300 feet.
Major streets: 400 feet.
Intersections.
Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect
another at an angle of less than 60° or more than 120°.
No more than two streets shall intersect at the same point.
Streets intersecting another street shall either intersect directly opposite to each other or shall
be separated by at least 150 feet between center lines, measured along the center line of the
street being intersected.
Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight leveling area, the grade of which
shall not exceed 5% within 50 feet of the intersection of the nearest right-of-way lines.
Intersections with major streets shall be located not less than 1,000 feet apart, measured from
center line to center line along the center line of the major street.
Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangent arc with a minimum radius of:
Thirty feet for intersections involving only minor streets.
Forty feet for all intersections involving a collector street.
Fifty feet for all intersections involving only major streets.
Ten feet for all intersections involving only service streets.
Street right-of-way lines shall be parallel to (concentric with) curb arcs at intersections.
Sight distance at intersections.
Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections. Within such triangles, no
vision-obstructing objects other than utility poles, streetlights, street signs, or traffic signs shall
be permitted which obscure vision above the height of 30 inches and below 10 feet,
measured from the center-line grade of intersecting streets. Such triangles shall be
established from a distance of:
For minor streets, 150 feet from the point of intersection of the center lines, except that:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 372/620
(2)
(3)
b.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
502.10
502.11
Clear sight triangles of 250 feet shall be provided for all intersections with collector or
major streets.
Clear sight triangles for intersection with major streets shall be in accordance with
minimum standards of PennDOT.
Wherever a portion of the line of such triangles occurs behind (i.e., from the street) the
building reserve (setback) line, such portion shall be shown on the final plan of the subdivision
and shall be considered a building setback (reserve) line.
Cul-de-sac streets.
Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as cul-de-sac streets or designed for future
access to adjoining properties.
Any temporarily dead-ended street shall be provided with a temporary all-weather turnaround
within the subdivision, and the use of such turnaround shall be guaranteed to the public until
such time as the street is extended.
Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed 750 feet in length for lots
containing one acre or more and shall not be more than 500 feet in length for lots containing
less than one acre. In any case, the minimum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be 250 feet.
Both of these measurements shall be taken from the back curbline of the bulb of the cul-desac
to the nearest curbline of the abutting street. No cul-de-sac street shall have access from
another cul-de-sac street.
Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the turnaround right-of-way shall
be placed adjacent to the tract boundary with sufficient additional width provided along the
boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width.
All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily designed as such, shall be
provided at the closed end with a fully paved turnaround. The minimum radius of the
pavement edge or curbline shall be 40 feet, and the minimum radius of the right-of-way line
shall be 50 feet.
Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be toward the open end. If drainage is toward
the closed end, it shall be conducted away in an underground storm sewer.
The center-line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 7%, and the grade of the
diameter of the turnaround shall not exceed 5%.
On a cul-de-sac street, no part of a fifth lot and no more than four lots may have any frontage
or driveway on the circumference of the turnaround or its reverse radius. Driveways that front
on a cul-de-sac shall be located on the preliminary plan. Driveways shall be placed so as to
facilitate snow removal.
No parking shall be permitted in the turnaround.
All non-through streets shall be provided with an authorized sign stating that no outlet exists.
For any cul-de-sac that serves 10 lots or fewer, the Board of Supervisors may approve a
pavement width of not less than 24 feet with a minimum twenty-four-foot-wide street subbase
and base course. It must be shown that the cul-de-sac will never be extended.
If a cul-de-sac is to be extended in the future, a Type II barricade or other approved structure
must be erected at the end of the cul-de-sac.
Street names.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 373/620
a.
b.
c.
a.
b.
c.
d.
502.12
a.
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
d.
502.13
Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named
shall bear the names of the existing streets.
In no case shall the name of a proposed street be the same as or similar to an existing street
name in the Township and in the same postal district, irrespective of the use of the suffixes for
street, road, avenue, boulevard, driveway, place, court, lane, etc.
All street names and numbers shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
Service streets (alleys).
Service streets may be permitted, provided that the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory
to the Township Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors of the need for such service
streets.
No part of any dwelling, garage or other structure shall be located within five feet of the rightof-
way of a service street.
Dead-end service streets shall be avoided; but where this proves impossible, dead-end
service streets shall terminate with a paved circular turnaround with a minimum radius to the
outer pavement edge (curbline) of 50 feet.
Service street intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where
necessary corners shall be rounded as required in § 502.8.f and deflections in alignment in
excess of 5° shall be made by horizontal curves.
Driveways.
Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least 40 feet from the point of intersection
of the nearest street right-of-way lines.
In order to provide a safe and convenient means of access, grades on private driveways shall
not exceed 14%. Entrances should be rounded at a minimum radius of five feet or should
have a flare construction that is equivalent to this radius at the point of intersection with the
cartway edge (curbline).
All private driveways shall be paved with a minimum of two inches of bituminous material or
the equivalent and have a base consisting of a minimum of six inches of stone. The driveway
entrance from the street shall be installed as to permit the uninterrupted flow of stormwater
within the road shoulder area through either a pipe or a swale situation.
The 14% maximum driveway slope shall be delineated to include the following criteria:
A minimum driveway slope of 1% is required.
The area of the driveway within the street right-of-way shall not exceed 5% in grade.
The leveling area at the garage or parking area shall not exceed 4%.
No portion of the driveway shall exceed 14%.
No building permit for a structure involving a driveway shall be issued until an engineered
profile is submitted for review and approval. In the case of a lot where it seems evident
that there is no slope problem through satisfactory Township inspection of grade stakes
showing finished road grade and first-floor elevation staked by an engineer or land
surveyor, there is no need to submit such a profile.
Where it is physically impossible or impractical to meet the 14% maximum grade, a
waiver may be considered up to a maximum of 20% as long as the applicant can supply
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 374/620
[1]
e.
a.
b.
c.
d.
503.1
a.
b.
c.
503.2
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
503.3
a minimum of two off-street parking spaces that do not interfere with pedestrian traffic,
are located outside of the Township right-of-way, are on a slope not to exceed 5%, and
are accessible by a portion of the driveway that does not exceed 7% in slope from the
street.
Sight distance. See Appendix A.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
§ 503. Blocks.
Layout. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
Zoning requirements.
Topography.
Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including the
reduction of intersections with major streets.
Length.
Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and a minimum length of 500 feet;
provided, however, that the Township Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors may
increase the maximum and/or decrease the minimum lengths of blocks if, in the opinion of
either body, topography of the land in question and/or surface water drainage conditions
warrant such a change.
In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet, special consideration shall be given to the
requirements of satisfactory fire protection.
Where practicable, blocks along major and collector streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet
long.
Crosswalks and sidewalks.
Crosswalks shall be required wherever necessary to facilitate pedestrian circulation and to
give access to community facilities.
Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all existing and proposed streets, within parking
areas, and, where necessary for safety and convenience, to establish pedestrian connections
to parking areas and green spaces or through blocks.
Maintenance of sidewalks and curbs, whether located within the public street right-of-way or
not, is the responsibility of the owner of the property directly adjacent to the sidewalk.
Sidewalks which are damaged or deteriorating and present a hazard to public safety shall be
repaired at the owner's expense. A note shall be added to the record plan indicating the
sidewalk maintenance responsibilities.
At the discretion of the Township, a system of bicycle, equestrian, and/or pedestrian trails for
public use generally may be established and secured by dedication or easement. These trails
may be required in any subdivision or land development.
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the standards of § 602.3 of this ordinance.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 375/620
503.4
503.5
a.
b.
c.
d.
(1)
(2)
e.
504.1
a.
b.
c.
504.2
504.3
505.1
Depth. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers of lots, except
where prevented by the size, topographical conditions or other inherent conditions of the property,
in which case the Township Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors may approve a single
tier of lots.
Commercial and industrial blocks. Blocks in commercial and industrial areas may vary from the
elements of design detailed above as required by the nature of the use. In all cases, however,
adequate provision shall be made for off-street parking and loading areas as well as for traffic
circulation and parking for employees and customers.
§ 504. Lots and parcels.
General standards.
Insofar as practical, side lot lines should be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to
curved street lines.
Where feasible, lot lines should follow Township boundaries rather than cross them in order to
avoid jurisdictional problems.
Generally, the depth of residential lots should be not less than one nor more than 2 1/2 times
their width.
Depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential uses shall be adequate for the use
proposed and sufficient to provide satisfactory space for on-site parking, loading and
unloading, setbacks, landscaping, etc.
If, after subdividing, there exist remnants of land, they shall be either:
Incorporated in existing or proposed lots; or
Legally dedicated to public use, if acceptable to the Township.
Lot frontage.
All lots shall front on a public street, existing or proposed, or on a private street if it meets the
requirements of this ordinance.
Double- or reverse-frontage lots shall be avoided except where required to provide separation
of residential development from major streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography or orientation.
All residential reverse-frontage lots shall have a rear yard with a minimum depth of 75 feet,
measured in the shortest distance from the proposed dwelling unit to the ultimate right-of-way,
and shall have within such rear yard and immediately adjacent to the right-of-way a planting
screen easement of at least 10 feet in width, across which there shall be no right of access.
Lot size. Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than specified by the provisions of the
Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance and shall further conform to Title 25, Chapter 17, Rules and
Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and § 506 of this
ordinance.
§ 505. Sanitary sewage disposal.
Each property shall be connected to a public sewer system, if accessible. Where the public
sewer is not yet accessible but is planned for extension to the subdivision, the subdivider shall
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 376/620
505.2
505.3
505.4
505.5
505.6
505.7
505.8
506.1
506.2
506.3
506.4
install sewer lines, including lateral connections, as may be necessary to provide adequate service
to each lot when connection with the sewer system is made. The sewer lines shall be suitably
capped at the limits of the subdivision, and the laterals shall be capped at the street right-of-way
line. When capped sewers are provided, on-site disposal facilities shall also be provided. Design
of capped sewer system shall be subject to approval by the Uwchlan Township Municipal Authority
(UTMA).
Sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed in strict accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection standards and UTMA specifications. A copy of the
approval of such system shall be submitted with the final plan.
Sanitary sewers shall not be used to carry stormwater.
All lots which cannot be connected to a public or community sanitary sewage disposal system in
operation at the time of construction of a principal building shall be provided with an on-site
sanitary sewage disposal system meeting the design standards of Title 25, Chapter 73, Rules and
Regulations of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and Township standards.
If on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities are to be utilized, the Township Planning
Commission may require that the subdivider submit a feasibility report. Such report shall compare
the cost of providing on-site facilities and the cost of public sanitary sewer system with a
temporary sewage treatment plant. Based on the analysis of this report, the UTMA may require
the installation of a public sanitary sewer system.
Where on-site sanitary sewage facilities are to be utilized, each lot so served shall be of a size
and shape to accommodate the necessary length of tile fields at a safe distance from, and at a
lower elevation than, the proposed building(s) in accordance with Township and state regulations
and shall be so plotted.
The proposed method of sanitary sewage disposal shall be in accordance with the Township's
officially adopted Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan.
When, in accord with Title 25, Chapter 71, Section 71.16, Rules and Regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the necessity for an Act 537 sewage
facilities plan revision is determined, the procedure set forth in § 71.15 through § 71.17 of those
Rules and Regulations shall be followed.
§ 506. Soil percolation test requirements.
Soil percolation tests shall be performed for all subdivisions wherein building(s) at the time of
construction will not be connected to a public or community sanitary sewage disposal system in
operation.
Soil percolation tests shall be made, in accordance with the procedure required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, by either a registered professional
engineer or registered sanitarian and/or the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act sewage
enforcement officer at a rate of one per acre or part thereof for the property being subdivided.
The engineer, sanitarian and/or sewage enforcement officer shall enter the result of the test and
all other information on five copies of the subdivision sewage disposal report form and shall submit
these with the preliminary plans; provided, however, that where the approval of the proposed
sanitary sewage disposal facilities is otherwise required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, two copies of the report of investigation and approval may be submitted
in lieu of the subdivision sewage disposal report.
Where possible, soil percolation tests shall be performed near the site of the proposed on-site
sanitary sewage disposal facilities and spaced evenly throughout the property.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 377/620
506.5
a.
507.1
507.2
507.3
507.4
507.5
507.6
507.7
The results of the soil percolation tests shall be analyzed in relation to the physical
characteristics of the tract being subdivided and of the general area surrounding the tract being
subdivided, and the final plan lot layout shall be based on this analysis.
§ 507. Water supply.
Whenever an existing public or approved community water system is geographically and
economically accessible to a proposed subdivision, a distribution system shall be designed to
furnish an adequate supply of water to each lot, with adequate main sizes and fire hydrants
located to meet the specifications of the Insurance Services Office of Pennsylvania and the
Lionville Fire Company. A copy of the approval of such system by the appropriate public service or
utility company shall be submitted with the final plan. Suitable agreements shall also be
established for the design, specifications, construction, ownership, and maintenance of such a
distribution system.
All off-site water systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the latest
Aqua Pennsylvania, Inc., water system specifications, and all designs shall be approved by
Aqua Pennsylvania, Inc., prior to the start of construction.
Where such systems are not accessible and where on-site sanitary sewage disposal systems
are to be used, a community water supply system may be required. A community water supply
system shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and
appropriate measures shall be provided to ensure adequate maintenance. Suitable agreements
shall also be established for the construction, ownership and maintenance of such a distribution
system.
Where individual on-site water supply system(s) are to be utilized, each lot so served shall be of
a size and shape to allow safe location of such a system, and wells shall be placed uphill from
sewage disposal systems and shall not be within 100 feet of any part of the absorption (tile) field
of any on-site sanitary sewage disposal system nor within 50 feet from lakes, streams, ponds,
quarries, etc.
Where individual on-site water supply system(s) are to be utilized, it is recommended that the
subdivider provide at least one test well for each 10 proposed dwelling units. Such wells should be
drilled, cased, and grout-sealed into bedrock at least 50 feet deep, having a production capacity of
at least five gallons per minute of safe potable drinking water, as certified by a state or Township
health officer.
All water systems (public, private or community) must provide 1,500 GPM at 30 psi for a twohour
duration.
Where public or community water systems are utilized, a separate water service must be
installed for each unit or establishment within a commercial development or shopping center.
Fire hydrants are required in accordance with § 602.11 of this ordinance.
§ 508. Storm and surface drainage and stormwater management.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-07]
All subdivisions and land developments shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 214,
Stormwater Management, of the Code as applicable, the provisions of which are incorporated herein
by reference and made part hereof.
§ 509. Public use and service areas.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 378/620
a.
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
d.
509.1
509.2
Public open spaces.
In reviewing subdivision and land development plans, the Township Planning Commission
and Board of Supervisors will consider whether community facilities in the area are adequate
to serve the needs of the additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision or land
development and shall make such report thereon as they deem necessary in the public
interest.
Subdividers and the Township Planning Commission shall give consideration to providing
facilities or reserving areas for facilities normally required in residential neighborhoods,
including libraries, public buildings, parks, playgrounds and playfields. Areas provided or
reserved for such community facilities shall be adequate to provide for building sites,
landscaping and off-street parking as appropriate to the use proposed and shall be suitably
prepared for this end use at the expense of the subdivider. Prior to the preparation of plans,
subdividers of large tracts should review with the Township Planning Commission the
minimum standards for various community facilities applicable to the tract being subdivided.
The subdivider shall provide suitable open space for parks, playgrounds and other recreation
uses. Due consideration shall be given to preservation of natural features such as mature
trees, woods, waterways and historic areas.
Open space and recreation area in every subdivision shall meet minimum standards for parks
and recreation established by the National Recreation and Park Association, or as set forth
below for the estimated population of the subdivision. The following minimum land area shall
be provided within the subdivision, or, when such park and open spaces should more logically
be located outside the subdivision, sufficient money shall be escrowed to purchase land
and/or facilities at an appropriate location.
Where the residential open space option or other land development option requiring open
space is not proposed, the following applies:
Density
(dwelling units per acre) Percent of Tract
1 — 6 10%
6.1 — 10 15%
10.1 — 15 20%
Over 15 25%
The above figures apply in land subdivisions or developments which intend to provide
housing for the following number of families by unit type.
Unit Type Open Space Required
Single-family 20 units or more
Townhouse and multifamily Densities in excess of 4.0 and/or involving 20 or
more units
Mobile home park Always required
When mixed unit types are proposed within a development (ex: single-family and
townhouses), open space shall be required where there are 20 or more total units and/or
a density in excess of 4.0.
The Board of Supervisors may consider a fee in lieu of the above open space
requirements.
Utility easements.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 379/620
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
510.1
a.
b.
510.2
In accord with the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission order, all electric distribution lines
are required to be installed underground in residential developments of five or more family
units. This also applies to mobile home parks, apartment houses and townhouses. In
compliance with these regulations and with the cooperation of local utility companies, the
following procedure will be followed in reviewing plans subject to underground electric
service:
Upon filing of a preliminary plan for review, the subdivider will forward a copy to the
appropriate utility company if the development would fall subject to the order. This would
apprise the utility company of the project status and indicate that the subdivider would be
contacting the utility in the near future.
Upon receipt and review of preliminary plans, the subdivider is directed to contact the
utility company and secure an approval of plans for the underground electric system.
Receipt of a letter from the utility company indicating receipt of plans will be required prior
to Township endorsement of any plan for recording. The responsibility for securing this
approval and coordinating the plan with the utility company would be the subdivider's or
his representative's.
Easements with a minimum width of 30 feet shall be provided for poles, wires, conduits, storm
and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains and/or other utility lines intended to service
the abutting lots. No structures or trees shall be placed within such easements.
Easements shall be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet, measured in the shortest distance, between
any proposed dwelling unit and any petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas
transmission line which traverses the subdivision or land development.
Subdividers are urged to avail themselves of the services provided by the various public utility
companies in determining the proper locations for utility line easements.
Petroleum products or natural gas transmission lines shall be located in a fifty-foot-minimum
right-of-way, such lines to be installed in the center of the right-of-way. The subdivider shall
provide a fifty-foot right-of-way for all existing transmission lines within the subdivision.
Utility services for residential development not subject to the above-mentioned Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission's order are recommended to be provided through the use of
underground facilities in accord with the standards and approval of the utility company having
appropriate jurisdiction.
§ 510. Erosion and sediment controls and guidelines.
Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management controls are regulated
herein and under existing state law and implementing regulations. These provisions shall operate
in coordination with those state requirements; the requirements of this ordinance shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this ordinance than state law.
All earth disturbance activities of the following kinds shall be designed, implemented, operated
and maintained in compliance with this ordinance:
Erosion and sediment control and stormwater management during earth disturbance activity
(e.g., during construction).
Stormwater management and water quality protection measures after completion of an earth
disturbance activity (e.g., after construction), including operations and maintenance.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 380/620
510.3
510.4
[1]
510.5
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
510.6
510.7
No earth disturbance activity shall commence until the requirements of this ordinance have been
fulfilled.
All best management practices (BMPs) proposed in accordance with this section shall conform
to the State Water Quality Requirements or any more-stringent requirements as determined by the
Township.
Post-construction water quality protection and the operation and maintenance of permanent
stormwater BMPs shall be addressed as required by the Uwchlan Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 214, Stormwater Management.
Erosion and sediment control during earth disturbance activities:
No earth disturbance activity shall commence until approval by the Township of an erosion
and sediment control plan to be submitted by an applicant for subdivision or land
development plan approval at the time of preliminary and final plan submittals. The erosion
and sediment control plan shall comply with the following reference publications, as amended.
25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control, Section 102.4(b)(5).
PA DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual, March 2000, as
amended.
The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by a person trained and experienced
in erosion and sediment control methods and techniques.
The erosion and sediment control plan shall encompass the minimum limit of disturbance
necessary for access for grading and borrow material in order to construct in accordance with
the BMPs (including sediment basins and sediment traps) the necessary erosion and
sediment pollution controls. All plans shall adhere to applicable maximum area of disturbance
criteria.
A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan approved by the Township as part of the final
plan, and any required permit, shall be available at the project site at all times.
Subdivision and land development applicants shall also comply with PADEP regulations that
require submittal of an erosion and sediment control plan for any earth disturbance activity of
5,000 square feet or more, and that require implementation and maintenance of erosion and
sedimentation control BMPs to minimize the potential for those activities which disturb less
than 5,000 square feet, under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
Subdivision and land development applicants shall also comply with 25 Pa. Code, Chapter
92, and obtain a DEP "NPDES construction activities" permit for regulated earth disturbance
activities. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance activity from
the Southeast Regional DEP office or Chester County Conservation District must be provided
to the Township prior to the commencement of any earth disturbance activity for which any
such permit may be required.
Erosion and sediment controls must be constructed and functional before site disturbance
begins.
All graded or earth disturbance shall be stabilized, whether temporary or permanent, within
three days of the initial groundbreaking and weather permitting, and accepted material used
for stabilization shall be watered, tended and maintained until growth is well established.
Until the site is stabilized, all erosion and sediment BMPs must be maintained properly.
Maintenance must include inspections by the applicant/developer of all erosion and sediment
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 381/620
510.8
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
512.1
BMPs after each rainfall event and on a weekly basis. All preventive and remedial work, including
cleanout, repair, replacement, regrading, reseeding, remulching, and renetting, must be performed
immediately. If erosion and sediment control BMPs fail to perform as expected, then immediate
replacement BMPs or modifications of those controls previously installed is required.
Erosion and sediment control designs shall comply with the Township's Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer System (MS4) NPDES II permit requirements, including the necessary total
maximum daily load (TMDL) requirements for the Brandywine Creek and Schuylkill River basins.
Stream and/or stormwater runoff from the site may be required to be tested, by the applicant, for
all pollutants as listed in the approved TMDL plan. Any pollutant increases must be mitigated to
return the site runoff to the original pollutant levels or below. Mitigation measures shall be
proposed by the applicant and approved by the Township.
§ 511. Environmental hazards.
The applicant for subdivision and/or land development approval (except for a revision to existing lot
lines) shall demonstrate that the subject property is free of or has been remediated of environmental
contamination and/or hazardous materials or waste. Such demonstration shall be made as part of the
environmental impact assessment report required by § 406.1.h(6) of this ordinance. No subdivision
and/or land development shall be approved without compliance with this § 511. For purposes of this
§ 511 and § 406.1.h(6) of this ordinance, "hazardous materials" and "hazardous waste" shall mean
garbage, refuse, sludge or other discarded material which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, has been demonstrated to: cause or significantly
contribute to an increase in mortality or morbidity; or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
§ 512. Tree protection and woodland management.
Tree protection. In areas of permitted woodland disturbance and areas adjacent to permitted
woodland disturbance, care shall be exercised to protect remaining trees from damage. To the
maximum extent practicable, the following procedures shall be utilized during construction in order
to protect remaining trees:
Where existing trees are to remain, no change in existing grade shall be permitted within the
dripline of the trees. Prior to any land disturbance, appropriate fencing four feet in height shall
be placed at the dripline of trees to remain, wherever adjacent to proposed construction. Such
fencing shall be maintained in place throughout the duration of construction activity and shall
be inspected by the Township prior to initial land disturbance. Roots shall not be cut within the
dripline of any trees to remain.
Trees within 25 feet of a building or bordering entrances or exits to building sites shall be
protected by a temporary barrier to be maintained in place throughout the duration of
construction activity.
No boards or other material shall be nailed or otherwise attached to trees during construction.
Construction materials, equipment, soil and/or debris shall not be stored nor disposed of
within the driplines of trees to remain, except for mulched vegetative matter used to prevent
soil compaction.
Tree trunks, limbs and exposed roots damaged during construction shall be protected from
further damage by being treated immediately in accordance with accepted professional
landscape procedures.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 382/620
512.2
601.1
601.2
601.3
[1]
a.
602.1
Woodland management planning. The applicant shall include, as part of preliminary and final
plan submission, provision for the long-term management of any woodland area not subject to
woodland disturbance and any area selected for introduction of new plantings. Such plan
submission shall include a statement of woodland management objectives and shall demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors the feasibility of intended management practices,
aiming to ensure the success of stated objectives, including the viability of introduced plantings,
deterrence of invasive species, and means to minimize any future woodland disturbance.
Applicants are strongly encouraged to seek woodland management assistance through the
Pennsylvania Forest Stewardship Program administered by the Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry.
Article VI. Improvement Specifications
§ 601. General requirements.
Physical improvements to the property being subdivided or developed shall be provided, constructed,
and installed as shown on the record plan, in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance or
other Township ordinances or regulations, whichever are more restrictive (see Appendix A, Township
Construction Improvement Standards).[1]
As a condition to review of a final plan by the Township Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors, the subdivider shall agree with the Township as to the installation of all improvements
shown on the plan and required by this ordinance or other Township ordinances or regulations.
Before the record plan is endorsed by the Township Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors, the subdivider shall submit a completed original copy of the subdivision
improvements agreement, subdivision escrow agreement and subdivision and land development
agreement.
All improvements installed by the subdivider shall be constructed in accordance with the design
specifications of the Township, including any promulgated by the Uwchlan Township Municipal
Authority (UTMA). Where there are no applicable Township specifications, improvements shall be
constructed in accordance with specifications furnished by the Township Engineer, Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or such
other state agency as applicable. If there are no applicable Township or state regulations, the
Township may authorize that specifications be prepared by the Township Engineer or an
engineering consultant.
Supervision of the installation of the required improvements shall in all cases be the
responsibility of the Township or of the appropriate state regulatory agency.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
§ 602. Required improvements.
The following improvements, as shown on the record plan, shall be provided by the subdivider in all
subdivisions:
Street construction standards. All materials for the construction of streets and the methods of
construction and drainage shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications Publication 408, latest revision thereof,
and shall be supplied by vendors approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for
the supply of such materials. Cross-sections shall be as described in Table A and Table B and
detailed in Appendixes A-1 and A-2.[1] Inspection of materials and construction methods shall be
as approved in Section 802 of this ordinance.
Street design.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 383/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
b.
Thickness of base and paving for new Township streets shall meet the minimum
requirements in Table A and Table B.
Table A
(Local Road)
Table B
(Collector Road)
1 1/2 inches superpave asphalt mixture
design, HMA wearing course, PG 64-22,
0.3 to 3 million ESALS, 9.5 mm mix,
SRL-H
on
2 inches superpave asphalt mixture
design, HMA binder course, PG 64-22,
0.3 to 3 million ESALS, 19 mm mix
on
4 inches superpave asphalt mixture
design, HMA base course, PG 64-22,
0.3 to 3 million ESALS, 25 mm mix
on
6 inches of 2A modified stone subbase
course
on
Class 4, Type B, geotextile fabric on
compacted subgrade
2 inches superpave asphalt mixture design,
HMA wearing course, PG 64-22, 0.3 to 3
million ESALS, 9.5 mm mix, SRL-H
on
3 inches superpave asphalt mixture design,
HMA binder course, PG 64-22, 0.3 to 3
million ESALS, 19 mm mix
on
6 inches superpave asphalt mixture design,
HMA base course, PG 64-22, 0.3 to 3 million
ESALS, 25 mm mix
on
8 inches of 2A modified stone subbase
course
on
Class 4, Type B, geotextile fabric on
compacted subgrade
Stone Subbase Course Notes: The stone subbase course shall consist of stone and
screenings meeting with the requirements of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Publication 408, as amended. Every attempt shall be made to
completely fill voids with fines. No large areas of solid screenings or loose stone areas
shall be permitted. The application of bituminous concrete base course materials shall
be in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 70 and
Publication 408, both as amended.
The Township may require additional paving, base or subbase materials where soil types
are inferior, wet or otherwise unsuitable as indicated by the "Soil Survey of Chester and
Delaware Counties, Pennsylvania," prepared by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service or
where, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, field conditions indicate soil conditions
are inferior, wet or otherwise unsuitable.
Alternate paving sections may be approved by the Township Engineer as long as the
proposed alternative meets the structural strength achieved with the above pavement
specification.
Subgrade.
The area within the limits of the proposed road surface shall be shaped to conform to the
line, grade and cross section of the proposed street.
All unsuitable subgrade material shall be removed.
All wet or swampy areas shall be permanently drained and stabilized, subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 384/620
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
c.
[2]
(1)
d.
Fills, within the roadway, shall be made with suitable materials as approved by the
Township Engineer; they shall be thoroughly compacted for the full width of the cartway
in uniform layers of not more than eight inches thick. No more than two eight-inch layers
of fill shall be laid or placed between inspections by the Township Engineer.
The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted by rolling with a minimum ten-ton, threewheel
roller. Equivalent vibratory, sheep's foot or rubber-tired rollers may be used with
the approval of the Township Engineer. Subgrade shall be compacted tight and dry, to
95% compaction at optimum moisture, and shall not be soft and spongy under the roller.
Compaction of the subgrade shall extend the full width of the cartway, including the width
to be occupied by shoulders.
In fill areas over three feet thick, compaction tests are required in each eight-inch layer at
one-hundred-fifty-foot intervals. A qualified geotechnical engineer shall test compaction
of soils in place according to ASTM D 1556, ASTM D 2167, ASTM D 2922, and ASTM D
2937, as applicable. The tests must be performed by a certified testing laboratory and the
results submitted to the Township Engineer for approval. All compaction must be 95%
compaction at optimum moisture. Any layer not coming up to standard will be removed or
rerolled until suitable compaction is obtained.
A Class 4, Type B, geotextile shall be placed on the compacted subgrade.
Paving.
Paving and base thickness and materials shall be as specified in § 602.1.a(1) and Table
A and Table B above.
The subbase course, where required, shall be installed and compacted in accordance
with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Publication 408, and
latest edition thereof.
Bituminous base, binder and surface courses shall be laid to the specified thickness after
compaction. All bituminous courses shall be laid with a mechanical bituminous paver in
accordance with specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Specifications, Publication 408, and latest edition thereof.
Duplicate delivery slips for all material deliveries shall be furnished to the Township
Engineer and shall become the property of the Township.
Failure to adhere to the above specifications shall give the Township cause to refuse,
among other things, to accept streets for dedication.
All wearing courses shall be sealed to the concrete curb with a solid one-foot-wide Class
BM-1 bituminous gutter seal.
A tack coat must be applied to each layer of pavement if not installed within the same
day.
Grading and slopes.
Roadways shall be graded for the full width of the right-of-way on each side, unless
modified by the Township to avoid disturbance of significant trees, historic structures, or
other significant natural or cultural resources. Planting strips behind curbs shall be
graded with a minimum slope of 1/2 inch per foot and a maximum slope of one inch per
foot. Beyond the limits of this grading, banks shall be sloped to prevent erosion, but this
slope shall conform to the details included in Appendixes A-1 and A-2.[2]
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 385/620
(2)
(3)
e.
f.
g.
[1]
[3]
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
602.2
All roads shall be constructed with plain cement concrete curb as detailed in Appendix
A-3.
Seeding. All unpaved areas between the street line and the curb or shoulders (as the
case may be) shall be covered with not less than six inches of topsoil, fertilized, seeded,
and mulched in a manner and with materials approved by the Township.
Underdrains may be required by the Township to mitigate wet road conditions.
Utility trench construction (storm sewer, wastewater lines, water main, gas main, etc.) within
existing streets shall be backfilled with 2A modified stone placed and compacted in eight-inch
lifts. The trench shall be paved with superpave asphalt mixture design, HMA base course, PG
64-22, 0.3 to 3 M ESALS, 25 mm mix (four inches compacted depth), superpave asphalt
mixture design, HMA binder course, PG 64-22, 0.3 to 3 M ESALS, 19 mm mix (two inches
compacted depth), and the entire roadway shall be paved with a full-width overlayment (edge
of road to edge of road) of superpave asphalt mixture design, HMA wearing course, PG 64-
22, 0.3 to 3 M ESALS, 9.5 mm mix, SRL-L (1.5 inches compacted depth). Utility trenches
within proposed streets shall be backfilled with clean, dry, select material and compacted in
eight-inch lifts to not less than 100% of the dry weight density of the backfill material.
Trenches within easements shall be backfilled with clean, dry, select material and compacted
in twelve-inch lifts to not less than 100% of the dry weight density of the backfill material as
set forth in ASTM D 698 and Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications,
Publication 408, and latest edition thereof.
During construction of streets, the contractor shall provide maintenance and protection of
traffic meeting Pennsylvania Department of Transportation standards.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
Curbs.
Concrete curbs shall be required at streets, private and public, at the sole discretion of the
Board of Supervisors, and will generally be required along heavily traveled streets, at
intersections and where street grades require them for proper drainage. Curbs shall be plain
cement concrete curb as detailed in Appendix A-3[3] in accordance with "Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 72, Standards for Roadway Construction," as last
revised.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
Curbs shall be provided on all parking areas within a land development. Curb may be
replaced with another form of vehicle stop, such as, but not limited to, bumpers and bollards,
at the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors, if the applicant can demonstrate that the
physical barrier is not warranted and the elimination of curb helps promote water quality
measures, including filtration and infiltration of stormwater runoff.
All curbs shall conform to the specifications for Class AA concrete air-entrained, as specified
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 408, last revised, with a
minimum compressive strength of 3,500 psi after 28 days.
Final curb height, above the wearing course, shall be eight inches.
Curb constructing methods shall be in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Publication 408, last revised.
Where a curb ties into an inlet, two No. 5 reinforced bars 12 inches long shall be used to
connect the curb to the inlet. Driveway curb depressions shall be reinforced with two No. 5
reinforced bars in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication
72, Standards for Roadway Construction.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 386/620
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
a.
[4]
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
602.3
Depressed curbs at driveways shall be no higher than 1 1/2 inches above the street surface.
The length of this depressed curb shall not exceed 35 feet without a safety island. This safety
island shall not be less than 15 feet in length. Pipes, grates or other constructions shall not be
placed in the gutter to form a driveway ramp. The depressed curb at handicapped ramps shall
be flush with the paving surface.
New curb cuts for driveways and parking areas shall be limited to the extent feasible.
Excavations shall be made to the required depth, and the material upon which the curb is to
be constructed shall be compacted to a firm, even surface to 95% of the maximum dry weight
density of the soil.
Where it is necessary to replace existing vertical curbs with depressed curbing, two ten-footlong
sections of existing curb shall be removed down to the subgrade without disturbing the
adjacent cartway paving. Any portions of the cartway disturbed during curbing removal or
installation will be repaired to new condition.
Curbing shall be constructed in ten-foot lengths. A premolded bituminous impregnated
expansion joint having a minimum thickness of 1/4 inch shall be placed between sections of
curved curb and at intervals of not more than 50 feet. Intermediate joints between ten-foot
sections shall be saw cut. However, wherever a driveway enters a street, the driveway shall
not have a curb joint nor be constructed in lengths longer than 20 feet.
All curb depressions must comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act
and the Pennsylvania Universal Accessibility Act, and the latest Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation RC-67M standards.
Sidewalks. The following construction standards shall be used for sidewalks:
The minimum width of all sidewalks shall be four feet, and a minimum four-foot-wide planting
strip between the curb and sidewalk shall be provided. Additional width may be required, as
determined by the Township, if the walk abuts a fence, a building, walls or parking areas.
Where a sidewalk exists on an adjoining property, the dimensions may be modified to match
existing conditions, provided the sidewalk is located within the road right-of-way.
The grades shall be continuous across driveways, but the concrete sidewalk will stop at each
side of the bituminous driveway as detailed in Appendix A-4.[4]
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
The construction of all sidewalks shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Township.
Sidewalks shall be laterally pitched at a slope of not less than 1/4 inch per foot to provide for
adequate surface drainage.
Handicap ramps shall be provided at all intersections. All sidewalks and sidewalk ramps must
meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Pennsylvania Universal
Accessibility Act. Shared ramps at intersections are not allowed. Each crossing at an
intersection must have its own ramp. Landing areas may be shared as detailed in Appendix
A-3.
All sidewalks shall conform to the specifications for Class AA concrete, as specified by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, with a minimum compression strength of 3,500
psi after 28 days.
Where sidewalks abut the curb and a building, wall or other permanent structure, a premolded
expansion joint 1/4 inch in thickness shall be placed between the curb and the sidewalk for
the full length of such structure. Sidewalks shall be constructed in separate slabs 24 feet in
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 387/620
h.
i.
j.
k.
[5]
a.
b.
c.
602.4
a.
(1)
(2)
(3)
b.
602.5
length except for closures. The slabs between expansion joints shall be divided into blocks
four feet in length by scoring transversely.
Sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four inches when used solely for pedestrian
traffic. Upon approval of the Township Engineer, fiber-reinforced concrete may be used as an
alternative.
Excavation shall be made to the required depth, whereupon a layer of four-inch base of 2B
aggregate shall be placed and thoroughly compacted prior to laying the sidewalks when used
solely for pedestrian traffic.
Where required by the Board of Supervisors, sidewalks with a minimum width of four feet
shall be installed on both sides of all streets, except that no sidewalks shall be required along
service streets.
All sidewalks shall be placed within the right-of-way, parallel to the right-of-way line. Gradient
shall be continuous across all private driveways, but the concrete sidewalk will stop at the
paved driveway.
Cul-de-sac turnaround.
The end of a cul-de-sac street shall be constructed with a permanent curbed turnaround as
detailed in Appendix A-5.[5] No more than five residential driveways may enter onto the curb
radius or returns of the cul-de-sac turnaround.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
If a cul-de-sac street is intended to be extended within a three-year period after dedication of
the street, a temporary noncurbed turnaround may be considered as detailed in Appendix A-
5.1. The Township may require a barrier to be placed at the end of the temporary turnaround.
The turnaround right-of-way of a cul-de-sac street shall be placed adjacent to the tract
boundary with a fifty-foot right-of-way width provided along or to the boundary line to permit
extension of a street at full width, unless future expansion of a cul-de-sac street is clearly
impractical or undesirable. The small triangles of land beyond the cul-de-sac to the boundary
shall be dedicated to the Township.
Street signs. The subdivider shall furnish and install signposts and street nameplates, approved
by the Township, and at least one street name sign shall be erected at each street intersection.
Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided in addition to a street sign, with a standard "no outlet" sign at
the intersection of a street, furnished and installed by the subdivider.
Street nameplates shall be put at all intersections, naming all streets at each intersection, and
shall be visible from both directions when approaching an intersection. Generally, the sign
shall be parallel to the street that it is identifying.
Street nameplates shall match existing street nameplates as currently used by the Township.
Street nameplates shall be mounted on a metal signpost.
The post shall be equipped with such standard rustproofed hardware as to hold the
nameplates rigidly in a proper and permanent position and to prevent their swaying in the
wind.
The signs shall be preferably of rustproof materials, such as aluminum, and the proper
thickness and properly reinforced at the edge to have rigidity and stiffness. If they are of
a material other than aluminum, such as steel or cast iron, they shall be adequately
rustproofed by bonderizing or other acceptable methods prior to final painting. The
backgrounds shall be white and the letters green or other acceptable contrasting colors.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 388/620
(4)
(5)
c.
d.
a.
b.
602.6
a.
b.
602.7
a.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
b.
602.8
The finish shall be equivalent to a baked enamel, and the letters shall be of the spacing
and proportions as recommended in one of the alphabets used by the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), U.S.
Bureau of Public Roads. Lettering on ground-mounted street name signs should be at
least six-inch-high capital letters or six-inch uppercase letters.
The signs shall be located with a view to making them seen at all times with a minimum
of effort by both pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and as close to the side of the cartway
or curb as practical, but no part of the nameplate shall be permitted to overhang any part
of the cartway or curb.
Types and samples of street nameplates, standards and installation and location shall be
submitted for the inspection and approval of the Township prior to installation.
Street signs, including stop and speed limit signs, shall be erected prior to occupancy of the
first dwelling on the street.
All signs shall be high-grade reflectivity signage in accordance with PennDOT Standards Pub.
212 as amended.
Streetlights.
Poles and standards for streets with underground "parkway" cable service lines shall be
furnished and installed by the subdivider on all collector streets and streets within industrial or
commercial subdivisions or land developments. Improvements shall be located in the street
right-of-way, approved by the Township and appropriate public utility, spaced not more than
500 feet apart, and shall be provided with approved screens.
In residential subdivisions, in lieu of streetlights, the Township may require an individual
lamppost and light be installed at the end of the driveway one foot behind the street right-ofway
or in front of the house if no driveway exists. All lighting shall comply with this ordinance
and § 615 of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
Mailboxes.
Mailboxes on posts in accordance with the U.S. Postal Service requirements shall be
provided at the curbline when gang boxes are not utilized.
The house number, street addressed, must be affixed to the mailbox or post on both sides so
it may be viewed by the postal and emergency services.
Street trees, buffering, and landscaping.
All subdivisions or land developments shall provide street trees of varying species along the
entire length of any existing or proposed public road that forms a property boundary and on
both sides of any road within the subdivision or land development, except where the Township
agrees that suitable street trees are already in place.
One of the following street tree planting concepts shall be used, subject to Township approval:
Formal allee of street trees.
Use uniform street tree variety.
Coordinate new plantings with existing street tree plantings, where applicable, to
obtain a uniform canopy from both sides of the street or road.
Street trees shall be located a minimum of two feet back from the street right-of-way
for all subdivisions proposed for single-family detached dwellings. For single-family
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 389/620
[6]
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
c.
attached or multifamily residential subdivisions, or for mixed-use or village-style
developments, street trees may be planted between the sidewalk and curb, with the
minimum width of the tree lawn (the planted area between the sidewalk and the
curb) being no less than eight feet, in which case trees shall be tap-rooted, columnar
species (see Appendix A-7).[6]
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
Street trees shall be planted not less than 40 feet nor more than 60 feet apart,
staggered along both sides of the street along street frontages.
New plantings shall observe the clear sight triangles to be provided at local street
and major driveway entrances (see Appendix A-6 of this ordinance). This
requirement does not apply to driveways for single-family detached residences.
Naturalized street tree planting.
Varying street tree varieties spaced 10 to 15 feet back from the street right-of-way
line.
An average of one street tree shall be planted on each side of the street or road for
every 35 feet of street frontage.
Planting design shall accentuate views and integrate important landscape elements.
New plantings shall observe the clear sight triangles to be provided at driveway
entrances (see § 515.C of this ordinance).
Street trees shall meet the following standards:
Minimum size: 2 1/2 to three inches' caliper; trees of greater than three inches' caliper
are desirable, if locally available.
Branching height: The height of branching shall depend upon the size and species of
tree; those trees selected for street tree usage shall have a minimum clearance height of
seven feet above grade before branching begins.
All trees shall be balled and burlapped in accordance with the standards of the following
publications: "American or U.S.A. Standard for Nursery Stock," ANSI or U.S.A.S. Z60.1
of the American Association of Nurserymen, as amended. The ball depth shall be not
less than 60% of the ball diameter and in all cases contain the maximum of the fibrous
roots of the tree. Bare root material is not acceptable. The following standards shall
apply:
Caliper
(inches)
Minimum Ball Diameter
(inches)
2 1/2 to 3 24 to 28
3 to 3 1/2 32
Excavated plant pits shall be two feet wider than the ball size.
Backfill mix for the excavated plant pit shall be composed of topsoil, compost, or other
Township-recommended material.
Tree guying. Tree guying shall be in accordance with standard landscaping requirements.
Tree wrapping paper the entire length of the tree trunk from the top of ball to the start of
lateral branching shall be provided, tied on with natural twine.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 390/620
(8)
(9)
(10)
[7]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(11)
d.
e.
f.
(1)
a.
602.9
All tree guying material shall be removed one year after planting.
All plantings shall be mulched to a depth of three inches in a six-foot-diameter ring
around the base of each tree, or continuous beds if trees or shrubs are less than six feet
apart.
Pruning: Each plant shall be pruned to preserve the natural character of the plant in a
manner appropriate to the particular plant. Branches shall be thinned by approximately
25% by the removal of crossing, damaged or competing limbs back to the major crotch.
The leader shall be left intact.
Plant material.
Street tree species for planting shall be selected from the "Street/Urban Trees" list in
Appendices A-7 and A-7.1 of this ordinance.[7]
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
The use of native species from this list is encouraged, with trees selected to have
minimal maintenance requirements and, at maturity, to provide adequate summer
shade. Selected street tree species shall be of the nongrafted type. Tap-rooted
species shall be required in locations proximate to roads or sidewalks.
Plantings and their measurement shall conform to the standards of the following
publications: "American or U.S.A. Standard for Nursery Stock," ANSI or U.S.A.S.
Z60.1 of the American Association of Nurserymen, as amended. All plant material
shall have been grown within the same USDA hardiness zone as the site, shall be
free of disease, and shall be nursery grown, unless it is determined by the Township
that the transplanting of trees may partially fulfill the requirements of this section.
Landscape guaranty. All replacement plantings shall be guaranteed and maintained by the
applicant or developer in a healthy and/or sound condition for at least 18 months or be
replaced by the applicant or developer. The applicant shall escrow sufficient funds for the
maintenance and/or replacement of the proposed vegetation during the eighteen-month
replacement period to insure that funds are available for the applicant's/developer's use for
the removal and replacement of vegetation damaged during construction.
Buffering and screening. Subdivision and land development plans shall comply with § 607.6
and § 608 of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance and this ordinance, as applicable.
General landscaping requirement. Any part or portion of any lot or tract which is not occupied
by buildings or structures or used for loading, parking spaces and aisles, pedestrian
circulation, designated storage areas, or other permitted impervious or semipervious surfaces
shall be landscaped according to a landscape plan approved by the Township or shall be left
in its natural state (e.g., forest, meadow or hedgerow). The landscape plan shall be submitted
as part of both preliminary and final plan submissions and shall clearly identify all landscaped
areas, all areas subject to vegetation disturbance and replacement pursuant to § 524 above,
and any areas to be left in a natural state. The landscape plan shall match with the applicant's
proposed grading plan and shall comply with this ordinance and § 607.6 and § 608 of the
Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
Sewers.
Storm sewers. Storm sewers and related facilities shall be designed and installed consistent
with the design principles and requirements contained in this ordinance and the Uwchlan
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.[8]
Storm sewers, inlets, endwalls, manholes, and other related items shall be manufactured,
constructed, and installed in accordance with the latest edition of Pennsylvania
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 391/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
Department of Transportation Publication No. 72M, Road Construction Standards, and
Publication 408, Specifications.
The minimum pipe size shall be 18 inches in diameter for any public or privately owned
storm sewer conveyance system. Storm sewers for conveyance of roof drains or U'drains
may be less than 18 feet in diameter.
All storm sewers shall be laid to a minimum depth of one foot measured from the top the
compacted subgrade to the crown of the pipe unless the pipe manufacturer requires
additional fill depth over the pipe.
Storm sewer conveyance systems may be constructed with RCP (Type A), Reinforced
Concrete Pipe (heavy duty), CCGSP, coated (polymer) corrugated galvanized steel pipe
and TP, thermoplastic pipe Group I, II, III or IV (60 inches max). Alternate pipe designs
may be considered dependent upon environmental factors when approved by the
Township Engineer.
In inlets and manholes, a minimum of two inches in elevation shall be provided between
the invert in and out of the pipe, for pipes of the same diameter. For pipes that vary in
size, the crown elevation of the pipes shall be matched.
Outlet pipes for permanent stormwater basins shall be constructed with RCP (Type A)
reinforced concrete pipe (heavy duty) with watertight joints.
Storm sewers may not enter the corner of an inlet. The storm sewer shall enter an inlet
with the crown of the pipe at least six inches minimum below the top of the box.
Waterproof grout shall be used to anchor the pipe into the inlet. The pipe must be cut
flush with the interior wall of the inlet box. All pipes shall be saw cut.
Storm sewers shall be extended to storm basins, if used, or to a point at least 100 feet
beyond any home site as approved by the Township Engineer.
Stormwater pipes must be oriented at right angles to electric, water, sanitary sewer, and
gas utilities when crossing above or beneath them. Crossing angles of less than 90° will
only be permitted at the discretion of the Township Engineer. When skewed crossings are
permitted, interior angles between alignment of the storm sewer pipe and the utility may
not be less than 45°. Vertical and horizontal design of storm sewers must be linear.
All open-ended storm sewers must be provided with a concrete endwall.
All inlets shall be furnished with bicycle-safe grates unless located in a swale, etc.
All inlets and manholes located in paved areas must be overexcavated a minimum of two
feet around the structure and backfilled with crushed stone aggregate.
The maximum spacing of inlets and manholes shall 300 feet.
Double inlets must be spaced a minimum of 10 feet apart.
Inlet and manhole risers shall be a one-piece solid structure a minimum of three inches
thick. Bricks for use as a riser will not be allowed.
All present inlet boxes, endwalls, manholes, and pipe materials shall be manufactured by
an approved PennDOT supplier.
No connections of roof drains, storm sewers, and others shall be made directly to a storm
sewer pipe. All connections must be made to an inlet or manhole.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 392/620
[8]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
b.
a.
b.
c.
602.10
Editor's Note: See Ch. 214, Stormwater Management.
Sanitary sewage disposal system(s).
Sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be provided consistent with the design standards
and requirements contained in Article V of this ordinance.
Whenever a subdivider proposes that individual on-site sanitary sewage disposal
systems shall be utilized within the subdivision, the subdivider shall either install such an
approved facility, approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
and/or the Chester County Health Department, or shall guarantee (by deed restriction or
otherwise) as a condition of the sale of each lot or parcel within the subdivision that such
facilities can be installed by the purchaser of such lot or parcel.
In all other cases, the subdivider shall provide a complete community or public sanitary
sewage disposal system. The design and installation of such public system shall be
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer and the UTMA. The design and
installation of such community distribution system shall be subject to the approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and such system shall be further
subject to the satisfactory provision for the maintenance thereof.
Where studies by the Township Planning Commission or UTMA indicate that construction
or extension of sanitary trunk sewers to serve the property being subdivided appears
probable within a reasonably short time (up to five years), the Township Planning
Commission and the Board of Supervisors shall require the installation and capping of
sanitary sewer mains and house connections, in addition to the installation of temporary,
individual, on-site sanitary sewage disposal systems. It shall, however, be the
responsibility of the Township to supervise the design and installation of such capped
sewers.
Terminal manhole location. In order to provide an efficient sewer system and to minimize
sewer duplication, it is the Township policy that all publicly owned sewer extensions shall
be sized and located to accept the efficient connection of sewers from other subdivisions
or future sewered areas of the Township. During the review of sewer drawings for
proposed subdivision sewers, the UTMA or its engineer will designate future connection
points, if any, to the proposed sewers. The portion of the proposed sewer which is
designated as a connection point shall be extended or situated (at the developer's
expense) on the property boundary at a depth and location provided by the UTMA or its
engineer.
Water supply.
Water supply system(s) shall be installed consistent with design principles and requirements
contained in Article V of this ordinance and Township standards.
Where the subdivider proposes that individual on-site water supply systems shall be utilized
within the subdivision, the subdivider shall either install such facilities or shall guarantee (by
deed restriction or otherwise) as a condition of the sale of each lot or parcel within the
subdivision that the facilities can be installed by the purchaser of such lot or parcel.
Wherever feasible, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete public or community
water distribution system. The design and installation of such public system shall be subject
to the approval of the Township Engineer; the design and installation of such community
distribution system shall be subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection; and such system shall be further subject to satisfactory provision
for the maintenance thereof.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 393/620
602.11
a.
(1)
(2)
[9]
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
b.
602.12
Fire hydrants. Wherever a public or community water system is provided, fire hydrants suitable
for the coupling of equipment serving the Township shall be installed as specified by the Insurance
Services Offices of Pennsylvania. Locations of hydrants shall be approved by the Lionville Fire
Company and by the Township Fire Marshal.
Trails shall be required in any subdivision or land development where it is desirable, in the
opinion of the Board of Supervisors, to provide access to community facilities (schools, shopping
areas, recreation areas, etc.), or to continue sidewalks or trails that are existing in adjacent
developments, or to ensure the safety of pedestrians in unusual or peculiar conditions with respect
to prospective traffic, or where proposed sidewalks and trails are shown on Map 4-4, Plans for
Parks, Recreation and Open Space — Walkway Network, of the Township 2010 Comprehensive
Plan Update.
All trails shall be continually offered to the Township for dedication. A note stating this shall be
placed on the subdivision or land development plan. This shall include a twenty-foot-wide
easement centered on the trail. Additionally, the developer must provide a written continuing
offer of dedication to the Township that includes a metes and bounds description of the
easement.
The following design standards shall be used for trails:
The trail surface shall be bituminous pavement having a minimum depth of three inches.
Trails shall cross roadways and parking lots at a ninety-degree angle and include
appropriate signage. Trail grades shall not exceed 5%. Where trails cross driveways,
they shall be delineated with striping and appropriate signage.
Trails shall be constructed to the dimensions shown in Appendix A-7.[9] Trails shall be a
minimum of six feet wide, except along collector and arterial streets and adjacent to
shopping centers, schools, recreation areas, and other community facilities, where they
shall be a minimum of eight feet wide.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
Trail excavations shall be made to the required depth, and a Class 4, Type B, geotextile
fabric shall be placed over the compacted subgrade. A subbase layer of crushed stone,
PennDOT 2-A Type C, not less than six inches thick, shall be placed and thoroughly
compacted prior to laying the trail (this may be achieved in one lift). The base course
shall extend out a distance of 18 inches from the paved width on either side of the trail
before tapering to subgrade.
Trail paving shall consist of a bituminous concrete base course having a compacted
depth of two inches and a wearing course having a compacted depth of one inch. A tack
coat shall be applied between the two courses, and any joints must be sealed. Trails
under construction shall comply with the requirements of § 602.12.b of this ordinance.
Trails shall be constructed with appropriate drainage swales and surface pitch or
crowning so that water flows off the trail in a perpendicular sheet flow.
Trails shall be graded at street or parking lot intersections to provide handicapped
accessibility.
Trails shall provide connections to the development's internal sidewalk system and any
adjacent tract's trails and sidewalk systems. Alignments do not necessarily have to follow
exactly those proposed in Map 4-4, Plans for Parks, Recreation and Open Space —
Walkway Network, of the Township 2010 Comprehensive Plan Update; however, they
should enter/depart the development in close proximity to the alignment shown.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 394/620
c.
[10]
[11]
602.13
603.1
603.2
603.3
603.4
603.5
603.6
603.7
604.1
604.2
604.3
Waiver. The design standards set forth in § 602.12.b above may be waived if environmental
or topographic constraints preclude the use of a paved trail or 5% maximum slope.
Parking lots. The required number of parking spaces shall be in accordance with the Uwchlan
Township Zoning Ordinance.[10] The dimensions of parking stalls and aisles shall be in accordance
with Appendix A-9;[11] the pavement section for a parking lot shall be determined based on the
use of the parking lot but shall be no less than 1 1/2 inches of bituminous wearing course on two
inches of bituminous binder course on six inches of crushed stone.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Zoning.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
§ 603. Monuments and markers.
Monuments shall be placed at sufficient locations to define the exact location of all roads and to
enable the reestablishment of all road lines. In general, monuments shall be set on the road line
on one side of the road at the beginning and ending of all curves and at those points on the curve
at road intersections necessary to establish the actual intersection. Monuments shall be placed at
the tract perimeter where no markers exist, as required by the Township.
Markers shall be placed at all points where lot lines intersect road lines or other lot lines, at all
angle points in lot lines, and tangent points of curves, except where concrete monuments are
required.
Monuments shall be concrete with a minimum top width of four inches by four inches and a
bottom width of six inches by six inches. The minimum height shall be 24 inches. The concrete
monument shall have a metal component detectable by an electromagnetic locator.
Markers shall be steel bars at least 24 inches long and not less than 5/8 inch in diameter.
Utility easements shall be monumented at their beginning, their end, and at all directed changes.
The monumentations shall be placed in the ground after final grading is completed. The
monumentation shall be either a concrete monument or marker, as required by the Township.
All monuments and markers shall be certified for accuracy by the developer's engineer and their
accuracy checked by the Township Engineer. Accuracy of monument/markers shall be within
3/100 of a foot.
In cases where it is impossible to set a monument or where the permanency of a monument
may be better ensured by offsetting the monument with a reference monument(s), the Township
may authorize such procedure, provided that proper instrument sights may be obtained and
complete offset data is designated on the record plan. A reference monument (preferably two)
should be set on the boundary line(s) that intersect the corner.
§ 604. Easements.
Easements with a minimum width of 30 feet shall be provided for all utilities. Additional width
may be required for access and maintenance as determined by the Township. Permanent or
temporary construction easements may also be required at the sole discretion of the Township.
Easements shall be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put within the area of an easement
unless necessary for the purpose of the easement, including but not limited to plants, trees or
fences.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 395/620
604.4
604.5
604.6
604.7
604.8
604.9
604.10
604.11
605.1
605.2
605.3
605.4
605.5
Drainage easements shall be required along watercourses and drainage structures. Easements
with a minimum width of 30 feet shall be provided for all drainage structures and swales.
Sanitary sewer easements with a minimum width of 30 feet shall be provided for all sanitary
sewer structures located outside of the street right-of-way.
Easements shall be required along existing trails which are to remain. At the discretion of the
Township, such easements may be dedicated to the Township for public use.
Where stormwater or surface water will be gathered within a subdivision or land development
and discharged or drained over lands within or beyond the boundaries of the subdivision or land
development, the applicant or owner shall reserve or obtain easements over all lands affected if
flow patterns are changed, as deemed by the Township. These easements shall be adequate for
such discharge of drainage and for the carrying off of such water and for the maintenance, repair
and reconstruction, including the right of passage over and upon the same by vehicles, machinery
and other equipment for such purposes, and shall be of sufficient width for such passage and
work. The width of the easement shall be as required by the Township.
The Township may accept dedication of easements prior to the final dedication of improvements
to enforce such easements during construction or prior to the completion of all improvements.
Metes and bounds descriptions shall be provided for all easements.
The applicant shall provide, where required by the Township, a method of physically delineating
easements for emergency access, pedestrian access or other utilization across private lots. Such
method may include shrubbery, trees, fence, markers, or other methods acceptable to the
Township.
Any easement or right-of-way required herein shall be made part of the deeds to all affected
properties. Any error found in a deed shall be immediately corrected and rerecorded in the
Chester County Recorder of Deeds' office at the sole expense of the applicant. The applicant shall
be solely responsible to the buyer for any failure to record an easement or right-of-way shown on
the approved plan. Failure to record an easement or right-of-way shown on the approved plan
shall not prevent its intended use from being utilized. All easements and rights-of-way shown on
the final plan of record shall be deemed to be incorporated in the appropriate deed.
§ 605. Other utilities.
All other utility lines, including but not limited to electric, telephone, cable and security, shall be
placed underground. Installation of all utilities shall be in strict accordance with the engineering
standards and specifications of the Township and of the public utility concerned.
Underground utilities shall be installed before the roads are constructed, as approved by the
Township.
Easements shall be required to facilitate the maintenance and repair of utility lines. Facilities
shall be located within a right-of-way or in the center of an easement not less than 30 feet wide.
All proposed utility locations shall be coordinated so as not to conflict with landscaping
requirements.
In accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Utility Line Protection Act, Act 287 of
1974, as amended (Act 199 of 2004),[1] an applicant shall contact all applicable utilities and
accurately determine the locations and depths of all underground utilities within the boundaries of
the tract proposed for development prior to excavation. A list of the applicant's utilities and each
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 396/620
[1]
a.
b.
606.1
a.
606.2
a.
b.
c.
606.3
[1]
606.4
606.5
(1)
a.
606.6
606.7
utility's phone numbers shall appear on the plans submitted for review, and proof of contact shall
be presented in the form of the Pennsylvania One Call System serial number.
Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 606. Existing street excavation.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except any department or authority of the Township, to
perform any work, including opening or excavation in or under any Township street, unless and
until a permit therefor shall be secured from the Township for each separate undertaking. All work
performed within the right-of-way shall conform to the provisions of PennDOT Publication 213,
Temporary Traffic Control Devices. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, a permit shall not be required in
the following instances:
Emergency repairs of utility facilities may be performed.
Permit applications are not required for accessing the utility facility through a manhole.
The Township Manager or Code Enforcement Officer or any duly authorized agent of the
Township may prohibit any work being done without a proper permit or contrary to the terms
thereof.
A permit will not be issued for an open trench excavation on any road for a period of five
years after a new bituminous wearing course has been installed.
Backfilling. All openings made in the cartway or in paved shoulders shall be backfilled by the
permittee in accordance with the following minimum standards:
The opening shall be backfilled with No. 2 RC aggregate, compacted in not more than sixinch
layers, with approved vibratory compaction equipment.
Compaction shall be completed to the bottom elevation of the existing pavement.
Temporary or permanent restoration shall be placed at the end of each working day.
Permanent restoration: Prior to replacement of the pavement, one foot from each edge of the
trench shall be saw cut, in a neat, straight line, to the bottom elevation of the existing asphalt, and
the detached material shall be removed. Drilling shall not be permitted. All material shall comply
with PennDOT Form 408. Refer to Appendix A-10 for trench and flexible pavement restoration
details.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
The Township may require modified specifications if, determined during the construction, the
existing road section is greater than the specified section listed above in Section I(1). If a concrete
road base is located below the asphalt roadway, the trench restoration must include a concrete
base of similar depth and material.
Temporary restoration.
Temporary restoration. The 2RC aggregate backfill material shall be placed in accordance
with § 606.4 above with a surface of a two-inch compacted cold patch asphalt. The Township
may require the temporary restoration to be made and kept in place for up to 60 days after
backfilling the trench.
Weather pending, the permanent restoration shall be made within 120 days of roadway
opening. Outside air temperatures at time of permanent restoration shall comply with
PennDOT Form 408 specifications (40° and rising).
Additional restoration.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 397/620
a.
(1)
(2)
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
d.
a.
b.
c.
d.
606.8
All disturbed portions of the street, including all appurtenances and structures, such as
guardrail or drainpipes, shall be restored to a condition equal to or better than that which
existed before the start of any work authorized by the permit.
If the permittee opens the street pavement, whether to install a new facility or to modify an
existing facility or for any reason other than to perform emergency work pursuant to § 606.1
above (relating to emergency work), and the wearing course is less than seven years old, the
permittee shall, in addition to the minimum restoration conditions outlined in this section of
this article (relating to special conditions - subsurface operations), overlay the entire street
pavement in accordance with the following conditions:
When a longitudinal opening longer than 10 feet and wider than three feet is made in the
street pavement, the permittee shall overlay the traffic lane(s) in which the opening was
made, for the entire length of street that was opened.
When two or more transverse trench openings are made by the permittee in the street
pavement less than 100 feet apart, the permittee shall overlay all traffic lanes in which
the openings were made, for the entire length of the street between such openings.
Regardless of the age of the wearing course, when both longitudinal and transverse trench
openings are made in the street pavement, the Township may require the permittee to overlay
all traffic lanes in which such openings were made, for the entire length of street that was
opened, if the Township Manager or Code Enforcement Officer determines that the present
serviceability of the street has been impaired by the openings.
Any lawn area disturbed as part of the work shall be restored to the condition prior to the start
of work
A minimum of six inches of screened topsoil shall be placed at all locations of lawn
restoration.
Disturbed areas shall be permanently stabilized with quality seed mixture and straw
mulch. Seed mixture shall match existing grass type.
Erosion control blanket shall be placed on all slopes that are 3:1 or greater. Blanket must
be placed on all areas where erosion occurs or on locations specified by the Township.
All wheel ruts created by the construction shall be restored to the condition prior to the
start of work.
Enforcement. Any violation of the regulations set forth in this article shall constitute grounds for
imposition of any or all of the following penalties:
Upon receipt of oral or written notice of any violation(s) from the Township's authorized
representative, the permittee shall cease to perform any further work in the permitted area
except to restore the area to a safe condition. No further work shall commence in the
permitted area until the violation(s) has been remedied. Where the permittee has received
oral notice of the violation(s), written notice shall be sent to the permittee within five days of
receipt of the oral notice.
Confiscation of the applicant's permit or emergency permit card by the Township Manager or
Code Enforcement Officer.
Revocation of the applicant's permit or emergency permit card by the Township Manager or
Code Enforcement Officer.
Removal by the utility facilities' owner of facilities installed without a permit or in violation of
the regulations set forth in this article.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 398/620
606.9 Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof
in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$200 nor more than $1,000, together with costs of prosecution. The continuation of such violation
for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of a violation may be punished as provided above for each separate
offense.
Article VII. Mobile Home Parks
§ 701. Associated definitions.
With the exception of "mobile home," "mobile home lot," and "mobile home park," the following
definitions pertain specifically to mobile homes and related facilities:
HEALTH AUTHORITY
That department or those departments, state or county, charged with the regulation, authorization,
and control and licensing of mobile home parks.
LICENSE
Written approval, in whatever form, as issued by the appropriate health authorities, authorizing a
person to operate and maintain a mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME
A transportable building intended for permanent occupancy as a single-family dwelling, office, or
place of assembly, contained in one unit, or in two units, each having separate and individual sets
of axles, designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated
towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation, i.e., a double-wide mobile home, not modular home. No home occupation is permitted
within a mobile home.
MOBILE HOME LOT
A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which said lot is
leased by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel of land under single ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement
of mobile homes for nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation, or other entity.
RECREATION VEHICLE
A vehicle which may be towed or driven on the public highways without a special hauling permit,
and which is designed for human occupancy under transient circumstances, such as camping,
travel, or other recreation, sometimes variously known as a "trailer" or a "camper."
SERVICE OR RECREATIONAL BUILDING
A structure housing operation, office, recreational, park maintenance, and other similar facilities.
SEWER CONNECTIONS
Consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the
inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 399/620
702.1
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
702.2
702.3
That portion of the sewer lateral that extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at
each mobile home space.
WATER CONNECTION
Consists of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of
the distribution system within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE
That portion of the water service pipe which extends vertically to the ground elevation and
terminates at a designated point at each mobile home lot.
WATER SERVICE PIPE
Consists of all pipes, fittings, valves and appurtenances from the water main of the park
distribution system to the water outlet of the distribution system within the mobile home.
§ 702. Permits.
Permits required. No person shall construct, expand or operate any mobile home park or later
construct or cause to be occupied any additional mobile home lots therein or adjacent thereto or
as part thereof within the limits of Uwchlan Township unless he holds a valid permit issued by
Uwchlan Township.
Application to Uwchlan Township. The application procedure shall comply with the application
provisions set forth in this ordinance. The applicant shall submit to the Board of Supervisors, at
least 10 working days prior to its regular meeting, an application for a permit to construct and
operate a mobile home park in Uwchlan Township. The said application shall be on forms
prescribed by the Township and shall contain all of the information necessary to demonstrate
compliance with all of the terms of this ordinance. The application shall be accompanied by:
Plans, prepared by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor, showing the information
required in §§ 703.3 and 703.4 of this ordinance.
Copies of the applications and approvals and/or licenses of the Chester County Health
Department and all other approvals issued by any state or county agencies or offices
necessary for the construction and operation of the mobile home park and the water and
sewer facilities attendant thereto.
A sedimentation and erosion control plan approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection or the Chester County Conservation District, as applicable.
The proper fee for application review.
Five copies of the application shall be filed with the Township.
Inspection and issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application, the Uwchlan Township Board
of Supervisors shall retain one copy in its files and forward the following: one copy to the Township
Department of Building and Inspections, one copy to the Township Engineer, three copies to the
Uwchlan Planning Commission, and one copy to the Chester County Planning Commission. All of
the foregoing shall review the said plans and submit a written report to the Board of Supervisors,
which, upon examination of the application and reports and, if deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors, the inspection of the premises and the holding of public hearings as outlined within
§ 806 of the Township Zoning Ordinance, shall approve, subject to the conditions, or deny the plan
in whole or in part. After approval of the application at a public meeting or approval subject to such
conditions as are agreeable to the applicant, the Township Department of Building and Inspections
shall issue the proper permits for construction of the said park, and after construction, if upon
inspection the Township Department of Building and Inspections deems that the park, as
constructed, complies with the terms of the approval and this ordinance, shall issue use and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 400/620
702.4
702.5
702.6
703.1
703.2
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
703.3
occupancy permits for the same and a mobile home park operator's license for the calendar year.
Final action shall be taken within 90 days after the public meeting at which the Board of
Supervisors received the application.
Annual renewal permits to operate a park. Renewal permits for operation for a one-year period
shall be issued by said officer upon furnishing proof by the applicant that his park continues to
meet the standards prescribed by this and other applicable ordinances of Uwchlan Township.
Fees. Each application for a new or a renewal permit shall be accompanied by payment of an
inspection fee in such amount as the Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, from time to time
establish. In addition to the inspection fee set forth above, the applicant shall pay to the Township
an amount equal to the statutory allowed costs, fees, expenses and charges incurred by the
Township for professional services in the review of any application.
Limited applicability to existing parks. Owners of mobile home parks in existence on the effective
date of this ordinance shall be entitled, upon presentation of current licenses from all state, county
and regional authorities governing mobile home park construction or operation, to a permit for the
number of mobile home lots actually currently occupied or which have been previously legally
approved as of the effective date of this ordinance. Any extension or expansion to a mobile home
park after the effective date of this ordinance shall conform in all manners and respects to the
provisions of the ordinance as well as the Zoning Ordinance of Uwchlan Township.
§ 703. General requirements and minimum standards.
A mobile home park shall neither be constructed/operated on any lands designated as
floodplain, as defined in the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance, nor on land with slopes in
excess of 20%, unless the applicant can show conformance to all appropriate provisions of the
Uwchlan Township Zoning and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinances.
No mobile home park plan shall be approved unless all streets, which are required to be private,
shown thereon, are of sufficient width and proper grade and otherwise conform in all respects with
the other provisions of this ordinance.
When a mobile home park plan is submitted, it shall include the following items:
Tract boundaries.
Location of tract.
North point or arrow.
Streets on and adjacent to the tract, properly named or identified.
Significant topographical and physical features.
Proposed street layout.
Proposed lot layout.
Elevation contours at intervals of two feet shall be provided. United States Geological Survey
ten-foot contour data will only be accepted for sketch plans.
The seal of a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
Soil type overlays. Provided that the Board of Supervisors deems it necessary as
recommended by the Township Engineer, the Board may require field delineation of soil types
of the entire tract or critical portion thereof.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 401/620
k.
l.
m.
n.
o.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
703.4
704.1
704.2
A plan demonstrating the supply and distribution of water within the site.
A plan showing the collection and disposition of sewage within the site.
A plan or narrative showing the means of fire protection.
A plan or narrative showing the means of fuel supply.
A plan or narrative showing the means of refuse and recycling collection, storage, and
disposal.
The plans shall be accompanied by an application for approval of the plan on the prescribed
form. The plans shall be clearly legible paper prints at a scale not less than one inch equals 100
feet and shall contain the following information:
The proposed name of the mobile home park or identifying title.
The date, scale, and North arrow.
The names and addresses of the owner of the land; of the developer, if other than owner; and
of the engineer or surveyor, including his seal.
The boundary lines of the tract containing the mobile home park, accurate in scale and
bearing the names of adjoining subdivisions and/or owners of record of adjoining land.
The name, location and width of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks
and other public open spaces.
All proposed dwelling sites must be numbered and shown.
All streets, roads, highways, or parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved to the
public use, together with the conditions of such dedication or reservation, shall be shown on
the plan.
The location of any proposed curbs, sidewalks, drainage structures, or other improvements to
be made by the developer.
The plan shall also show the physical features or present improvements that affect the layout
of lots and streets. Such features include location of any present buildings, high-tension line
towers or pipelines within the tract, existing water mains or sewer lines, watercourses,
marshes, gullies, tree masses, and steep slopes.
Where the plan covers only a part of the developer's entire holding, a sketch plan of the
balance of the tract shall be submitted of the prospective street layout for the remainder.
§ 704. Registration.
Transfer of ownership. Every person holding a permit shall file notice in writing with the Township
within 10 days after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of interest in or
control of any mobile home park.
Suspension. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is determined that
conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this ordinance or any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Township Department of Building and Inspections shall
give notice in writing, in accordance with § 715.1 herein, to the person holding the certificate
advising him that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within such time as shall be
specified in the said notice, the license to operate the mobile home park shall be suspended.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 402/620
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
704.3
705.1
705.2
705.3
706.1
706.2
a.
b.
706.3
706.4
Registration of occupants.
Every mobile home park owner or operator shall maintain a register containing a record of all
mobile homes and occupants using the mobile home park. Such register shall be available to
any authorized person inspecting the park and shall be preserved for a period of three years.
Such register shall contain:
The names and address of all mobile home occupants.
The make, model, and serial number of each mobile home.
In addition to the foregoing and not in substitution thereof, no mobile home shall be removed
from any mobile home park unless and until the park operator and/or owner of the mobile
home shall have first obtained from the Township Tax Collector and the Township Earned
Income Tax Collector certificates that all taxes imposed upon the mobile home and/or the
occupants thereof, as well as all earned income taxes imposed, have been paid and satisfied
and all returns required by any applicable law or ordinance have been filed.
§ 705. Mobile home park inspections.
Inspections. An authorized representative of Uwchlan Township shall inspect a mobile home
park yearly (and at such other times as may appear necessary or proper) to determine compliance
with this ordinance.
Inspector. The Code Enforcement Officer or Assistant Code Enforcement Officer is hereby
designated as the person to make such inspections. Another or additional inspectors may also be
authorized to make inspections or additional inspections at the discretion of the Township
Supervisors.
Authorization to act. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon determination of any violation of
this ordinance, issue notice thereof as provided in § 715.1 herein. Any person affected by such
notice may appeal to the Board of Supervisors under the provisions of § 715.2 herein.
§ 706. Park requirements.
Minimum park area. A mobile home park shall have a gross area of at least five contiguous
acres of land.
Site location. The location of all mobile home parks shall comply with the following minimum
requirement: be located in a zoning district where mobile home parks are a permitted use under
the terms of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
Site drainage requirements.
The site drainage shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance and the Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance.
Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water collectors capable of breeding
mosquitoes and other insects shall be eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or Chester County Health
Department.
Soil and ground cover requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be
paved or covered with stone screenings or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of
preventing soil erosion and the emanation of dust during dry weather.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 403/620
a.
(1)
b.
c.
706.5
a.
b.
706.6
a.
b.
(1)
(2)
c.
d.
706.7
706.8
a.
706.9
Required setbacks, buffer strips, and screenings.
There shall be a minimum mobile home building setback line of 25 feet from interior roadway
rights-of-way.
Mobile homes shall be located on each mobile home lot so that there will be not less than 10
feet to any other mobile home or structure within the park.
Except individual storage structures not to exceed 200 feet square feet as an accessory
structure for the personal use of the occupants of the mobile home shall not be less than
five feet to any other mobile home or building within the park.
All mobile home parks shall be required to provide visual screening, such as fence or natural
growth, along the property boundary line in accordance with § 608 of the Township Zoning
Ordinance.
Erection of mobile homes.
An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected around the entire base of
each mobile home. Such enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and
deterioration of the structure. Such enclosure shall be installed within 90 days of the
placement of any mobile home.
The standard of construction for mobile homes not state-certified and the construction of all
concrete patios, decks, and accessory structures shall be in accordance with the applicable
portions of the Uwchlan Township Building Code.
Park street system:
General requirements. A safe and convenient vehicular access shall be provided from
adjacent public streets or roads.
Access. The entrance road, or area, connecting the park with a public street or road shall
have a minimum pavement width of 25 feet for 50 feet from the public street right-of-way and
have a curb radius of 35 feet. Clear sight distance shall be provided for the entrance road in
accordance with § 502.9 of this ordinance. Curbs shall be provided at the entrance
intersection in accordance with § 502.8.f and § 602.2 of this ordinance.
Internal streets. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated
traffic and in any case shall meet the following minimum requirements:
A minimum road pavement width of 22 feet will be required. No on-street parking is
permitted. Clear sight distance shall be provided at all internal intersections in
accordance with § 502.9 of this ordinance.
Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside
roadway radius of at least 40 feet.
Street layout and construction. All streets and street signage shall be laid out and constructed
in accordance with this ordinance. Addressing shall be completed by the Township, and
addresses must be posted according to the Township Addressing Ordinance.
Off-street parking areas. A paved off-street parking area for three motor vehicles shall be
provided for each mobile home. Areas for off-street guest parking shall be dispersed throughout
the park and shall be either paved, gravel or other impervious material.
Walks.
Common walk system. Where pedestrian traffic is concentrated and a common walk system
is provided, such common walks shall have a minimum width of six feet and be constructed of
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 404/620
(1)
b.
a.
b.
706.10
706.11
706.12
707.1
a.
b.
c.
d.
707.2
bituminous material.
Individual walks. All mobile home lots shall be connected to common walks, or to streets, or to
driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall have a
minimum width of two feet.
Individual walks must be constructed within 60 days of the issuance of a use and
occupancy permit for the mobile home. The owner may request an extension of this time
period by up to 90 days due to freezing weather conditions from the Uwchlan Township
Department of Building Safety.
Construction of mobile home lot.
The total number of lots in a park shall not exceed an average density of four per acre of land
within the mobile home park, unless the Zoning Ordinance requires a lesser density, which
said park shall, for these purposes, be defined as being bounded by the public roads abutting
the same, any zoning district boundary lines adjacent to a zoning district within which mobile
home parks are not a permitted use, and property lines of the applicant. Where a public road
passes through the mobile home park, the same, for the purpose of the density computations,
shall be deemed to create separate mobile home parks on either side of the public road, and
each shall be limited by density computations separate and distinct from the other.
Each mobile home lot shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable
provisions of the Uwchlan Township Building Code.
Recreational area. If a recreational area, or areas, is provided, these facilities shall be
maintained within the park for the use of all park residents by the mobile home park permit holder.
All mobile homes shall have a four-inch concrete patio at least eight feet by 10 feet in size,
which shall be immediately contiguous to an entrance of the home, or a wood deck built in
compliance with the Township Building Code may be interchanged with the concrete patio.
§ 707. Water supply.
General requirements. Water supply shall be public and in accordance with the standards of
AquaPA.
Individual water riser pipes and connections.
Individual water riser pipes shall be located at a point where the water connection will
approximate a vertical position, thereby ensuring the shortest water connection possible and
decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 3/4 inch and terminate at least
four inches above the ground surface. The water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipe
and to protect risers from heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing weather.
Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water riser pipe on each mobile
home lot. Underground stop and waste valves are prohibited, unless their type of manufacture
and their method of installation are approved by the Township.
§ 708. Sewage disposal.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 405/620
a.
b.
c.
712.1
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
712.2
Sewage disposal shall be to a treatment facility acceptable to the Township Board of Supervisors and
shall be in accordance with the Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan as approved by the Township.
§ 709. Electrical distribution system.
Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment, and
appurtenances, which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable provisions of the
Uwchlan Township Building Code and shall be installed underground.
§ 710. Refuse/recycling handling.
The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse and recycling in the mobile home park shall be so
conducted as to assure that collection areas are adequately screened from view, create no health or
safety hazards, and that the storage is conducted in sealed containers.
§ 711. Insect and rodent control.
Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and
infestation.
§ 712. Fuel supply and storage.
Natural gas system.
Natural gas piping systems, when installed in mobile home parks, shall be maintained in
conformity with accepted engineering practices.
Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an approved shutoff valve installed
upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent
accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
Installation shall comply with the Uwchlan Township Building Code, the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA), and any other authorities having jurisdiction.
Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
Liquefied petroleum gas systems provided for mobile home service buildings or other
structures when installed shall be maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of
NFPA and other authorities having jurisdiction and shall include the following:
Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures and shall
be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe location.
Systems shall have a least one accessible means for shutting off gas. Such means shall
be located outside the mobile home and shall be maintained in effective operating
condition.
All liquid petroleum gas (LPG) piping outside of the mobile homes shall be well supported
and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form
shall not be conveyed through piping equipment and systems in mobile homes.
Vessels of more than 12 and less than 60 U.S. gallons' gross capacity shall be securely,
but not permanently, anchored to prevent accidental overturning.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 406/620
(5)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
712.3
713.1
713.2
713.3
713.4
714.1
714.2
714.3
714.4
No LPG vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport,
mobile home, or any other structure, unless such installations are specially approved by
the authority having jurisdiction.
Fuel oil supply systems.
All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings and other structures
shall be installed and maintained in conformity with the standards of the Township Fire
Marshal and other authorities having jurisdiction, when provided.
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall be securely, but
not permanently, fastened in place. When the storage tank is separated from the home, piping
shall be buried six inches.
All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings and other structures
shall have shutoff valves located within five inches of storage tanks.
All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be buried or enclosed in a protective building and
shall not be less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against physical damage.
§ 713. Fire protection.
Local regulations. The mobile home park areas shall be subject to the rules and regulations of
Uwchlan Township where provided.
Litter control. The mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish, and other
flammable materials.
Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the Township shall be kept
in public service buildings and where no hydrants are provided, and a number established by the
Fire Protection Authority shall be maintained throughout the park in readily accessible and wellmarked
positions.
Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed, if connected to a public water supply source, in
accordance with § 507 of this ordinance.
§ 714. Responsibilities of the park management.
The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall operate the park in
compliance with this ordinance and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its
facilities, and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home
lot, which includes supervising the securing of its stability and installing all utility connections.
The park management shall give the appropriate inspecting officers free access to all mobile
home lots, service buildings, and other community service facilities for the purpose of inspection.
As part of the application for a mobile home park permit under the provisions of this ordinance,
the mobile home park applicant shall submit a copy of the proposed rules and regulations of the
park, which shall be incorporated into each mobile home park lease and shall provide appropriate
rules, regulations, and penalties to assure that the mobile home park lessees and occupants shall
maintain their respective mobile homes and mobile home lots as to assure compliance within the
park with the terms of this ordinance and the other applicable ordinances of the Township;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 407/620
a.
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
d.
e.
f.
715.1
715.2
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve the mobile home
park operator of the responsibility for and liability for noncompliance with this ordinance.
§ 715. Notices, hearings, and orders.
Notice of violation. Whenever the Township Code Enforcement Officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this ordinance, or
of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Township shall give notice of such alleged
violation to the person to whom the permit or certificate was issued, as hereinafter provided. Such
notice shall:
Be in writing.
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
Be served upon the owner or his agent, as the case may require; provided, however, that
such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly serviced upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served by:
Certified mail; or
Personal delivery to the mobile home park officer by a Township employee; or
Posting in the main entrance to the park; or
Any other method authorized for service of a summons in equity under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure; or
Publication in the legal section of the Daily Local News or other newspaper of general
circulation in the Township once a week for two consecutive weeks.
Contain an outline of the remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance, or any part thereof, and with the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
Failure to comply with these regulations or to undertake required remedial action shall result
in the suspension of the permit to operate a mobile home park as provided under § 702.
Hearing. Any person aggrieved by any notice which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this ordinance, or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may
request and shall be granted a hearing before the Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors,
provided that such person shall file in the office of the Township a written petition requesting such
a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds heretofore within 10 days after service
of said notice. The filing of a request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of notice and
suspension under § 715.1., unless the Uwchlan Department of Building Safety inspector shall
certify in writing that he believes the failure to abate the violation forthwith will result in an
immediate threat to the public health and safety or the health and safety of the persons residing
within the park. Upon receipt of such petition, the Board of Supervisors shall set the time and
place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof and shall publish notice
in the legal section of a newspaper of general circulation stating the time, date, place and purpose
of such hearing, which said notice shall appear at least once not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days prior to said hearing. The hearing shall be conducted and the adjudication issued
thereunder, which shall have the effect as set forth in the Local Agency Law Act of December 2,
1968, P.L. 1133, 53 P.S. § 11301 et seq.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 408/620
715.3
715.4
716.1
716.2
802.1
Findings and order. After such hearing, the Uwchlan Township Board of Supervisors shall make
findings as to compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and regulations issued thereunder
and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying, or withdrawing the notice, which shall be
served as provided in § 715.1.d. Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a
notice within 30 days of such order or within such other time as may be stated in the said order,
the license of the mobile home park affected by the order shall be revoked.
Record and appeal. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the
Board of Supervisors, together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto, shall be
entered as a matter of public record in the office of Uwchlan Township, but the transcript of the
proceedings need not be transcribed unless judicial relief from the decision is sought as provided
in the Local Agency Law. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Supervisors shall
have the right to appeal, as set forth in the Local Agency Law of Pennsylvania.
§ 716. Penalties.
Summary offense. Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance or violates any
provisions of any plan approved or permit issued hereunder shall be guilty of a summary offense
and, upon conviction before a District Justice, shall be required to pay a penalty to the use of
Uwchlan Township in an amount not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, and in
default of such payment shall be imprisoned in the Chester County prison for a term not exceeding
five days. Each day of each violation shall be deemed a separate offense subject to like fine and
penalty.
Revocation or suspension of permit. If any fine assessed under § 716.1 hereof shall remain
unpaid for a term of 15 days or for such further period as the Township may permit for cause
shown, then and in that event all permits and licenses shall forthwith be suspended until such time
as all fines, costs and fees have been satisfied. Further, upon continued or repeated violation or
violations within any mobile home park, the right to the issuance of a permit or other continued
operation thereunder may be suspended for a fixed term or permanently revoked by the Board of
Supervisors. Any person aggrieved by such action shall have the right of appeal as provided for in
this ordinance.
Article VIII. Administration
§ 801. General administration.
All provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the Board of Supervisors, or by the Township
Manager, Township Zoning Officer, or other Township official as designated by the Board. All plans,
applications, correspondence, complaints, requests for variances, or appeals shall be delivered to the
Township Building and submitted through the Township Secretary.
§ 802. Amendments.
Any amendment to this ordinance shall be in accordance with Section 505 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.[1] Resolutions adopted by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the
terms and conditions of this ordinance regarding fees, paving and construction standards and timely
changes in other design criteria as specifically permitted by resolution of the Board shall not require an
amendment to this ordinance.
Power of amendment. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, amend, supplement,
change, modify or repeal this ordinance. When doing so, the Board shall proceed in the manner
prescribed in this article and in accordance with law.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 409/620
a.
b.
802.2
802.3
[1]
803.1
803.2
805.1
805.2
Sources of amendment. Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal
may be initiated by the Board of Supervisors on its own motion or by recommendation of the
Planning Commission, as follows:
Proposals originated by the Board of Supervisors. The Board shall refer every proposed
amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal originated by said Board to the
Township Planning Commission and the Chester County Planning Commission. Within 30
days of the submission of said proposal, the Township Planning Commission shall submit to
the Board of Supervisors a report containing its recommendations, including any additions or
modifications to the original proposal.
Proposals originated by the Planning Commission. The Township Planning Commission may,
at any time, transmit to the Board of Supervisors a proposal for the amendment, supplement,
change, modification, or repeal of this ordinance.
Hearings. Before voting on the enactment of any amendment, the Board of Supervisors shall
hold a public hearing thereon, with notice as required by law. No amendment shall become
effective until after such hearing at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity
to be heard. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is
revised, or further revised, the Board may hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice,
before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10505.
§ 803. Hardship.
If any mandatory provisions of this ordinance are shown by an applicant, to the satisfaction of
the Board, to be unreasonable and cause undue hardship as they apply to their proposed
subdivision or land development, the Board may grant a modification to such applicant from such
mandatory provisions, so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured,
provided that such modification will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this
ordinance.
In granting modifications, the Board may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified.
§ 804. Revisions to recorded plans.
If, during the course of construction or completion of a subdivision or land development, minor
changes, alterations or modifications of a final plan become necessary, such changes may be
approved only after written acceptance by the Township Engineer and written approval of the Board of
Supervisors. Substantial revisions to any such final plan shall cause the rerecording of the final plan
after such approvals are obtained.
§ 805. Records.
The Township shall assign a subdivision application name to all applications, and all matters
referring to each such plan should be identified with and filed in accordance with the subdivision
name. The Township shall keep a record of its findings, decisions and recommendations relative
to all subdivision plans filed for review.
All such records shall be public records.
§ 806. Fees.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 410/620
806.1
806.2
806.3
808.1
808.2
Subdivision and land development application fees shall be fixed by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution. In addition to such fees, all disbursements by the Township incident to plan review,
approval, and inspection of construction, including but not necessarily limited to engineering fees,
inspection fees, costs of material or site testing and any maintenance costs prior to acceptance of
improvements by the Township, shall be reimbursed to the Township by the applicant on the basis
of the Township's actual costs. In addition, any legal fees incurred by the Township in excess of
review of the Township's standard forms shall be reimbursed in the same manner. A deposit of
such review fees may be required at the time of filing.
No application for review of a preliminary or final plan shall be accepted until all fees required
have been paid in full. No final plan will be approved or signed until all fees as required by the
most-recent fee schedule have been paid in full.
Inspection fees. The subdivider shall pay directly to the Township a specified fee per hour or
portion thereof for field inspection by the Township Engineer, as defined herein. Such field
inspections shall be made by the Township Engineer as are necessary to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this ordinance. The Board will require payment of fees in advance of actual
inspection, to be maintained in an escrow account.
§ 807. Penalties.
Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which, being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot,
tract or parcel of land, shall lay out, construct, open or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, water main or other improvements for public use, travel or other purposes or for the common
use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, or who sells, transfers or agrees or enters into an
agreement to sell any land in a subdivision or land development, whether by reference to or by other
use of a plat of such subdivision or land development or otherwise, or erects any building thereon,
unless and until a final plan has been prepared in full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance
and has been recorded as provided herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction
thereof, such person, or the members of such partnership, or the officers of such corporation, or the
agent of any of them, responsible for such violation shall pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 per lot or
parcel or per dwelling within each lot or parcel. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid to the
Township. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used
in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or
from the remedies herein provided.
§ 808. Conflicts with other ordinances.
Whenever there is a difference between the minimum standards specified herein and those
included in other Township ordinances or regulations, the more-stringent requirements shall apply.
All existing ordinances or regulations or parts thereof which are contrary to the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect.
Chapter 265. Zoning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan 7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-11. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 51.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Junkyards — See Ch. 146.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See Ch. 153.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 214.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 411/620
103.1
103.2
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 260.
ATTACHMENTS
265a Table 1 Permanent Sign Reg
265b Table 2 Temporary Sign Reg
265c Hist Resources Inventory List
265d Hist Resources Map and Inventory
Article 1. General Provisions
§ 101. Title.
The title of this ordinance is "An ordinance repealing the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance of 1994,
as amended, replacing said ordinance with an ordinance permitting, prohibiting, regulating, restricting,
and determining the uses of land, watercourses, and other bodies of water; the size, height, bulk,
location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, razing, removal, and use of structures
as well as courts, yards, and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and
structures; regulating the density of population and intensity of use; regulating the location and size of
signs; creating zoning districts and establishing the boundaries thereof; continuing the office of Zoning
Officer; continuing a Zoning Hearing Board; and providing for the administration, amendment, and
enforcement of the ordinance, including the imposition of penalties."
§ 102. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance of
1994."
§ 103. Purpose.
This Zoning Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the Township Comprehensive Plan, as
amended, and with consideration for the character of the Municipality, its various parts, and the
suitability of the various parts for particular uses and structures, and is enacted for the following
purposes:
To promote, protect, and facilitate any or all of the following: the public health, safety, morals and
the general welfare; coordinated and practical community development and proper density of
population; emergency management preparedness and operations, airports, and national defense
facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air, access to incident solar energy, police
protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
recreational facilities, public grounds, the provision of safe, reliable and adequate water supply for
domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial use, and other public requirements; as well as
preservation of the natural scenic and historic values in the environment and preservation of
forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
To prevent any and all of the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in
travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic, or other dangers.
§ 104. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the Township and
its citizens. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any rules or
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 412/620
201.1
201.2
regulations previously adopted or permits previously issued by the Township which are not in conflict
with any provision of this ordinance, nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or
annul any easements, covenants, building restrictions, or other agreements between parties; provided,
however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of the buildings or
premises or upon the height of the building, or requires a larger open space than is imposes or
required by such ordinance, rules, regulations or permits, or by easements, covenants, building
restrictions or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall control.
§ 105. Compliance with Township ordinances.
No uses shall be permitted in any district which directly violate any Township ordinances.
§ 106. Review.
All development shall be subject to the provisions and requirements delineated in the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as amended.
§ 107. Validity.
If any article, section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase
or word in this Zoning Ordinance is for any reason declared to be illegal, unconstitutional or invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect or impair the validity of the Zoning
Ordinance as a whole, or any other article, section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation,
restriction, sentence, clause, phrase, word or remaining portion of the Zoning Ordinance. The Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan, Chester County, Pennsylvania, hereby declares that it would
have adopted the Zoning Ordinance and each article, section, subsection, provision, regulation,
limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase, and word thereof irrespective of the fact that any one
or more of the sections, subsections, provisions, regulations, limitations, restrictions, sentences,
clauses, phrases, or words may be declared illegal, unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 108. Repealer.
Inconsistent ordinances. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance, including the Uwchlan Township
Zoning Ordinance of 1977, inconsistent herewith, and any amendments thereof, are hereby expressly
repealed.
Article 2. Statement of Community Development Objectives
§ 201. Community development objectives.
In addition to the purposes enumerated in § 103, this ordinance has been adopted in part to assist in
carrying out the following community development objectives:
To achieve the best use of the land within the Township, insuring that varying land uses will
complement one another and improve the ecological, social, economic, and aesthetic character of
the community.
To establish realistic population densities in order to insure adequate traffic circulation, health
standards, privacy, and open space and in order to provide utilities, protection, services, and
facilities in the most convenient and efficient manner.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 413/620
201.3
201.4
201.5
201.6
201.7
201.8
201.9
201.10
201.11
201.12
301.1
301.2
To improve the road system for better internal circulation and movement of through traffic, which
will facilitate the efficient and safe movement of people and goods.
To guide the location of future development and establish developmental standards in such a
way that negative impacts on the natural environment and natural resources are minimized, and to
minimize existing and future water, air, and noise pollution.
To stimulate the local economy by encouraging controlled and appropriate commercial,
industrial, residential, and recreational growth which will provide for local employment, local
shopping, and local recreational opportunities, and which will strengthen the local tax base.
To provide for the use of land within the Municipality for residential housing of various dwelling
types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings
and a reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements, mobile homes and
mobile home parks.
To strive for coordination of policies, plans, and programs in the Township and region through
cooperation among governing officials and special interest groups in both the public and private
sectors.
To expand and activate a continuing planning program that will serve to continually update and
revise planning goals and objectives, and the operational tools necessary for implementation, in
light of new data and conditions.
To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including population and employment
growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of residential dwelling types and
nonresidential uses.
To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering topography, soil type and classification,
and present use.
To protect environmental resources of the Township, such as but not limited to floodplain,
wetland, steep slope, woodland, and preserve habitat areas and PNDI sites.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
To protect historic resources identified within the Comprehensive Plan and this ordinance.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Article 3. Definitions
[Amended 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-04; 4-8-1996 by Ord. No. 96-04; 9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-07; 9-8-
1997 by Ord. No. 97-15; 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16; 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-10; 5-11-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-07; 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14; 4-26-1999 by Ord. No. 99-08; 1-24-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01; 3-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2000-02; 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-14; 10-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-16; 9-25-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-06]
§ 301. Application and interpretation.
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms, phrases, and words are defined as follows:
Tense, gender, and number. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter; the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural the singular.
General terms. The word "shall" or "must" is always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive;
the words "used for" includes "designed for," "arranged for," "intended for," "maintained for," or
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 414/620
301.3
a.
b.
301.4
"occupied for." The word "building" includes "structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the
phrase "or part thereof." The word "person" includes "individual," "profit or nonprofit organization,"
"partnership," "company," "unincorporated association," "corporation" or other similar entities.
Terms, phrases, and words not defined. When terms, phrases, or words are not defined, they
shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
Specific terms. Terms or words herein, unless otherwise expressly stated, shall have the
following meanings:
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURE
A subordinate building or structure, the use of which is customarily incidental to and located
on the same lot occupied by the principal building.
ACCESSORY USE
A use directly related and subordinate to and located on the same lot occupied by the
principal use to which it relates. In no event shall the sale of any item(s) nor the conducting of
any service(s) be considered an accessory use if such sales or services are not directly
related to the principal use and if such sales or services constitutes in excess of 20% of the
establishment's total income. Also, the area that the accessory use(s) utilize shall be not more
than 25% of the portion of the lot currently being utilized for the conducting of the principal
use. For example, if a person owns 10 acres but is only using one acre of that for conducting
his sales or services, the area allowed for accessory use(s) shall be 25% of that one acre.
ADULT ARCADE
Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or
for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or
motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time,
and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental
for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as
adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. Such other business
purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long
as one of its business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
any one of the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and the said
business purpose(s) involves more than 15 square feet of floor area of the
commercial establishment or property.
ADULT CABARET
A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 415/620
a.
b.
c.
Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical
areas or by specified sexual activities; or
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER
A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown to more
than five persons, or in a room containing more than five patron seats per projector and which
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER
A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity, or live performances which
are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.
ADVERTISING SIGNS
See "sign, advertising."
AGE-RESTRICTED APARTMENT UNIT
A dwelling unit for rental at current market rates intended for occupancy by senior citizens
with a minimum age of 62 years old. All residents must be 62 years of age or older.
[Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
AGRICULTURE
The cultivation of the soil and the raising and harvesting of the products of the soil, including
but not limited to nursery, horticulture, forestry, and animal husbandry.
AGRICULTURE (INTENSIVE)
Specialized agricultural activities, including, but not limited to, mushroom production, poultry
production, and dry lot livestock production, which due to the intensity of production,
necessitate development of specialized sanitary facilities and controls.
ALTERATION
Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities of a building or
structure, or any enlargement thereof, whether by extension on any side or by an increase in
height, or the moving of such building from one location or position to another.
ANTENNA
Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes, whips, or other similar devices
used for the transmission or reception of wireless signals. An antenna may include an
omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any
other wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless communications
facilities defined herein.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
APARTMENT HOUSE
See "building, multifamily."
AREA
The quantity of land projected on a horizontal plane enclosed by the boundaries or extremities
of a lot, parcel, tract, etc.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 416/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
ATTACHED BUILDING
See "building, attached."
ATTACHED GARDEN LOT DEVELOPMENT
See "single-family garden lot development."
ATTIC
That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing.
BASEMENT
A story that is not a story above the grade plane per the Building Code.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
BILLBOARD
See "sign."
BLOCK
A tract of land or two or more contiguous lots bounded by streets, public parks, railroad rightsof-
way, watercourses or bodies of water, boundary lines of the Township, unsubdivided land,
or by any combination of the above.
BLOCK OR LOT FRONTAGE
That portion of a block or lot which fronts on a single street.
BOARDING HOUSE
See "rooming house."
[1]
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS or GOVERNING BODY
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
BUILDING
Any combination of materials forming any structure which is erected on the ground and
permanently affixed thereto, designed, intended, or arranged for the housing, shelter,
enclosure, or structural support of persons, animals, or property of any kind. The following
dwelling unit types are depicted at the end of this article:
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
SINGLE-FAMILY
A building arranged, designed, or intended for and occupied exclusively by one family.
TWO-FAMILY
A building arranged, designed, and intended for occupancy by two families living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein.
MULTIFAMILY
A building arranged, designed, and intended for occupancy by three or more families
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein, including
apartment houses, apartment hotels, flats, garden apartments, and group houses.
LOW-RISE APARTMENT
A detached multifamily building three to five stories in height with access to all dwelling
units from one or more common entranceways and which has a common hallway for all
dwelling units on the same floor.
BUILDING AREA
The maximum horizontal cross-sectional area.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 417/620
BUILDING, ATTACHED
A building which has two or more walls or portions thereof in common with an adjacent
building.
BUILDING COVERAGE
The percentage which when multiplied by the lot area will determine the permitted building
area for all roofed structures and buildings.
BUILDING, DETACHED
A building which has no parts or walls in common with an adjacent building.
BUILDING LENGTH
The longest horizontal distance of any building measured from exterior face to exterior face of
walls.
BUILDING LINE or BUILDING SETBACK LINE
A line established by the required front yard, defining the minimum distance between any
building or structure or portion thereof to be erected or altered, and an adjacent right-of-way,
street line or lot line. Such line shall be measured at right angles from the street right-of-way
line and shall be parallel to said right-of-way line.
BUILDING PERMIT
An approval statement signed by the Building Code Officer, indicating compliance with the
Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance and any other ordinances or regulations, authorizing the
construction, alteration, reconstruction, restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any
building or structure within the Township.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
BUILDING, SEMIDETACHED
A building which has one wall or portion thereof in common with an adjacent building.
BUILDING, SINGLE-FAMILY GARDEN
A detached dwelling situated on a single-family garden lot in a single-family garden lot
development.
BULK
A term used to describe the size, volume, area, or shape of buildings or other structures and
their physical relationship to each other, to open space, or to tracts of land, to lot lines, or to
other buildings or structures.
CARPORT
A roofed-over structure open on two or more sides and used in conjunction with a dwelling for
the storage of private motor vehicles.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
A statement, based on an inspection, signed by the Zoning Administrative Officer, setting forth
that a building, structure, sign, and/or land complies with the Zoning Ordinance, and/or that a
building, structure, sign, and/or land may be lawfully employed for specific uses, or both, as
set forth therein.
CHURCH
A building utilized for public divine worship. The term "church" shall also include temple,
synagogue, mosque, and other similar places of worship.
CLEAR-CUTTING
Except for the removal of trees related to development approved by a building permit or other
Township approval, the removal of all trees greater than 12 inches diameter at breast height
(dbh) on a lot, or any portion thereof greater than 1/2 acre in contiguous area, during a single
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 418/620
tree removal operation or within three years of a previous tree removal operation on the same
lot.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
COLOCATION
The placement or installation of a new wireless communication facility on previously approved
and constructed wireless support structures, including self-supporting or guyed monopoles
and towers, electrical transmission towers, water towers or any other structure not classified
as a wireless support structure that can support the placement or installation of a wireless
communication facility if approved by the Township. The term includes the placement,
replacement or modification of accessory equipment within a previously approved equipment
compound.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
COMMON OPEN SPACE
A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water within a
development site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of the public or of
residents of the development.
In the calculation of the area or proportion of a development site devoted to common open
space, the following shall not be included:
a. Areas within any lot, yard, or required setback;
b. Areas within any public or private street or street right-of-way, sidewalk, driveway,
parking area, or utility easement;
c. Areas or portions thereof less than 50 feet in width, unless part of a trail corridor or
required buffer; [Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
d. Following exclusion of all areas not to be included as common open space and
described in Subsection a through c above, contiguous areas less than 1/4 acre in
area, unless acceptable and approved by the Township. [Amended 12-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-06]
The common open space within a development site shall be designed and arranged so as to
be conveniently accessible to all residences and all areas thereof shall be interconnected by
a means of pedestrian access and circulation acceptable to the Board.
Common open space shall be free of structures other than those approved by the Board
consistent with the provision of active and passive recreational opportunities together with
vehicular access and parking as required in connection therewith. Only those stormwater
management facilities designed so as to be consistent with the active or passive
recreational purposes of the open space may be constructed within required common open
space.
Common open space shall be the subject of recorded encumbrances in form and substance
satisfactory to the Township Solicitor and sufficient to ensure that the purposes and
restrictions with respect thereto are maintained in perpetuity which governing documents
shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds in and for the County of Chester prior to the
first issuance of a building permit or the conveyances of a lot with respect to lands or
buildings within the development and adjacent thereto.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE
A space which will remain totally dry during flooding; the structure is designed and
constructed to prevent the passage of water and water vapor.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
A long-range policy plan intended to guide the growth and development of the Township,
adopted as the current Uwchlan Township Comprehensive Plan Update by the Board of
Supervisors, as amended.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 419/620
CONDITIONAL USE
A use which is not appropriate to a particular zoning district as a whole, but which may be
suitable in certain localities within the district only when specific conditions and factors
prescribed for such cases within this ordinance are present. Conditional uses are allowed or
denied by the Board of Supervisors after a public hearing and review and comments from the
Planning Commission.
CULTURAL FACILITIES
Establishments, such as museums, art galleries and botanical and zoological gardens, of an
historic, educational or cultural interest which are not operated commercially.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
CULTURAL STUDIO
A building or portion of a building used as a place of work by an artist, photographer, artisan,
musician, dancer, etc.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
DEMOLITION
The deterioration, dismantling or tearing down of all or part of the structural elements or
exterior parts of a building or structure, including but not limited to foundations, load-bearing
posts, beams and walls, siding, masonry, roofing, trim, doors and windows.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT
The absence of routine maintenance and repair which leads to structural weakness, decay or
deterioration in a building or structure or its architectural features or elements, leaving a
structure open or vulnerable to vandalism or to intrusion of the elements, flora or fauna.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
DENSITY
The total number of dwelling units per acre, computed by dividing the total number of dwelling
units proposed by the total number of acres to be developed. When computing density, the
area of existing street right-of-way shall not be included in the total number of acres to be
developed.
DETACHED BUILDING
See "building, detached."
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading, and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or
materials; and the subdivision of land.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH)
The outside bark diameter of a tree at breast height, which is defined as 4.5 feet above the
ground surface at the point of the highest elevation in contact with the trunk of the tree.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
DISPENSARY
A person, including a natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other
entity, or any combination thereof, which holds a permit issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health to dispense medical marijuana. The term does not include a health care
medical marijuana organization under Chapter 19 of the Medical Marijuana Act.[2]
[Added 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS)
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 420/620
Network of spatially separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
DISTRICT
A portion of the Township, within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or
combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
DIVINATION PARLOR
Any establishment providing fortune-telling for consideration. Fortune-telling includes the
prediction by any means of what are claimed to be future events or influences on the life of
another, including but not limited to astrology and horoscopes, augury, phrenology, card
reading, including Tarot, and palmistry.
DRIP LINE
A generally circular line, the circumference of which is determined by the outer reaches of a
tree’s widest branching points.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT
A place of business so laid out that patrons can be accommodated while remaining in their
automobile.
DWELLING UNIT
A building or portion thereof providing one or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, and having no cooking or sanitary
facilities in common with any other dwelling unit.
EDUCATIONAL USE
Land or building specifically designed, arranged, and intended for the purpose of education.
Only the following types of schools shall be permitted: preschool, elementary and secondary
schools, either public or private; colleges, universities and junior colleges, and vocational
schools; excluding earth moving, trucking, heavy equipment, police or fire schools, and
related uses.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION
Buildings or structures and equipment erected and used for the purpose of transmission,
switching or transforming of electrical current between customers and the utility company
facilities, not including the storage of materials, trucks, repair facilities or housing of repair
crews.
EMPLOYEE OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a fulltime,
part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary,
wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment
on the premise, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04
ESCORT
A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for
another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 421/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish
escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE
A space which will remain dry during flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or
minor seepage. The structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
ESTABLISHMENT
Includes any of the following:
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; or
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to
any sexually oriented business; or
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented
business; or
The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
FAMILY
One or more persons, related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single
housekeeping unit and using cooking facilities and certain rooms in common; or not more
than three unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit and using cooking
facilities and certain rooms in common.
FCC
Federal Communications Commission.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
FLOOD
A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land areas from precipitation or the
overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
FLOODPLAIN
The low area adjoining and including any water or drainage course or body of water subject to
periodic flooding or overflow. The limits of a floodplain shall be those areas identified in the
current Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and accompanying maps prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), including all digital data developed as part of the
FIS. In the absence of such maps, the floodplain shall be determined through the mapping of
alluvial soils as determined by the current United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) soil survey.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduces or eliminates flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are
reasonably required to carry and discharge the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and FIS provided by FEMA.
In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundredyear
floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the center line of the stream and to 50 feet beyond the top of the bank of the stream on both
sides.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 422/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
FLOOR AREA or GROSS FLOOR AREA
The gross floor space of the building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating buildings. In particular, the floor area of a
building or buildings shall include:
Basement space.
All spaces other than basement space with structural headroom of seven feet six inches
or more.
Interior balconies and mezzanines.
Enclosed or roofed porches or terraces or other roofed spaces.
Attic spaces (with or without a finished floor) providing structural headroom of seven feet
six inches or more is available over 50% of such attic space.
Accessory buildings.
However, the "floor area" shall not include:
a. Elevator shafts, stairwells, bulkheads, accessory water tanks or cooling
towers.
b. Terraces, breezeways, uncovered steps, or open space.
GARAGE, PRIVATE
An accessory building or part of a principal building used for the storage of motor vehicles
owned and used solely by the owner or tenant of the premises.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
GARAGE, PUBLIC
A building other than a private garage, one or more stories in height, used solely for the
commercial storage, service or repair of motor vehicles.
GARDEN APARTMENT/LOW-RISE APARTMENT
A multifamily building, not exceeding three stories in height, containing three or more
separate dwelling units in which no more than six dwelling units have common hallways and
entrances.
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION
A structure, building, or area of land or any portion thereof that is used for the sale of gasoline
or any other motor vehicle fuel and oil and/or other lubricating substances, which may or may
not include facilities for lubricating, washing, sale of accessories, and otherwise servicing
motor vehicles, but not including the painting and/or body work thereof or the sale of new or
used automobiles. Any business or industry dispensing gasoline only for its own use and
vehicles will not be deemed to be a gasoline service station.
GOVERNING BODY
The Board of Supervisors of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
GRADE
The arithmetic mean of the maximum and minimum finished ground elevation adjoining the
buildings.
GRADE PLANE
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 423/620
A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at
exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the
reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building
and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet from the building, between the
building and a point six feet from the building.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
GROWER/PROCESSOR
A person, including a natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other
entity, or any combination thereof, which holds a permit issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health to grow and process medical marijuana. The term does not include a
health care medical marijuana organization under Chapter 19 of the Medical Marijuana Act.[3]
[Added 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
GUEST HOUSE
An accessory single-family dwelling on a lot available for short-term rental.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
HEDGEROW
A linear plant community dominated by trees and/or shrubs. Hedgerows often occur along
roads, fence lines or property lines, or between fields, and may occur naturally or be specially
planted (e.g., as a windbreak).
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING
The building's vertical measurement from the grade plane of the ground surrounding the
building to a point midway between the highest and lowest points of the roof, provided that
chimneys, spires, towers, elevators, tanks, and similar projections shall not be included in
calculating the height.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
HEIGHT OF SIGNS OR OTHER STRUCTURES
The vertical distance measured from the grade at the front of the structure or sign to its
highest point. The highest point in the case of a sign shall include the supporting structure.
HELIPORT
An area to accommodate landings, takeoffs, and storage of rotary-wing aircraft (helicopters)
with suitable space to allow development of service facilities.
HELISTOP
An area on a roof or on the ground to accommodate landings and takeoffs of rotary-wing
aircraft (helicopters) for the purpose of picking up and discharging passengers or cargo. Such
area shall have sufficient space to accommodate all required safety controls, but in no case
shall service facilities be provided.
HISTORICAL COMMISSION
The Historical Commission of Uwchlan Township; an advisory body charged with overseeing
the cataloguing of collections of historic Township records, documents, and memorabilia.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
A zoning district including historic resources which overlays the underlying zoning district.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
HISTORIC RESOURCE
Any structure that is shown on the Historic Resources Map and Inventory and defined within
§ 612.3 herein.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 424/620
HISTORIC RESOURCES MAP AND INVENTORY
A map and list adopted as part of this ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan, showing
historic resources and their respective classifications and descriptions.[4]
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06[5]]
HOME OCCUPATION, MINOR
Any lawful occupation conducted in a single-family building by the occupant as an incidental
use conforming to the standards of §§ 602 and 602.1. The shall be no exterior evidence of the
home occupation except the permitted sign.
HOME OCCUPATION, MAJOR
Any lawful occupation conducted in a single-family detached building and permitted
accessory structures by the occupant of the building as an incidental use as defined in
§ 602.2.c. and e and conforming to the standards of §§ 602, 602.1 and 602.2. There shall be
no exterior evidence of the home occupation except the permitted sign.
HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION
A nonprofit organization of homeowners or property owners, planned and operated under
Township-approved rules and regulations, for the purpose of administering to the needs of
residents or property owners through the maintenance of commonly owned property such as
open space and stormwater management facilities.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
HOSPITAL
Unless otherwise specified, the term "hospital" shall be deemed to include clinic, retirement
home, nursing home, convalescent home, and any other place for the diagnosis, treatment, or
other care of ailments, and shall be deemed to be limited to places for the diagnosis,
treatment, or other care of human ailments.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
HOTEL
A building or group of buildings containing individual rooms for rental, primarily for transients,
with common hallways for all rooms on the same floor.
HYDRIC SOILS
Any soil inventoried or described as hydric or as a soil with hydric inclusions according to the
current United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) soil survey.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
The floodplain area specifically identified in this ordinance as being inundated by the onehundred-
year flood.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE
The percentage of lot area covered by any and all impervious surfaces.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it prevents or is
resistant to infiltration of water, including but not limited to structures such as roofs, buildings
and storage sheds; other solid, paved or concrete areas such as streets, driveways,
sidewalks, parking lots, patios, paver areas, swimming pools (including the water surface) and
tennis or other paved courts; or athletic playfields comprised of synthetic turf materials. For
the purposes of determining compliance with this ordinance, compacted soils or stone
surfaces used for vehicle parking and movement shall be considered impervious. Surfaces
that were designed to allow infiltration (i.e., areas of porous pavement) will be considered on
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 425/620
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
a.
b.
c.
a case-by-case basis by the Township, based on appropriate documentation and condition of
the material.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
INN
A commercial facility for the housing and feeding of guests.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
JUNKYARD
A lot, land, or structure, or parts thereof used for the collection, storage, dismantling, salvage
or sale of used and discarded materials, including, but not limited to, wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal, or other scrap, salvage, or discarded material, vehicles or machinery. The deposit or
storage of two or more unlicenced, uninspected, wrecked, or disabled vehicles shall be
deemed to be a junkyard.
KENNEL
The use of land, buildings and/or structures for the purpose of trading, breeding, boarding,
training or grooming customary household pets for compensation, or the possession or
maintenance of six or more dogs that are more than six months old for any reason, on a
single lot or contiguous lots under single ownership or lease.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
LABORATORY
A building or group of buildings in which are located the facilities for scientific research,
investigation, testing, and experimentation, but not including the manufacture of products for
sale.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for
any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless
of the number of occupants or tenure; or
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between
or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the
purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or
other features.
A subdivision of land.
LIGHTING
The illumination required for commercial, industrial, or multifamily uses, through the use of
high pressure sodium lighting fixtures unless otherwise approved by the Township.
DIFFUSED
That form of lighting wherein the light passes from the source through a translucent cover
or shade.
DIRECT or FLOOD
That form of lighting wherein the source is visible and the light is distributed directly from
it to the object to be illuminated.
INDIRECT
That form of lighting wherein the light source is entirely hidden, the light being projected
to a suitable reflector from which it is reflected to the object to be illuminated.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 426/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
LOADING SPACE
A space, accessible from a street or way, in a building or on a lot, for the temporary use of
vehicles, while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LODGING HOUSE
See "rooming house."
LOT
A tract or parcel of land, regardless of size, held in single or joint ownership, not necessarily a
lot or lots shown on a duly recorded map, which is occupied or capable of being occupied by
buildings, structures, and accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged,
designed, required, which is intended for transfer of ownership, use, lease, improvement or
for development, regardless of how it is conveyed. The term "lot" shall also mean parcel, plot,
site, or any similar term.
LOT AREA
That portion of a lot or parcel of land within all bounding property lines on which a building or
building and any accessory building or buildings are or may be located. The term "lot area"
when used herein in the determination or calculation of permitted development or its intensity,
shall include required yard and setback areas (except when and to the extent they are also
included in 1 through 4 below), but shall not include:
Steeply sloped areas more than 1,000 square feet in area and having a slope in excess
of 15% measured over three or more two-foot contour lines established by field survey.
Floodplains as defined in § 510.3.a hereof or wetlands as determined by the criteria
promulgated from time to time by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
In the case of flag lots only, portions of the lot which are not of the required width.
Existing street rights-of-way.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Stormwater management basins, except basins and berms serving only the individual lot
on which they are located.
The terms "lot size," "square footage" and similar terms used in the Zoning Ordinance in the
above referenced zoning districts to describe the minimum land area required for a lot shall
have the same meaning as "lot area."
LOT, CORNER
The lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersecting streets, or at the point of
abrupt change in direction of a single street, the interior angle of which is not greater than
135°.
LOT, INTERIOR
A lot (e.g., flag lot) which does not adjoin a street but is connected thereto by an access strip
of required minimum width. Minimum lot area and other dimensional requirements shall be
those of the applicable zoning district. [Note: No more than two contiguous interior lots shall
be formed. The creation of such lots shall be minimized and limited to those circumstances
dictated by the configuration of the site; in general, interior lots shall not be considered an
acceptable site design alternative to the creation of an interior residential street. Also, in no
case will more than one tier of interior lots be permitted behind those lots whose entire or
substantially entire lot width fronts on a street.]
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
LOT LINE
Any line dividing one lot from another.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 427/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE
A lot having frontage on two parallel or nearly parallel streets. A minimum setback of 75 feet
shall be provided from the rear lot line or rear road right-of-way line to the principal structure
on the lot. Accessory buildings and structures shall have a setback from both road frontages
equal to the normal front yard setback required for the district or approved for the subdivision.
Only structures permitted under § 601.2 shall be placed in the required front yard setback
area or reverse front yard setback for accessory structures.
LOT, THROUGH
An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
LOT WIDTH
The width measured at the building setback line between side lot lines and parallel to the front
lot line but in no case shall the street frontage be less than 1/2 of the required lot width.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, floodresistant
partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in
violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this ordinance.[6]
MASSAGE PARLOR
An establishment that meets all of the following criteria:
Manipulative exercises are performed using the hands and/or a mechanical or bathing
device on a person(s) skin other than the face or neck by another person(s) in
consideration of certain monetary compensation; and
The person conducting the manipulative exercises (massage) is not licensed as a health
care professional or a licensed massage therapist by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or is related to the person receiving the massage by blood, adoption,
marriage or court-ordered guardianship; and
The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital or nursing home or an office
of a medical doctor or chiropractor; and
The massages are conducted within private or semiprivate rooms; and
The use is not clearly a customary and incidental accessory use to a permitted exercise
club or to a school or college athletic program.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Marijuana for certified medical use as set forth in the Medical Marijuana Act.[7]
[Added 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACT
Act 16 of 2016.[8]
[Added 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
MICROWAVE ANTENNA
A ground based reflector antenna, together with its pedestal and any other attachments and
parts thereof, commonly referred to as a dish shaped antenna, used or intended to receive
radio or electromagnetic waves from an overhead satellite. This shall include all microwave
receiving antennas. Wherever the word "dish" appears, it shall mean any microwave receiving
antenna.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 428/620
MID-RISE APARTMENT
A detached multifamily building three to five stories in height with access to all dwelling units
from one or more common entrances and which has a common hallway for all the dwelling
units on the same floor.
[Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
MINOR REPAIR
The placement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or
change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting
the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas,
oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of
assembly contained in one unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit
capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and
constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT
A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and
other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is
leased by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the
placement of mobile homes for nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
MODIFICATION OR MODIFY
The improvement, upgrade or expansion of existing wireless communications facilities or
base stations on an existing wireless support structure or the improvement, upgrade or
expansion of the wireless communications facilities located within an existing equipment
compound, if the improvement, upgrade, expansion or replacement does not substantially
change the physical dimensions of the wireless support structure.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
MONOPOLE
A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure, designed and erected on the ground
or on top of a structure, to support communications antennae and connecting appurtenances.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
MOTEL
A building or group of buildings containing individual rooms or apartment accommodations
primarily for transients, each of which is provided with a separate exterior entrance and a
parking space, and offered principally for rental and use by motor vehicle travelers. The term
"motel" includes, but is not limited to, auto courts, motor courts, motor inns, motor lodges, or
roadside hotels.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC)
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended, 53 P.S.
§§ 10101 et seq.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
MUNICIPALITY
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 429/620
The Township of Uwchlan, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL CONDITION
In the context of a lot or lots, the condition of the lot or lots prior to development as
determined by the plans of the required environmental impact assessment (EIA) report
identifying the following: geological, topographical, soil, hydrological, biological, and land use
conditions of the lot or lots.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of the construction commenced on or after September 30, 1980,
and includes any subsequent improvements thereto.
NONCONFORMING LOT
A lot, the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this
Zoning Ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which
it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING
A structure or building, or part thereof, which does not conform to the applicable provisions or
requirements of the district in which it is located, either at the time of enactment of this
ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto, where such building or structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE
A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply with the applicable use
provisions in this Zoning Ordinance or in any amendments heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or
amendment, or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by
reason of annexation. Provided, however, that no existing use shall be deemed
nonconforming solely because of the existence of less than the required number of off-street
parking spaces.
NONTOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NONTOWER WCF)
A nontower wireless communications facility, including, but not limited to, antennae and
related equipment. Nontower WCF shall not include support structures for antennae and
related equipment.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
NUDE MODEL STUDIO
Any place where a person who appears seminude, in a state of nudity, or who displays
specified anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form
of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the
State of Pennsylvania or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by
public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation or which is authorized to award a recognized academic or
vocational certificate or accreditation; and where in order to participate in a class a student
must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; or in a structure that has no sign
visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or
seminude person is available for viewing.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY
The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernible turgid state.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 430/620
OBJECT
Man-made articles such as sculptures, monuments, boundary markers, statuary, and
fountains, but not including trees and hedgerows.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
OLD FIELD
An area undergoing natural succession, characterized by the presence of shrubs and small
trees (seedlings) whose branches do not form a complete or nearly complete aerial canopy.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a onepercent
chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
OPEN SPACE
Unoccupied space open to the sky and on the same lot with the principal use.
OPEN SPACE MANAGEMENT PLAN
A plan which provides for the long-term management, over time, of private, public, or common
open space, in accordance with § 617 of this ordinance.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
OPEN SPACE OPTION
A use in a residential use district, which may be a conditional use or a use by right, that may
be granted to a landowner or developer which would enable said landowner or developer to
subdivide a parcel of land into lots for building purposes which do not conform to the minimum
requirements of the district, provided open space is included in the plan designed for passive
or active recreational purposes.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
PARKING LOT
An off-street hard surfaced area designed solely for the parking of motor vehicles, including
driveways, passageways, and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto.
PARKING SPACE
An off-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle and measuring a minimum
of 9.5 feet by 20 feet, exclusive of driveways, and passageway, and maneuvering space
appurtenant thereto; except in the case where parked vehicles would abut a grass strip of at
least four feet in width, in which case the parking space may be 9.5 feet by 18 feet. Up to 50%
of the parking spaces shall be 10 feet wide if deemed necessary at the sole discretion of the
Board.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
PARTY WALL
A wall or an interior lot line used or adopted for joint services between two buildings.
PERMITTED USE
A use allowed by right in a particular zoning district as established by this ordinance.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLANNED LIFE CARE FACILITY
An institutional use designed, constructed and used to accommodate the housing and life
care needs of seniors with a minimum age of 62. The use shall include: a) assisted living units
designed for seniors whose physical condition requires assistance with daily living tasks
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 431/620
and/or who are in need of memory support or similar cognitive-assistance services; and b)
independent living units specially designed to meet the physical challenges of aging seniors
who need some accommodations, but who are not yet in need of the level of care provided in
an assisted living facility. A planned life care facility shall offer residents amenities and
services such as meals, transportation, laundry, cleaning services and physical therapy
services. The facility shall include rehabilitative, leisure and recreational facilities such as a
club room, a card room, a game room, a craft room, a fitness room, library and an indoor or
outdoor pool.
[Added 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of Uwchlan Township; Chester County, Pennsylvania.
PLANTING, SCREEN
A strip of planting sufficient to provide an effective screen, having an initial height of not less
than five feet, the ultimate heights and width of which shall be not less than 10 feet, and
consisting of not less than 50% evergreen vegetation distributed throughout the length of the
strip.
PNDI
The Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory; provides an inventory of threatened and/or
endangered animal and plant species.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
PRIVACY FENCE
A privacy fence is a fence at least five feet in height which is installed in the side yard of a
garden lot structure between the garden lot structure and an adjacent dwelling which is
intended to predominantly shield views from the adjacent property.
PUBLIC HEARING
A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Board of Supervisors, the Planning
Commission, or the Zoning Hearing Board, intended to inform and obtain public comment,
prior to taking action in accordance with this ordinance.
PUBLIC MEETING
A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986, P.L. 1988, known as the
"Sunshine Act" (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.).
PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township, stating the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30
days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing. Where the hearing to be held will include consideration of a proposed zoning
amendment to the Zoning Map, then such proposed amendments must be additionally
noticed by the posting along the perimeter of the effected tract at least one week prior to the
date of hearing.
RARE, THREATENED, ENDANGERED (RTE) SPECIES SITES
Sites which have been identified on the PNDI, or the Chester County Natural Areas Inventory,
as possessing floral or faunal species of concern or sites in which federally and/or staterecognized
RTE species of flora and/or fauna are present.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
RECREATION, ACTIVE
Those recreational pursuits which require physical alteration to the area in which they are
performed. Such areas are intensively used and include, but are not limited to, playgrounds,
ball courts and fields, and swimming pools.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 432/620
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) not more than 400 square feet, measured at
the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light-duty truck; (iv) not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
RECREATION, PASSIVE
Recreational pursuits which can be carried out with little alteration or disruption to the area in
which they are performed. Such uses include, but are not limited to, hiking, biking and
picnicking.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The one-hundred-year-flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REHABILITATION
The process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which
makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of
the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
REPETITIVE LOSS
Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals
or exceeds 25% of the market.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a street, crosswalk, or for other public or
semipublic purposes.
RIPARIAN
Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent to the banks of a stream or
other body of water.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
RIPARIAN SETBACK AND BUFFER AREA
An undeveloped area of land adjacent to a body of water and wherein existing or new
vegetation is located and maintained to protect the integrity of stream channels and
shorelines, to reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by trapping, filtering, and
converting sediments, nutrients, and other chemicals, and to supply food, cover and thermal
protection to fish and other aquatic species and wildlife. The buffer is 50 feet in width
generally parallel to any permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, creek, lake, pond,
one-hundred-year floodplain, or wetland (as determined by the criteria promulgated from time
to time by the United States Army Corps of Engineers); measured outward from either the top
of the stream or other bank, edge of the lake, pond or wetlands, or from the boundary of the
one-hundred-year floodplain associated therewith (whichever yields the greater buffer width).
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
ROOMING HOUSE
An owner-occupied building or parts thereof occupied by three or more persons for living and
sleeping purposes. The term "rooming house" includes the terms "boardinghouse," "lodging
house," and "bed-and-breakfast inn" with six bedrooms or less.
ROW HOUSE
See "townhouse."
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 433/620
a.
b.
a.
b.
c.
SEMIDETACHED BUILDING
See "building, semidetached."
SEMINUDE or IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION
The state of dress in which clothing partially or transparently covers or exposes specified
anatomical areas.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
ON-SITE
Any structure designed to biochemically treat sewage within the boundaries of an
individual lot.
OFF-SITE
A sanitary sewage collection system in which sewage is carried from individual lots, by a
system of pipes, to a central treatment and disposal facility.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER
A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for
any form of consideration:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite
sex; or
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one
or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
Any variation on the activity popularly denominated as "mud wrestling."
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motion-picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter
center, or tattoo or body piercing or divination parlor. Sexually oriented business shall also be
termed herein "adult entertainment uses" and said terms are used interchangeably herein.
SHED
An accessory building, with or without a foundation, containing less than 120 square feet, with
a maximum dimension of 12 feet in length or width, not for storage of passenger vehicles or
trucks.
SHOPPING CENTER
A group of stores, four or more in number, planned and designed as an integrated unit with
off-street parking provided on the property as an integral part of the unit. Shopping center
shall also mean a single store or a group of stores less than four in number where the total
gross floor area of the store or stores exceeds 40,000 square feet.
SIGN
Any structure, building, wall, or other outdoor surface, or any device or part thereof, which
displays or includes any letter, work, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, or other
representations used for announcement, direction, identification, or advertisement. The word
"sign" includes the word "billboard" but does not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any
nation, state, city or other political unit, nor public traffic or directional signs.
SIGN, ADVERTISING
A sign which directs attention to a service, business, profession or industry conducted, sold,
manufactured or assembled or offered for sale elsewhere than upon the premises where the
sign is displayed.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 434/620
a.
b.
c.
SIGN, BUSINESS
A sign which directs attention to a business, profession or industry conducted on the premises
or to products sold, manufactured or assembled upon the same premises upon which it is
displayed. Signs offering premises for sale, rent, or development, or advertising the services
of professionals or building trades during construction or alteration shall be deemed a
business sign.
SIGN OR BILLBOARD, OFF-PREMISES OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
A sign which contains a commercial message and which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is located.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
SINGLE-FAMILY GARDEN LOT DEVELOPMENT
A development consisting of either attached or detached single-family garden lots which,
through flexible design standards, is designed to allow for maximum use of the individual lot
areas. Such design flexibility shall include reduced internal road rights-of-way widths, the use
of alleys or parking drives, reduced lot areas and yard setbacks. When alleys are used for
vehicular access to the dwelling units, parking on the internal roadway shall be restricted to
one side.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION
A use permitted with special permission, granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, to occupy and
use land and/or a building for specific purposes in accordance with this ordinance when such
use is not permitted by right.
SPECIAL PERMIT
A special approval which is required for hospitals, nursing homes, jails, and new
manufactured home parks and subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing
parks, when such development is located in all, or a designated portion, of a floodplain.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS
Human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks, female breast(s) below a point immediately
above the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
Any of the following:
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or
female breasts; or
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in adult
arcade and adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store above.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY
Camouflaging methods that are used in the installation of wireless communications towers,
antennae and other facilities which render them more visually appealing or blend the
proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it
minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited to,
architecturally screened roof-mounted antennae, building-mounted antennae painted to
match the existing structure and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, flag poles
and light poles.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 435/620
STEEP SLOPE
Those land areas with slopes of 15% or greater; the methodology for delineation of steep
slope is established in § 618 of this ordinance.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
STORY
That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor next above it or if there be no floor above it, then the space between any floor and the
ceiling next above it. A basement shall be deemed to be a story if it does not meet the criteria
for being below grade. Each level of a split level building excluding cellars, shall be
considered a half story.
STORY, HALF
Any space immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing, with or without a
finished floor, where the clear height of not more than 75% of such space has structural
headroom of seven feet and six inches or more. Any space which has more than 75% of its
area having such headroom shall be deemed to be a full story.
STREET
A public (dedicated) or private (undedicated) right-of way excluding driveways, intended for
use as means of vehicular or pedestrian circulation to provide access to more than one lot.
The word "street" includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway,
highway, lane, alley, service street, and road or similar terms.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on land or water, whether
or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be
exempted.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Uwchlan Township, Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
SUBSIDIZED ELDERLY APARTMENT UNIT
A dwelling unit for rental designed and intended for occupancy by senior citizens with a
minimum age of 62 pursuant to a program of housing subsidization for the rental costs under
the auspices of an agency of the county, commonwealth, or United States government.
[Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure
to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, total cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 436/620
a.
b.
a.
b.
a.
b.
substantial damage (or repetitive loss when repetitive loss language is used) regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than 10%, or by the
height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna
not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed
wireless communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein if necessary
to avoid interference with existing antennas; or
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which has already been
extended by more than 10% of its originally approved height or by the height of one
additional antenna array.
SWIMMING POOL
PRIVATE
Any reasonably permanent pool or open tank, not located within a completely enclosed
building, and containing, or normally capable of containing, water to a depth at any point
greater than 24 inches. Farm ponds and/or lakes are not included, provided that
swimming was not the primary purpose for their construction.
PUBLIC
A public bathing place shall mean any open or enclosed place, open to the public for
amateur and professional swimming or recreative bathing, whether or not a fee is
charged for admission or for the use thereof.
TATTOO OR BODY PIERCING PARLOR
This shall mean and refer to any establishment where the indelible marking or nonmedical
piercing of a person's skin for ornamental purposes or to facilitate the insertion of ornamental
objects is performed for a fee or other consideration provided that a jewelry sales use
involving incidental and accessory ear piercing shall not be considered a body piercing parlor.
TERRACED PARKING FACILITIES
A multilevel facility used for the purpose of parking passenger motor vehicles which is formed
by offsetting successive levels of the facility such that portions of each successive level (or
the entire level) form a roof used for the purposes of parking motor vehicles.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWER-BASED WCF)
Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting one or more antennae, including, but
not limited to, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light
poles. DAS hub facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
TOWN CENTER
A town center development is situated between areas of development, either existing or
proposed, of residential or nonresidential, and shall function as a transitional use to provide
traditional retail, office, culture, entertainment and recreational facilities for employees, users
and residents of the PCID and surrounding communities, and to provide certain types of
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 437/620
residential uses proximate to the retail, office, cultural, entertainment and recreational
facilities.
TOWN CENTER AGE-RESTRICTED APARTMENT UNIT
A dwelling unit for rental at current market rates permitted only within a Town Center and
intended for occupancy by senior citizens with a minimum age of 55 years old. Town Center
age-restricted apartment units shall have two parking spaces for every unit at a minimum.
[Added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
TOWNHOUSE
An attached building arranged, designed, and intended for, and occupied exclusively by one
family; each such building separated by unpierced fire walls and each building having at least
one separate entrance from the outside. No more than five attached buildings (including end
buildings) shall be permitted in a townhouse group.
TOWNHOUSE/RETAIL
An attached building arranged, designed, and intended for, and occupied as one or two
dwelling units or as one dwelling unit with a retail use on the first floor.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Uwchlan.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
TOWNSHIP AUTHORITY or MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
An authority, created by the Board of Supervisors, responsible for, but not limited to, the
construction, operation, and/or maintenance of water storage and distribution, and/or sewage
collection and treatment facilities.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
A duly registered professional engineer employed by the Township, or engaged as a
consultant thereto, or his duly authorized representative.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
TOWNSHIP SOLICITOR
The attorney appointed by the Board of Supervisors, his duly authorized representative, or
another attorney-at-law appointed by the Board of Supervisors to represent the Township.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
TREE PROTECTION ZONE
An area surrounding a tree or tree mass in which no construction, construction activity or
other disturbance shall take place.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999
applicable to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the Municipality, a
third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial
buildings, the code adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International
Building Code (IBC), by reference, which are revised every three years, as the construction
standard applicable with the Commonwealth floodplain construction. For coordination
purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and
the IBC.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
USABLE OPEN SPACE
An unenclosed portion of the area of a lot which is not devoted to driveway, parking spaces,
or principal structures, including common buildings such as shelters, pavilions, or recreational
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 438/620
a.
b.
structures centrally located, accessible to occupants of the building or buildings.
USE
The specific purpose for which land, sign, structure, or building is designed, arranged,
intended, or for which it may be occupied or maintained, or any activity, occupation, business,
or operation which may be carried on thereon or therein. The term "permitted use" or its
equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.
VARIANCE
An exception, granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, from the terms and conditions of this
ordinance where literal enforcement would create unnecessary hardship as a result of
peculiar or unique conditions, or circumstance pertaining only to the lot in question, and when
granting of the exception would maintain the spirit of the ordinance and original intent and not
be contrary to the public interest.
WAGERING AND GAMBLING FACILITIES
A commercial use which provides facilities or at which persons assemble for the purpose of
any activity which involves lawful gambling or wagering, including, without limitation, those
facilities and activities for pari-mutuel wagering on thoroughbred and/or harness horse races
remote from any race track and governed by and licensed pursuant to the Race Horse
Industry Reform Act, the Act of December 17, 1981, P.L. 435, as it shall be amended from
time to time, 4 P.S. § 325.101 et seq. Gambling and wagering shall include any activity, game,
or device at which money or other valuable things may be played for, or staked or betted upon
and in which, by the rules of the activity, game, or device a consideration is paid by the player
or participant and a reward is paid to players or participants as a consequence of some
element of chance. A commercial use otherwise permitted shall not constitute a gambling or
wagering solely on account of the installation of facilities and devices pursuant to the State
Lottery Law, the Act of November 21, 1996, as amended, 72 P.S. § 3761-101 et seq.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
WATERCOURSE
A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined bed and banks, whether natural
or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth, as determined by the criteria promulgated
from time to time by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
WATER SYSTEM
ON-SITE
A system for supplying and distributing water to a single dwelling or other structure from
a source located on the same lot.
OFF-SITE
A public or private system for supplying and distributing water from a common source to
buildings and other structures, installed and constructed in accordance with the
specifications of Aqua Pennsylvania.
WETLANDS
Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and under normal conditions do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes,
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 439/620
bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands include all lands regulated as wetlands by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or the United States Army Corps of
Engineers. In the event there is a conflict between the definitions of these agencies, the more
restrictive definition shall apply.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
WIRELESS
Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular,
PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio signals.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF)
The set of equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers,
base stations, cabling and accessory equipment, used to provide wireless data and
telecommunications services. The term shall not include the wireless support structure.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE
A freestanding structure, such as a tower-based wireless communications facility, electrical
transmission tower, water tower or any other support structure that could support the
placement or installation of a wireless communications facility if approved by the Township.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
WOODLAND
A tree mass or plant community covering an area of 1/4 acre or more in which tree species
are dominant or codominant and the branches of the trees form a complete or nearly
complete aerial canopy. For the purposes of this ordinance, the extent of any woodland plant
community or any part thereof shall be measured from the outermost drip line of all the trees
in the community. Woodland shall include any area where timber has been harvested within
the previous three years and/or woodland disturbance has occurred within the previous three
years which would have met the definition of “woodland” prior to timbering or disturbance.
Woodlands do not include nursery stock, orchards, or old fields, except where natural
succession has been allowed to occur and where most naturally occurring trees are larger
than six inches dbh.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
WOODLAND DISTURBANCE
Any activity which alters the existing structure of a woodland or hedgerow. Alterations include
the cutting or removal of canopy trees, subcanopy trees, understory shrubs and vines, and
woody and herbaceous woodland floor species; also includes any activity which constitutes a
land disturbance (exposes soils, alters topography) within a woodland or hedgerow.
Woodland disturbance does not include the removal of vegetation that constitutes hazardous
condition(s) or the selective cutting or removal of invasive alien trees, shrubs, vines or
herbaceous species.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
YARD, FRONT
An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full-width of lot
and situated between the front line of the lot and the front line of the building projected to the
side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of
the building and the street right-of-way line. Covered porches, whether enclosed or
unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a
required front yard.
YARD, REAR
An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of
the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected
to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured between the rear line
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 440/620
of the lot and the rear line of the building. A building shall not extend into the required rear
yard.
YARD, SIDE
An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building situated between the building
and the side line of the lot and extending from the front line to the rear lot line shall be
deemed a side line. A building shall not extend into the required side yards.
YIELD PLAN
A plan that is developed for a parcel that is in compliance with all current zoning and
subdivision requirements. In developing such a plan the designer shall not use or assume the
granting of any variances or waivers except the 50% lot reduction allowed under § 609.1.c(3).
The final number of lots that are shown on the yield plan and approved by the Township
reviewing agencies shall be the number of lots permitted under the residential open space
option that proposes a reduction of lot size below 50% [see § 609.1c(3)(g)] or proposes the
use of in-ground on-site sewage disposal systems. [See § 609.1c(3)(a)].
ZONING ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER or ZONING OFFICER
The agent or official designated by the Board of Supervisors to administrate and enforce the
Zoning Ordinance of the Township.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
ZONING HEARING BOARD
The Zoning Hearing Board of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
ZONING MAP
The Official Zoning Map of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING ORDINANCE
The Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009, as may be amended from time to time.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 441/620
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 442/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
Editor's Note: The definition of “Board or Zoning Hearing Board,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
Editor’s Note: The Historic Resources Map and Inventory, and the Historic Resources Inventory
List, are included as attachments to this chapter.
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definitions of “historic structure” and “home
occupation,” which immediately followed.
Editor's Note: The definitions of “manufactured home” and “manufactured home park,” which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
Article 4. Zoning Map and Zoning Districts
§ 401. Official Zoning Map.
The Township is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which
together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of
this ordinance, together with all future notations, references, and amendments.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 443/620
401.1
[1]
401.2
401.3
a.
[2]
b.
c.
401.4
Identification of Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature
of the Board of Supervisors and attested to by the Secretary of that Board, together with the date
of the adoption of this ordinance.
Changing the Official Zoning Map.
If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,[1] as amended, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map
promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Board of Supervisors.
No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon
except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance or any state law, if applicable.
All changes shall be noted on the Official Zoning Map by date with a brief description of the
nature of the change.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Location of official map. The Official Zoning Map shall be located in a place, as designated by
the Board of Supervisors, and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land
and water areas in the Township, regardless of unofficial copies, which may have been made or
published from time to time.
Replacement of Official Zoning Map.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to
interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Board of Supervisors
may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official
Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in
the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the
original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereto.
The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signatures of the Board of Supervisors,
attested by the Secretary of the Board, and bearing the following words: "This is to certify that
this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of
Ordinance No. 94-11 of Uwchlan Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior
map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved together with all available
records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
§ 402. Classes of districts.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the Township is hereby divided into districts which shall be
designated as follows:
R-A Rural Agricultural
R-R Rural Residential
R-1 Low Density Residential District
R-2 Medium Density Residential District
PC Planned Commercial District
PC-2 Planned Commercial District
PIC Planned Industrial-Commercial District
PCID Planned Commercial Industrial Development District
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 444/620
403.1
403.2
403.3
[1]
403.4
501.1
a.
501.2
PI Planned Industrial District
FP Floodplain District (Overlay)
PSFD Planned Single Family Development (Overlay)
ROSO Residential Open Space Option (Overlay)
§ 403. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
Designation of district boundaries. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center
line of streets, highways, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, streams, existing lot lines, as they exist on
a recorded deed or plan of record in the County Recorder of Deeds' office, or Municipal boundary
lines shall be construed to follow such features indicated. Where boundaries are indicated as
being approximately perpendicular to the right-of-way line of a street, highway or alley, such
boundary shall be construed as being perpendicular thereto. Where a District boundary line does
not follow such a line, position is shown on said Zoning Map by reference to an ordinance
describing such lines or by a specific dimension expressing its distance, in feet, from a street rightof-
way line or other boundary line as indicated and running parallel thereto.
Determination of location of boundaries. Where physical or cultural features existing on the
ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or if uncertainty exists as to
the true location of a district boundary line in a particular instance, the Zoning Officer shall request
the Zoning Hearing Board to render its determination with respect thereto.
Overlay districts.
In the case of the Floodplain District, rules for interpretation of district boundaries are contained
in § 510.
In the case of planned single-family development, the provisions of § 613 shall apply.
In the case of the residential open space option, the provisions of § 609 shall apply.
Adult entertainment uses as defined herein shall be permitted only in the PI Planned Industrial
District as defined and regulated pursuant to § 509 of this ordinance. Any building containing an
adult entertainment use must be located, in its entirety, in conformance with the use, setback, and
separation distance regulations applicable to the adult entertainment use.[1]
[Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Adult Entertainment.
Article 5. District Regulations
§ 501. R-A Rural Agricultural District.
Purpose. The purpose of the R-A Rural Agricultural District is to reserve for future development,
through the continuance of predominantly agricultural uses. Any use permitted in this district by
right, special exception or condition and described in § 611 of this ordinance is subject to the
requirements set forth in § 611.
Permitted uses.
Agricultural uses, except intensive agriculture, and buildings, provided that any structures
used for the housing of three livestock, or for the housing of poultry, shall be located not less
than 200 feet from any lot line and shall be situated on a lot of not less than four acres; except
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 445/620
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
501.3
a.
b.
501.4
a.
b.
501.5
501.6
501.7
that for each livestock above three, one additional acre shall be provided (e.g., four livestock
= five acres, five livestock = six acres, etc.).
The sale of farm products, provided such products are produced on the property.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Public uses, structures or buildings owned or operated by the Township or an Authority
created by the Township, or an Authority of which the Township is a member, or any other
public use subsidized by the Township.
Churches.
Cemetery, provided that the parcel devoted to this use shall not be less than 20 acres.
Residential Open Space Option pursuant to § 609.
[Added 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-08]
Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use.
Private garages, carports or private parking areas pursuant to § 607.
Signs pursuant to § 606.
Private swimming pools.
Home occupations pursuant to § 602.
Other accessory uses, structures or buildings, provided they are clearly incidental to the
principal use.
Uses permitted by conditional use.
[Amended 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-08; 11-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-08]
Residential Open Space Option pursuant to § 609.1.
Stables housing three or more horses and dog kennels, provided they are situated no less
than 400 feet from any public right-of-way and adjoining property lines.
Uses permitted by special exception.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Educational uses, exclusive of correctional or penal institutions.
Private clubs for swimming, golf, riding, or other recreation, provided that the principal activity
shall not be one which is customarily carried on as a business, and further provided that all
services shall be for members and their guests only.
Minimum lot size.
On-Site Water and
On-Site Sewage
Disposal
Either Off-Site
Water or Off-Site
Sewage Disposal
Off-Site Water and
Sewage Disposal
a. Area (acres) 2 1 1/2 1
b. Width (feet) 200 175 150
Minimum yard dimensions.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 446/620
a.
b.
c.
501.8
502.1
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
502.2
a.
502.3
On-Site Water and
On-Site Sewage
Disposal
Either Off-Site
Water or Off-Site
Sewage Disposal
Off-Site Water and
Sewage Disposal
a. Front yard
(feet)
50 50 50
b. Each side yard
(feet)
35 30 25
c. Rear yard
(feet)
50 50 50
Maximum lot coverage and building height.
Maximum building coverage: 15%.
Impervious coverage: No lot shall be covered by more than 25% with impervious surface,
including but not limited to principal and accessory buildings, driveways and walkways, and
parking areas.
Maximum height of buildings and structures: 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
§ 502. R-R Rural Residential District.
Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Residential District is to provide areas within the Township
which can accommodate residents wishing to reside on large lot, low density development
maintaining rural characteristics. Any use permitted in this district by right, special exception or
condition and described in § 611 of this ordinance is subject to the requirements set forth in § 611.
Permitted uses.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Public uses, structures or buildings owned or operated by the Township or an Authority
created by the Township or an Authority which the Township is a member, or any other public
use subsidized by the Township.
Churches.
Cemetery, providing that the parcel devoted to this use shall not be less than 20 acres.
The sale of farm products, provided such products are produced on the property.
Agricultural uses, except intensive agriculture, and buildings provided that any structures
used for the housing of three livestock or for the housing of poultry shall be located not less
than 200 feet from any lot line and shall be situated on a lot of not less than four acres; except
that for each livestock above three, one additional acre shall be provided (e.g., four livestock
= five acres, five livestock = six acres, etc.).
Residential Open Space Option pursuant to § 609.
[Added 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-08]
Permitted accessory use located on the same lot with the permitted principal use.
Private garages, carports or private parking areas pursuant to § 607.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 447/620
b.
c.
d.
e.
a.
b.
c.
502.4
a.
b.
[1]
c.
502.5
502.6
502.7
Signs pursuant to § 606.
Private swimming pools.
Home occupations pursuant to § 602.
Other accessory uses, structures or buildings, provided they are clearly incidental to the
principal use.
Uses permitted by conditional use.
Residential Open Space Option pursuant to § 609.1.g.
[Amended 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-08]
Stables housing three or more horses and dog kennels, provided they are situated no less
than 400 feet from any public right-of-way and adjoining property lines.
Mobile home parks, provided proposed park has satisfied all requirements for mobile home
parks found in Article VII of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
[Added 11-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-08]
Uses permitted by special exception.
Educational uses, exclusive of correctional or penal institutions.
Private clubs for swimming, golf, riding, or other recreation, provided that the principal activity
shall not be one which is customarily carried on as a business, and further provided that all
services shall be for members and their guests only.
[1]Accessory uses, structures, and buildings not located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use.
Editor's Note: Former § 502.5.c, Hospitals, was repealed and former § 502.5.d was
redesignated as § 502.5.c 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06.
Minimum lot size.
On-Site Water and
On-Site Sewage
Disposal
Either Off-Site
Water or Off-Site
Sewage Disposal
Off-Site Water and
Sewage Disposal
a. Area 60,000 square feet 50,000 square feet 1 acre
b. Width
(feet)
175 160 150
Minimum yard dimensions.
On-Site Water and
On-Site Sewage
Disposal
Either Off-Site Water
or Off-Site Sewage
Disposal
Off-Site Water and
Sewage Disposal
a. Front yard
(feet)
50 50 50
b. Each side yard
(feet)
30 25 25
c. Rear yard
(feet)
50 50 50
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 448/620
a.
b.
c.
502.8
(1)
a.
502.9
503.1
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
503.2
a.
b.
503.3
Maximum lot coverage and building height.
Maximum building coverage: 15%.
Impervious coverage: No lot shall be covered by more than 25% with impervious surface,
including but not limited to principal and accessory buildings, driveways and walkways, and
parking areas.
Maximum height of buildings and structures: 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
Area and bulk regulations for churches, conditional uses and special exceptions.
[Added 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
All of the regulations set forth in §§ 502.6, 502.7 and 502.8 shall apply to churches,
conditional uses and special exceptions, except as follows:
Churches may have up to 60% impervious coverage and 20% building coverage as long
as the property has ingress and egress to a state highway which contains protected
turning lanes.
§ 503. R-1 Low Density Residential District.
Purpose. The purpose of the R-1 Residential District is to provide suitable areas for
neighborhoods of single-family home development at densities which are dependent upon the
degree to which any particular portion of the district is serviced with the off-site sewerage facilities
and off-site water facilities. Any use permitted in this district by right, special exception or condition
and described in § 611 of this ordinance is subject to the requirements set forth in § 611.
Permitted uses.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Agricultural uses, except intensive agriculture, and buildings, provided that any structures
used for the housing of three livestock or for the housing of poultry shall be located not less
than 200 feet from any lot line and shall be situated on a lot of not less than four acres; except
that for each livestock above three, one additional acre shall be provided (e.g., four livestock
= five acres, five livestock = six acres, etc.).
Cemetery, provided that the parcel devoted to this use shall not be less than 20 acres.
The sale of farm products, provided such products are produced on the property.
Public uses, structures or buildings owned or operated by the Township, a Municipal Authority
organized by the Township or an Authority of which the Township is a member, or any other
public use subsidized by the Township.
Churches.
Residential Open Space Option pursuant to § 609.
[Added 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-08]
Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use.
Private garages, carports or private parking areas pursuant to § 607.
Signs pursuant to § 606.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 449/620
c.
d.
e.
f.
a.
b.
c.
d.
503.4
a.
b.
c.
[1]
d.
503.5
503.6
503.7
Private swimming pools.
Home occupations pursuant to § 602.
Home occupations permitted within the HO-2 overlay pursuant to § 602.2.
[Amended 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-08]
Other accessory uses, structures or buildings, provided they are clearly incidental to the
principal use.
[Amended 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-08]
Uses permitted by conditional use.
Stables housing three or more horses and dog kennels, provided they are situated no less
than 400 feet from public right-of-way and adjoining property lines.
Residential Open Space Option pursuant to § 609.1.
[Amended 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-08]
Churches may increase impervious coverage up to 40%, provided stormwater controls and
landscaped buffers are designed to provide protection of abutting properties and will not
change the character of the neighborhood.
Planned Single-Family Development pursuant to § 613.
Uses permitted by special exception.
Public swimming pools.
Private clubs for swimming, golf, riding, gunning or other recreation, provided that the
principal activity shall not be one which is customarily carried on as a business, and further
provided that all services shall be for members and their guests only.
Educational uses, excluding correctional or penal institutions.
[1]Accessory uses, structures, and buildings not located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use.
Editor's Note: Former § 503.5.d, Hospitals, was repealed and former § 503.5.e was
redesignated as § 503.5.d 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06.
Minimum lot size.
On-Site Water and
Sewage Disposal
Either Off-Site Water
or Off-Site Sewage
Disposal
Off-Site Water and
Sewage Disposal
a. Area
(square feet)
60,000 45,000 30,000
b. Width
(feet)
200 150 125
Minimum yard dimensions.
On-Site Water and
Sewage Disposal
Either Off-Site Water
or Off-Site Sewage
Disposal
Off-Site Water and
Sewage Disposal
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 450/620
503.8
504.1
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
504.2
a.
b.
c.
d.
504.3
On-Site Water and
Sewage Disposal
Either Off-Site Water
or Off-Site Sewage
Disposal
Off-Site Water and
Sewage Disposal
a. Front yard
(feet)
50 50 50
b. Side yard
(feet)
30 25 20
c. Rear yard
(feet)
50 50 30
Maximum lot coverage and building height.
Maximum building coverage: 20%.
Impervious coverage: No lot shall be covered by more than 25% with impervious surface,
including, but not limited to principal and accessory buildings, driveways and walkways, and
parking areas.
Maximum height of buildings and structures: 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
§ 504. R-2 Medium Density Residential District.
Purpose. It is the purpose of the R-2 Medium Density Residential District to provide suitable
areas in the Township for higher densities of residential development in those portions of the
community adequately served by public water and sewer and to provide for such other uses as
are compatible with the higher density residential development. Any use permitted in this district
by right, special exception or condition and described in § 611 of this ordinance is subject to the
requirements set forth in § 611.
Permitted uses.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Single-family semidetached dwellings, provided that a minimum lot area of 20 acres is
provided.
Two-family detached dwellings, provided that a minimum lot area of 20 acres is provided.
Two-family semidetached dwellings, provided that a minimum lot area of 20 acres is provided.
Churches.
Public uses, structures or buildings owned or operated by the Township, a Municipal Authority
organized by the Township or an Authority of which the Township is a member, or any other
public use subsidized by the Township.
Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use:
Private garages, carports or private parking areas pursuant to § 607.
Signs pursuant to § 606.
Private swimming pools.
Home occupations pursuant to § 602.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 451/620
e.
a.
b.
c.
504.4
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
[1]
g.
504.5
504.6
504.7
Other accessory uses, structures or buildings, provided they are clearly incidental to the
principal use.
Uses permitted by conditional use.
Medical and dental clinics.
Business office buildings to be used only for the administrative functions of companies,
corporations, social or philanthropic organizations or societies and offices of accountants,
architects, brokers, engineers, lawyers and similar professions.
Neighborhood commercial uses, provided that such uses constitute the first floor, or part of
the first floor, of an apartment building and are designed to serve primarily the residents in the
immediate area within walking.
Uses permitted by special exception.
Townhouses with a twenty-acre minimum lot area pursuant to § 604.3.
Garden apartments with a twenty-acre minimum lot area pursuant to § 604.3.
Low-rise apartments pursuant to § 604.3.
Boarding and lodging houses; bed-and-breakfast inn.
Public swimming pools.
Educational and philanthropic uses, excluding correctional or penal institutions.
[1]Accessory uses, structures and buildings not located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use.
Editor's Note: Former § 504.5.g, Hospitals, was repealed and former § 504.5.h was
redesignated as § 504.5.g 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06.
Minimum lot size per building.
Single-Family
Detached
Single-Family
Semidetached
Two-Family
Detached
Two-Family
Semidetached
a. Area
(square feet)
20,000 12,000 24,000 20,000
b. Width
(feet)
100 60 120 100
Minimum yard dimensions.
Single-Family
Detached
Single-Family
Semidetached
Two-Family
Detached
Two-Family
Semidetached
a. Front yard
(feet)
50 50 50 50
b. Side yard
(feet)
15
(aggregate of
side yards 40
feet)
20
(aggregate of side
yards 40 feet)
20
(aggregate of
side yards 50
feet)
25
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 452/620
a.
b.
c.
504.8
(1)
(2)
a.
504.9
505.1
a.
b.
505.2
a.
b.
505.3
Single-Family
Detached
Single-Family
Semidetached
Two-Family
Detached
Two-Family
Semidetached
c. Rear yard
(feet)
50 50 50 50
Maximum lot coverage and building height.
Maximum building coverage: 30%.
Impervious coverage: No lot shall be covered by more than 35% with impervious surface,
including but not limited to principal and accessory buildings, driveways and walkways, and
parking areas.
Maximum height of buildings and structures: 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
Area and bulk regulations for churches and for conditional uses and uses by special exception.
All of the regulations set forth in §§ 504.6, 504.7 and 504.8 which pertain to single-family
detached shall apply to churches and to conditional uses and uses by special exception,
except as follows:
Each side yard shall be a minimum of 35 feet.
Churches may have an impervious coverage up to 60%.
§ 505. PC Planned Commercial District.
Purpose. The purpose of the PC Planned Commercial District is to provide and require unified
and organized arrangement of buildings (one per lot), service and parking areas, together with
adequate circulation and open space, all planned and designed as integrated units, in a manner
so as to provide and constitute efficient, safe, convenient, and attractive shopping areas. Any use
permitted in this district by right, special exception or condition and described in § 611 of this
ordinance is subject to the requirements set forth in § 611.
Review procedure.
In order to assure the satisfactory development of the Planned Commercial District, it shall be
required that the development plans be submitted to the Board of Supervisors under the
procedures established in this ordinance.
A development plan for the parcel being subdivided shall be prepared and submitted to the
Board of Supervisors showing the overall development scheme, including location, proposed
site layout, existing zoning, parking facilities, all adjacent highways, streets, and alleys with
traffic flow patterns, and a tentative list of the kind of establishments to be located on the site
and their floor areas. Also, preliminary architectural sketches, elevations, and engineering
plans showing proposed methods of water runoff control, type of sewage treatment, and
source of water supply.
Permitted uses.
Retail establishment for sale of dry goods, drugs, food, jewelry, variety and general
merchandise, hardware, household furnishings and supplies, instruments, electronic
appliances, including repair service.
Restaurant, tearoom, cafe, confectionery or other place serving food or beverages, provided
that no curb service shall be permitted.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 453/620
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
[1]
h.
a.
b.
c.
505.4
a.
b.
c.
505.5
a.
b.
505.6
Personal service shop, including barber, beauty salon, shoe repair, tailor, dressmaking, pickup
station for laundry and dry cleaning.
Passenger station for public transportation, bank, savings and loan association or other
financial institution, business or professional office, offices or office building for administrative,
executive and professional activity, and similar activities involving the performance or
rendering of professional services, such as mortician, the sale of real estate and business
office, including the showing of samples, sale promotion and demonstration of equipment;
provided, however, that no merchandise shall be warehoused on the premises for sale,
exchange or delivery thereon, and further provided that nothing herein precludes the sale or
manufacturer's representatives from arranging for the sale of merchandise manufactured,
fabricated or warehoused at, or delivered to, locations outside of the PC Planned Commercial
District.
Automatic self-service laundry and dry-cleaning establishment with certificates of approval by
the public health agency having jurisdiction, with regard to waste disposal, and by the Fire
Marshall, with regard to compliance with all safety regulations.
Churches.
Public uses, structures or buildings owned or operated by the Township, a Municipal Authority
organized by the Township or an Authority of which the Township is a member.
Dispensary, provided that such use shall not be permitted closer than 1,000 linear feet from a
school or day-care center, and subject to all applicable requirements of the Uwchlan Township
Zoning Ordinance and the Medical Marijuana Act.[1]
[Added 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use.
Off-street parking pursuant to § 607.
Signs pursuant to § 606.
Other accessory uses, structures, or buildings, provided such are clearly incidental to the
principal use.
Uses permitted by conditional use.
Shopping centers pursuant to § 605, but excluding gasoline service stations.
[Amended 10-25-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13]
Any other use as determined by the Board of Supervisors to be of the same general character
as the permitted uses.
Hotel, provided that the same shall be constructed within 300 feet of and with exclusive
access onto a divided, arterial highway.
Uses permitted by special exception.
[Amended 10-25-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13]
Automobile court or motel, indoor theater, bowling lanes or other similar place of indoor
recreation.
Living quarters for a proprietor, building manager, caretaker or watchman, if employed on the
premises, as an accessory use within a principal building.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 454/620
c.
d.
a.
b.
505.7
a.
(1)
(2)
b.
c.
d.
505.8
a.
b.
(1)
c.
505.9
506.1
A private-use helistop as an accessory use to a permitted principal use subject to Planning
Commission review and recommendation and conformance to the general standards
prescribed in § 610.
Accessory uses, structures, or buildings not located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use.
Minimum yard dimensions.
Area: one acre.
Width: 200 feet.
Minimum yard dimensions.
Front yard: minimum of 50 feet.
Each side yard:
Minimum of 50 feet, except when an agricultural or residential district is adjacent to the
side yard, in which case the side yard setback shall be 100 feet.
When a mutual agreement is subscribed to by adjoining commercial property owners, no
side yard shall be required where two commercial uses adjoin side by side; however, in
no case shall common walls be permitted between properties of separate ownership. In
the case of such a series of adjoining structures on lots of single and separate ownership
abutting and paralleling a public right-of-way, an unobstructed passage of at least 20 feet
in width shall be provided at grade level at intervals not more than 400 feet apart.
Rear yard: minimum of 50 feet, except when an agricultural or residential district is adjacent to
the rear yard, in which case the rear yard setback shall be 100 feet.
Provided that, anything to the contrary contained in this § 505.8 not withstanding, the
minimum required side or rear yard where a hotel use adjoins a multifamily dwelling use shall
be 50 feet.
Maximum lot coverage and building height.
Maximum building coverage: 40%.
Maximum impervious coverage: No lot three net acres or larger shall be covered by more
than 65% of impervious surface, including but not limited to principal and accessory buildings,
driveways and walkways, and parking areas. Lots three acres or less may have up to 75%
impervious coverage.
[Amended 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
Maximum height of buildings and structures: 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
Buildings over two stories in height shall be sprinklered, and shall have a standpipe, in
accordance with the Uwchlan Township Building Code.
§ 506. PC-2 Planned Commercial District.
Purpose. The purpose of the PC-2 Planned Commercial District is to provide and require unified
and organized arrangement of buildings, service and parking areas, together with adequate
circulation and open space, all planned and designed as integrated units, in a manner so as to
provide and constitute efficient, safe, convenient and attractive shopping areas, offices, hotels and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 455/620
[1]
a.
b.
506.2
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
506.3
a.
b.
c.
506.4
other appropriate uses. It is also the intent that areas zoned PC-2 be located within one mile from
a limited access highway entrance and/or exit via existing state highways and that such areas
have frontage on a minimum of two state highways classified as major streets in § 502.3 of the
Uwchlan Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Public water shall be in
accordance with Aqua Pennsylvania specifications public and sewers shall be in accordance with
UTMA specifications except that temporary on-site sewage shall be permitted until connection to
public facilities is available. Any use permitted in this district by right, special exception or
condition and described in § 611 of this ordinance is subject to the requirements set forth in § 611.
[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Review procedures.
In order to assure the satisfactory development of the PC-2 Planned Commercial District,
development plans shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors under the procedures
established in the ordinance.
A development plan for the parcel being subdivided and/or developed shall be prepared and
submitted to the Board of Supervisors showing the overall development scheme, including
location, proposed site layout, parking facilities, all adjacent highways, streets, and alleys with
traffic flow patterns, and a tentative list of the kind of establishments to be located on the site
and their approximate floor areas. Also, preliminary architectural sketches, elevations and
engineering plans showing proposed methods of water control, type of sewage treatment, and
a source of water supply, shall be required.
Permitted uses.
Retail establishment for sale of dry goods, drugs, food, jewelry, variety, and general
merchandise, hardware, household furnishings and supplies, instruments, electronic
appliances, including repair service.
Restaurant, tearoom, cafe, confectionery or other place serving food or beverage, provided
that no curb service shall be permitted.
Personal service shop, including barber shop, beauty salon, shoe repair, tailor, dressmaking,
pickup station for laundry and dry cleaning.
Passenger station for public transportation, bank, savings and loan associations or other
financial institution, business or professional office, offices or office building for administrative,
executive and professional activity, hotel, and similar activities involving the performance or
rendering of professional services, such as mortician, the sale of samples, sale promotion and
demonstration of equipment; provided, however, that no merchandise shall be warehoused on
the premises for sale, exchange or delivery thereon and further provided that nothing herein
preclude the sale of merchandise manufactured, fabricated or warehoused at, or delivered to
locations outside the PC-2 Planned Commercial District.
Multiple principal uses shall be permitted on a tract of land in a PC-2 District, provided that
each principal use is otherwise permitted and only one principal use shall be permitted per lot.
Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use.
Off-street parking pursuant to § 607, except as provided for in § 506.5.b(3).
Signs pursuant to § 606.
Other accessory uses, structures, or buildings, provided such are clearly incidental to the
principal use.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 456/620
a.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
b.
506.5
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
506.6
a.
b.
506.7
Uses permitted by conditional use.
Shopping centers pursuant to § 605.
Office buildings or hotels in excess of two stories but not more than five stories or 65 feet in
height, whichever is less, when authorized in accordance with the standards set forth below
and in § 806;
Buildings shall be constructed with an interior fire protection sprinkler system and
standpipe system, installed in accordance with the Uwchlan Township Building Code and
approved by the Building Inspector.
The minimum building setback from all lot and right-of-way lines shall be 50 feet except
where the subject lot abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum setback from
the lot line shall be 100 feet or twice the height of the office or hotel building, whichever is
greater.
The minimum number of parking spaces for office buildings in excess of 2 1/2 shall be
one space for each 300 square feet of leasable floor area. The number of required
parking spaces for all other uses shall be in accordance with § 607.2 of the this
ordinance. If in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors parking proves to be inadequate,
a sufficient number of spaces shall be added to alleviate the problem to the satisfaction
of the Board of Supervisors.
The size of the parking spaces within the PC-2 District for each vehicle shall consist of a
rectangular area having a dimension of not less than nine feet in width and 20 feet in
length. Subject to the discretion of the Board, up to 50% of the parking spaces shall be
10 feet wide. Where a parking space abuts a grass median of at least two feet in width or
four feet in width where parking spaces are on each side of the median, only 18 feet of
paving shall be necessary, with the remaining two feet being within the grass median
area.
[Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-07]
Retail facilities as accessory uses within office buildings or hotels may be permitted on
the first floor only. Restaurants as accessory uses shall be permitted on any floor.
All internal setback requirements for building and parking may be waived, subject to the
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
Minimum lot size.
Lot area of development: six acres.
Minimum lot area: two acres.
Average lot size in development tract: three acres.
Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
Minimum setback from any lot line or right-of-way line (except as provided in § 506.5): 50 feet.
Maximum lot coverage and building height.
Maximum building coverage: 40%.
Maximum impervious coverage: No lot three net acres or larger shall be covered by more
than 65% of impervious surface, including but not limited to principal and accessory buildings,
driveways and walkways, and parking areas. Lots three acres or less may have up to 75%
impervious coverage.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 457/620
c.
d.
507.1
507.2
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
507.3
[Amended 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
Maximum height of buildings and structures: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less, except
as provided in § 506.5.b.
Minimum parking setback: 25 feet from any property line other than the right-of-way line of a
state or Township highway, except as provided in § 506.5. Setback from property lines
constituting a right-of-way line of a state or Township highway shall be 10 feet or such greater
distance as may be necessary to prevent infringement upon reasonable sight distances as
per Township ordinances.
§ 507. PIC Planned Industrial-Commercial District.
Purpose. The purpose of the PIC Planned Industrial-Commercial District is to provide sufficient
space in appropriate locations to meet current and anticipated future regional needs for large-site
industrial and commercial development appropriate to the community. It is further intended that the
PIC District encourage industrial and commercial development that will benefit the community and
the region, both economically and aesthetically, by permitting investment in a planned facility that
will provide for the location of several plants and/or commercial establishments to insure efficient
integration and consolidation of access to existing and planned future roadways and utilities. The
requirement for a plan will provide the Board of Supervisors with a means to review proposals and
permit the development of those facilities which, in addition to demonstrating a contribution to the
community and the region, would incorporate design innovations in buildings and landscaping that
would minimize any adverse impacts on adjacent uses. It is envisioned that these benefits would
accrue with the development of a unified tract designed to integrate various, single industrial
plants and/or commercial establishments. Any use permitted in this district by right, special
exception or condition and described in § 611 of this ordinance is subject to the requirements set
forth in § 611.
Review procedures. Planned Industrial-Commercial developments shall be subject to the
procedures for site plan review and approval established by the Township Subdivision and Land
Development.
Permitted uses.
Manufacturing, wholesaling, processing, warehousing and distributing, provided that no bulk
storage of liquid or gaseous fuels shall be permitted except for consumption on the premises.
Laboratory for scientific research and development.
Agriculture, except intensive agriculture.
Passenger station for public transportation; electric substations; telephone central office.
Theater (movie or performing) within a permanent building; library, civic or cultural center.
Retail establishment for sale of dry goods, drugs, food, jewelry, variety and general
merchandise, hardware, household furnishings and supplies, instruments, electronic
appliances, including repair service, job printing.
Restaurant, tearoom, cafe, confectionery or other place serving food or beverages, provided
that no curb service shall be permitted.
Automobile court or motel, bowling lanes or other similar place of indoor recreation.
Personal service shop, including barber, beauty salon, shoe repair, tailor, dressmaking, pickup
station for laundry and dry cleaning.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 458/620
j.
k.
l.
m.
n.
o.
[1]
p.
a.
b.
c.
507.4
a.
(1)
(2)
b.
507.5
Frozen food lockers, wholesaling, warehousing, distributing, provided that all parking, loading
and unloading shall be in the rear of the building and screened from a side street if on a
corner lot.
Offices or office building for administrative, executive and professional activity, and similar
activities involving the performance or rendering of professional service, such as a bank,
financial institution, mortician, the sale of real estate and business office, including the
showing of samples, sale promotion and demonstration of equipment; provided, however, that
no merchandise shall be warehoused on the premises for sale, exchange or delivery thereon,
and further provided that nothing herein preclude sale or manufacturers' representatives from
arranging for the sale of merchandise manufactured, fabricated or warehoused at, or
delivered to, locations outside of PIC Planned Industrial-Commercial District.
Wholesale establishment for the sale and distribution of dry goods, drugs, foods, variety and
general merchandise, hardware, household furnishing, electrical appliances and supplies, job
printing.
Wholesale establishment for the sale of plumbing and heating equipment and supplies,
lumberyard, including the customary storage and work yards incidental thereto when
screened by a fence, wall or planting screen.
Automatic self-service laundry and dry-cleaning establishment with certificates of approval by
the public health agency having jurisdiction, with regard to waste disposal, and by the Fire
Marshal, with regard to compliance with all safety regulations.
Churches.
Public uses, structures, or buildings owned or operated by the Township, a Municipal
Authority organized by the Township or an Authority of which the Township is a member.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Section 507.3.q, regarding regional shopping centers, added 8-5-1996
by Ord. No. 96-06, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal uses.
Private parking areas pursuant to § 607.
Signs pursuant to § 606.
Other accessory uses, structures or buildings, provided such are clearly incidental to the
principal use.
Uses permitted by conditional use.
Shopping centers pursuant to § 605.
Structures over 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height up to 65 feet in height may be permitted,
provided they are sprinklered according to the provisions of the Uwchlan Township Fire
Code, and provided that for each foot in excess of 35 feet, there shall be a corresponding
decrease in both maximum impervious coverage and building coverage by 0.7% and
provided such height increase does not impinge on the rights of existing or future
residents in the community.
Public and private wireless communication facilities.
[Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-04; 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; 10-14-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-03]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 459/620
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
507.6
a.
b.
507.7
a.
b.
c.
507.8
Facilities for outdoor recreation, not including shooting or archery ranges, motor vehicle
racing or amusement parks.
Any other use as determined by the Board of Supervisors to be the same general character
as the permitted uses.
Off-premises outdoor advertising signs, subject to the regulations of § 606.
[Added 1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-01]
Hospitals.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Any legitimate use not specifically provided for in any zoning district and which is not
inherently objectionable.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Uses permitted by special exception.
Gasoline service station, provided that no station be located closer than a five-hundred-foot
radius from the next nearest gasoline service station property line.
Living quarters for a proprietor, building manager, caretaker or watchman, if employed on the
premises, as an accessory use within a principal building.
Commercial uses or activities which are customarily and directly related to the comfort and
convenience of the traveling public, including rest facilities designed and operated exclusively
for licensed truckers, when maintained in strict accordance with the regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, and any other public agency having
jurisdiction.
A private-use helistop as an accessory use to a permitted principal use subject to Planning
Commission review and recommendation and conformance to the general standards
prescribed in § 610.
Accessory uses not located on the same lot with the permitted principal use.
Minimum lot size.
Area: five acres.
Width: 200 feet.
Minimum yard dimensions, setbacks and buffers.
[Amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
Front yard: Minimum of 40 feet, except when an agricultural or residential district is adjacent
to the front yard, in which case front yard setback shall be 150 feet minimum in conformance
with Subsection e, below.
Each side yard: Minimum of 15 feet, except when an agricultural or residential district or lot
containing an occupied dwelling is adjacent to the side yard, in which case the side yard
setback shall be 150 feet in conformance with Subsection e, below, on the side thus abutted.
On a corner lot there shall be a side yard of not less than 40 feet.
Rear yard: Minimum of 15 feet, except when an agricultural or residential district or lot
containing an occupied dwelling unit is adjacent to the rear yard, in which case the rear yard
setback shall be 150 feet in conformance with Subsection e, below.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 460/620
d.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
e.
By conditional use. Subject to § 806, the setbacks required when a building abuts a
residential or agricultural district or a lot containing an occupied dwelling may be reduced from
150 feet to a distance determined by the Board of Supervisors to be sufficient to allow for
proper protection of abutting property and its use but in no case to a distance less than the
district normally requires.
In every instance where a setback of 150 feet is required by this section or a reduced setback
is approved by conditional use pursuant to Subsection f, below, the said setback shall be
improved as a buffer and shall provide on installation a year-round visual screen by a
combination of planted berms, fences, walls, coniferous and deciduous trees, shrubs and
other plantings. No other structures or signage (excepting underground utilities) shall be
permitted within the setback buffer and no parking shall be there located. Impervious surfaces
within the setback buffer shall be limited to necessary access drives designed and located so
as to minimize the interruption of the visual screen. The following additional requirements
shall also be met:
A setback buffer plan prepared and sealed by and over the signature of a registered
landscape architect authorized to provide professional services in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall be submitted as an integral component of the application for special
exception, conditional use approval, or preliminary subdivision and land development
plan approval, whichever is first submitted. The said plan shall comply with the general
requirements applicable to preliminary subdivision and land development plan
submissions and shall contain sufficient information to determine compliance with this
section.
Berms shall be employed whenever the existing topography permits.
Existing mature trees located within the setback buffer shall be preserved using, where
necessary, tree wells and/or tree walls and, where preserved, shall be counted toward
the satisfaction of the numerical planting requirements of this section.
Where fences and walls are employed to create the mandatory visual screen they shall
be not less than eight feet in height (except within clear-sight triangles).
The type, design, location, configuration, materials, and colors of fences and walls shall
be responsive to the visual and aesthetic characteristic of the tract and adjoining lands
and uses, shall create visual interest from the perspective of adjoining properties, and
shall avoid conflict with the character of adjoining uses.
In those areas of the setback buffer improved with an approved fence or wall, there shall
additionally be planted on the side of the fence or wall facing the adjoining property: one
coniferous tree per 20 lineal feet of buffer, one canopy tree per 30 lineal feet of buffer,
one flowering tree per 60 lineal feet of buffer, and one each of deciduous and flowering
shrubs (at a ratio of one-to-one) per 30 lineal feet of buffer.
In those areas of the setback buffer not proposed to be improved with a fence or wall,
there shall be planted: two coniferous trees, one canopy tree, one flowering tree, and one
deciduous or one flowering shrub (at a ratio of one-to-one) per 20 lineal feet of buffer
planted generally in a double staggered row so as to achieve a naturalistic effect to the
maximum extent consistent with the requirement of providing on installation a year-round
visual screen.
Canopy trees shall be of an approved species and not less than three lineal inches in
caliper on installation; coniferous trees shall be of an approved species and not less than
eight feet in height on installation; shrubs shall be of an approved species and not less
than two feet in height on installation.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 461/620
9.
10.
11.
f.
a.
b.
[2]
c.
507.9
508.1
1)
2)
508.2
All plantings shall conform to the most current edition of the "American Standard for
Nursery Stock" of the American Association of Nurserymen; shall be typical of their
species and variety, have normal growth habits, well developed, densely foliated
branches, and vigorous, fibrous root systems; and shall be freshly dug and/or
containerized nursery-grown stock, free from defects, injuries, diseases, and pests.
The estimated cost of all proposed setback buffer plantings and structures shall be
included in the financial security posted in conformance with Section 509 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S § 10509.
A two-year maintenance and replacement guarantee for all plantings shall be provided to
the Township by the landscaping contractor. Following the expiration of the guarantee, all
dead and injured plantings shall be promptly removed and replaced by the landowner. All
setback buffer plantings and improvements shall be maintained by the landowner.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections 507.8.a through c above, when a lot in the
Planned Industrial-Commercial District abuts a lot that is subject to a use or conservation
easement or restriction which requires the lot thus abutted to be used for agricultural or open
space purposes, the front, rear or side yard buffer setback required by Subsections 507.8.a
through c on the side thus abutted may, if approved by conditional use by the Board of
Supervisors, be reduced to the greater of 75 feet or three feet for every one foot of building
height on the PCID lot (to a maximum setback requirement of 150 feet), even if said
agricultural or open space lot contains an occupied dwelling. The provisions of Subsection
507.8.e above shall apply to any front, rear or side yard governed by this Subsection f, but
only within the required buffer setback area as approved by conditional use.
Maximum building coverage and height.
Maximum building coverage: 50%.
Maximum building coverage: Maximum impervious coverage: no lot three net acres or larger
shall be covered by more than 65% of impervious surface, including but not limited to
principal and accessory buildings, driveways and walkways, and parking areas. Lots three
acres or less may have up to 75% impervious coverage.
[Amended 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
Maximum height of buildings: 35 feet (except as provided in § 507.5b) or 2 1/2 stories,
whichever is less.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 508. PCID Planned Commercial Industrial Development
Districts.
[Amended 4-8-1996 by Ord. No. 96-04; 9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-12]
Purpose. The purpose of the PCID District is to provide for unified and flexible development of a
large area of land with a mixture of uses.
Criteria for PCID District. All land to be considered for development within the PCID District and
all proposals for development within the PCID District shall comply with the following criteria:
Areas zoned PCID shall contain a total tract area of at least 275 contiguous acres and have
direct frontage on a major highway as defined by the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
All land proposed for development within the PCID District must be in single ownership, or
subject to an agreement among all owners to develop pursuant to a coordinated plan.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 462/620
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
508.3
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
508.4
Review procedures. In order to assure that development of the PCID District complies with the
intent of this section, a Master Concept Plan for the tract shall be submitted to the Board of
Supervisors in conformance with the following procedure:
An applicant for approval of any development within the PCID District shall initially present a
Master Concept Plan that shall, following approval, stand as an official tentative plan, with
phased submittals for final approval as development proceeds. The Master Concept Plan
shall include the entire tract and shall contain the following information:
Location, proposed site layout, parking facilities, all adjacent highways, streets and alleys
with traffic flow patterns, and a tentative list of the kind of establishments to be located on
the site.
Sketches, elevations and engineering plans showing proposed methods of stormwater
control, type of sewage treatment and disposal, and the source of water supply.
In addition to the Master Concept Plan, the applicant shall submit the following studies: traffic,
utility investigations and a detailed report that evaluates the effect of the Planned Commercial
Industrial Development on municipal services (such as police, fire, recreation), public
facilities, utilities, budget, environmental impact, stormwater drainage and transportation
system.
Following approval of the Master Concept Plan, and, where applicable, conditional use
approval, site development plans for sections of the tract shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with the current Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance regulations. The
provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, shall apply unless the
regulations are altered by this § 508.
Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the areas of the PCID designated on
the Master Concept Plan for office park uses:
Manufacturing, assembling and/or servicing electronic equipment.
Passenger station for public transportation; electric substation; telephone central office.
Hotel and/or conference center.
Professional and other business offices.
Restaurant, cafeteria or recreational facilities designed for the comfort and convenience of
employees, provided such facilities are located inside the confines of the building and are not
offered for use by the general public.
Churches.
Public uses, structures, or buildings owned, operated or subsidized by the Township, a
Municipal Authority organized by the Township or an Authority of which the Township is a
member.
Indoor recreational facilities containing amenities such as a swimming pool, spa, indoor track,
nautilus equipment, handball courts and facilities typical of a YMCA facility.
Laboratory for scientific research and development, excluding animal research for cosmetics
purposes.
Day-care centers.
Wholesaling, warehousing and distributing, provided that there shall be no exterior evidence
of such, and, further, no bulk storage of liquid or gaseous fuel or chemicals shall be permitted
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 463/620
a.
b.
c.
508.5
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
d.
e.
f.
508.6
except for immediate consumption on the premises.
Permitted accessory uses to office park uses.
Off-street parking pursuant to § 607, provided that, where a parking space abuts a grass
median of at least two feet in width, or four feet in width where parking spaces are on each
side of the median, the minimum length of the parking space may be 18 feet.
Signs pursuant to § 606.
Other accessory uses, structures or building, provided such are clearly incidental to the
principal use.
Uses permitted by conditional use. The following uses shall be permitted in the PCID District
when approved by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use:
Convenience centers. Principal uses as stated in § 605 shall be permitted subject to the
provisions thereof except that no gasoline service stations, garages (private or public) or
drive-in food establishments shall be permitted. In addition, the following convenience uses
are permitted in the PCID District:
Theater (movie or performing) within a permanent building; library, civic or cultural center.
Automatic self-service laundry and dry-cleaning establishment.
Manufacturing and processing, provided that there shall be no bulk storage of liquid or
gaseous fuels or chemicals except for immediate consumption on the premises, and no raw
materials or finished products shall be permitted on the exterior of the building.
Restaurant, tearoom, cafe, confectionery or other place serving food or beverages, provided
that no curb service shall be permitted.
Any nonresidential buildings in excess of three stories but not more than five stories or 65 feet
in height, provided that:
Structures up to 65 feet in height may be permitted, provided they are sprinklered and
have standpipe systems in accordance with the Uwchlan Township Fire Code, and
provided that for each foot in excess of 35 feet, there shall be a corresponding decrease
in both maximum impervious coverage and building coverage by 0.7% and provided such
height increase does not impinge on the rights of existing or future property owners in the
community. The decrease in impervious coverage shall be 0.2% for each one foot over
35 feet height limit for a structure in the Town center only.
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
The minimum parking spaces for office buildings shall be one space for each 300 square
feet of leasable floor area. The number of required parking spaces for all other uses shall
be in accordance with § 607.2 of this ordinance. If in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors parking proves to be inadequate, a sufficient number of additional spaces
shall be added to alleviate the problem to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors.
Wagering and gambling facilities, provided that no such use shall be located on any lot or
parcel of land unless said lot or parcel of land or any part thereof is separated by either (a) a
distance of 1,500 feet (except for a hotel) or (b) the right-of-way of a limited access highway,
from any lot or parcel of land which is used for residential purposes (except for a hotel) in the
Township or an adjoining Township; or which is included in whole or in part within a residential
zoning district of the Township or an adjoining Township.
Town center as defined in § 508.11.[1]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 464/620
[1]
[2]
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
a.
b.
508.7
a.
b.
c.
d.
508.8
a.
b.
508.9
Editor's Note: Former Subsection g, regarding wagering and gambling facilities, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04.
Hospitals.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06[2]]
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 508.6.g and h as § 508.6.h and i,
respectively.
Off-premises outdoor advertising signs, subject to the regulations of § 606.
[Added 1-24-2000by Ord. No. 2000-01]
Any other use as determined by the Board of Supervisors to be the same general character
as the permitted uses.
Any legitimate use not specifically provided for in any zoning district and which is not
inherently objectionable.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Planned life care facility in compliance with all of the requirements of §§ 508.13 and 806.4.
[Added 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
Uses permitted by special exception.
A private-use helistop as an accessory use to a permitted principal use subject to Planning
Commission review and recommendation and conformance to the general standards
prescribed in § 610.
Accessory uses not located on the same lot with the permitted principal use.
Minimum lot size and open space requirement for office park uses.
Area: Two acre minimum with a three acre average. However, one to 1.99 acre size lots may
be permitted for a maximum of 5% of the total number of lots in the development. Also, any
lot which is less than three acres shall be under single ownership and shall contain one
specific use, company or corporation.
Width: 200 feet.
Designated open space. In areas to be developed for office park uses the developer shall
allow for a minimum of 5% of the total net tract area, which may include stormwater
management areas, that shall be properly landscaped, separate from any lots, and usable for
any active or passive recreation.
Maximum impervious coverage: No lot three net acres or larger shall be covered by more
than 65% of impervious surface, including but not limited to principal and accessory buildings,
driveways and walkways and parking areas. Lots three acres or less may have up to 75%
impervious coverage.
Minimum yard dimensions for office park uses.
Front yard: minimum of 40 feet, except when an agricultural use or residential district is
adjacent to the front yard, in which case front yard setback shall be 150 feet minimum.
Each side yard: minimum of 15 feet, except when an agricultural use or residential district, or
lot containing an occupied dwelling, is adjacent to the side yard, in which case the side yard
setback shall be 150 feet on the side thus abutted. On a corner lot there shall be a side yard
of not less than 40 feet.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 465/620
c.
d.
a.
508.10
Rear yard: minimum of 15 feet, except when an agricultural use or residential district, or lot
containing an occupied dwelling unit, is adjacent to the rear yard, in which case the rear yard
setback shall be 150 feet.
By conditional use: subject to § 806, the setbacks required when a building abuts a residential
or agricultural district or a lot containing an occupied dwelling may be reduced from 150 feet
to a distance determined by the Board of Supervisors to be sufficient to allow for proper
protection of abutting property and its use but in no case to a distance less than the district
normally requires.
Requirements governing residential uses within residential use portions of the PCID.
Residential uses will be permitted as the exclusive use only on a minimum of 100 contiguous
acres.
Permitted density.
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
The maximum allowable residential density calculated with reference to the portion of the
tract to be developed exclusively for residential uses shall be four dwelling units per acre,
provided that a maximum density of 4.15 dwelling units per acre shall be permitted if the
dwelling units in excess of 4.0 dwelling units per acre consist entirely of units designed and
intended for occupancy by senior citizens pursuant to a program of housing subsidization
under the auspices of an agency of the county, commonwealth, or United States
government. In no event shall the net residential density of any specific use area and
calculated with reference to that area exceed the following:
Dwelling Unit Type Maximum Permitted Net Density
(1) Single-family detached 4 dwelling units per acre
(2) Single-family semidetached 6 dwelling units per acre
(3) Single-family attached (townhouse or
quadraplex)
8 dwelling units per acre
(4) Apartments, low rise apartments and
multifamily dwellings
12 dwelling units per acre
(5) Single-family garden lot development 5 dwelling units per acre
(6) Attached garden lots 8 dwelling units per acre
Of the total number of dwelling units within the residential portion of the PCID development,
the proportions of each dwelling unit type shall be as follows:
% of Total Dwelling Units
Building Type Minimum Maximum
(1) Single-family detached N/A *
(2) Single-family attached (townhouse
and quadraplex) and attached garden
lot development
0 40%**
(3) Apartments, low-rise apartments,
mid-rise apartments, and multifamily
dwellings
20% 60%
NOTES:
* Of the total number of single-family detached and semidetached dwelling units, a
maximum of 25% may be semidetached dwellings.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 466/620
b.
c.
NOTES:
* Of the total number of single-family detached and semidetached dwelling units, a
maximum of 25% may be semidetached dwellings.
** Of the total number of single-family attached dwelling units, a maximum of 15% may
be quadraplex dwellings.
No waiver shall be granted for yards facing adjacent properties along the tract boundaries.
The developer shall establish compliance with the area and bulk regulations set forth on the
chart inserted herein for each use and dwelling unit type.
Apartments,
Low Rise
Apartments
and
Multifamily
Dwellings
Townhouses
or
Quadraplexes
Single-
Family
Detached or
Semidetached
Single-Family
Garden Lot
Development
Attached Garden
Lot Development
(1) Minimum lot
area per
dwelling unit
N/A N/A 8,000 square
feet
6,000 square feet
(average lot area)
N/A
(2) Minimum lot
width at
building
N/A 20 feet [A] 75 feet 55 feet
40 feet (minimum
width at street line)
20 feet [A]
(3) Minimum side
yard
§ 508.10.d[B] § 508.10.d [B] 10 feet with a
minimum
aggregate of
30 feet
3 feet [D] § 508.10.d [B]
(4) Minimum rear
yard
§ 508.10.d[B] 30 feet 40 feet Dwelling, 10 feet;
garage, 10 feet; other
structures, including
fences and sheds, 10
feet [E]
30 feet
(5) Minimum front
yard
10 feet 10 feet 35 feet 10 feet [F][G] 10 feet [F][G]
(6) Distance
between
buildings
§ 508.10.d § 508.10.d N/A 20 feet 20 feet
(7) Parking area
set back from
lot line or
street ultimate
right-of-way
20 feet [C] 20 feet [C] N/A N/A N/A
(8) Maximum
height
3 1/2 stories
or 40 feet (but
see
§ 508.10.d)
2 1/2 stories or
35 feet
2 1/2 stories
or 35 feet
2 1/2 stories or 35 feet 2 1/2 stories or 35
feet
(9) Street See § 502 of
the
Subdivision
and Land
Development
Ordinance
See § 502 of
the Subdivision
and Land
Development
Ordinance
See § 502 of
the
Subdivision
and Land
Development
Ordinance
A. Minimum street
right-of-way width
40 feet
Same as singlefamily
garden lot
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 467/620
Apartments,
Low Rise
Apartments
and
Multifamily
Dwellings
Townhouses
or
Quadraplexes
Single-
Family
Detached or
Semidetached
Single-Family
Garden Lot
Development
Attached Garden
Lot Development
B. Minimum street
cartway width 26
feet
C. Minimum alley
width (private
ownership) onedirectional
alley,
12 feet; twodirectional
alley,
18 feet
D. Upright curb shall
not be permitted
on alleys except
where required
for drainage
purpose
NOTES:
[A] Minimum width of an individual unit is 20 feet.
[B] Applies to end building only. When abutting parking area or street right-of-way, then 10 feet setback is
permissible.
[C] Applies only to parking lots and joint parking areas, not to on-lot parking areas associated with individual
driveways or garages.
[D] (1) Within a three-foot minimum side yard, no structures other than the following shall be permitted: HVAC
equipment, upper level building overhang not to exceed 25 square feet, chimney projections, columns,
trellises, fences or garden walls (and in the case of a fence or wall, only where a garden lot dwelling wall
which faces the adjacent dwelling is recessed in conjunction with a patio or deck) and any other ancillary
structures deemed appropriate by the Township.
(2) No dwelling may be constructed closer than 10 feet to any building that is located on an adjacent lot.
(3) The owner of a single-family garden lot may construct a dwelling, fence, wall, garage or other structure
within 10 feet of a lot line (a "garden lot structure") in accordance with the Township building permit
procedure (except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance) only if:
(a) The lot on which the garden lot structure is constructed benefits from an easement over
maintenance or repairs to such garden lot structure, which easement shall obligate the party
exercising its rights thereunder to restore the land disturbed by such exercise;
(b) The lot on which such garden lot structure is located shall be subject to a restriction prohibiting such
owner from constructing thereon any window or opening on the side of a dwelling facing the
adjacent dwelling, the nearest wall of which is less then 20 feet away from the garden lot structure
and which adjacent dwelling has a window facing the wall of the garden lot structure except that
such restriction against a first floor window in the facing wall of a garden lot structure shall not apply
if there is a fence at least five feet in height installed in the side yard of the lot of the garden lot
structure and the adjacent dwelling (a "privacy fence"), nor shall such restriction apply if a window in
the facing wall of a garden lot structure is a clerestory window on a sill which is a minimum of 4'6"
from the floor plate. In the case where there are two adjacent dwellings with facing walls containing
windows, both lots shall be subject to a restriction prohibiting the owner from placing a window on
the facing wall of the extension or addition to such garden lot structure within 10 feet of the lot line;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 468/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(2)
d.
NOTES:
(c) Within the three-foot minimum side yard, the owner of the garden lot structure shall be permitted to
plant and maintain grass; and
(d) The declarant under the declaration and any homeowners' association created pursuant thereto
shall likewise benefit from the easements described in clauses (1) and (3) above, and has the
obligation to enforce the restriction described in clause (2) above.
For the purposes of clause (b) above, a window in a garden lot structure shall not be deemed to be
"facing" an adjacent dwelling unless the wall in which such window is installed is parallel to either:
(a) The outside wall on the adjacent dwelling which is less than 20 feet away from the garden lot
structure; or
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
(b) The privacy fence between the garden lot structure and the adjacent dwelling.
[E] In the case where the driveway to the garage is from the alley, then the garage and/or dwelling must be set
back at least 20 feet from the edge of the alley cartway if the garage doors face the alley. Where the side of the
garage faces the alley the ten-foot setback shall be from the edge of the paving. The ten-foot setback for
fences and sheds shall also be from the edge of paving where abutting an alley. In the case of reverse
frontage lots, each lot shall provide a rear yard setback of 40 feet to the building line. Access alleys may be
located within the setback area where adequate landscaping and berming are provided and access to the lots
is restricted to the interior street or rear alley.
[Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-12]
[F] Single driveway will not be permitted within the front yard only if the lot is not serviced by a rear or side access
alley.
[G] Uncovered stairs attached to the house or porch structure may extend into the required front yard. Stair treads
in the required front yard shall not exceed 48 inches vertically above grade.
[Added 6-12-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-05]
[H] All housing types and their accessory structures serviced by alleys shall maintain a minimum setback of 20
feet from the paving edge of the alley except as provided in [E]. [H] shall be added to all housing types of
§ 508.10.c under rear yard and side yard requirements.
[Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-12]
[I] Maximum impervious coverage: No lot three net acres or larger shall be covered by more than 65% of
impervious surface, including but not limited to principal land accessory buildings, driveways and walkways
and parking areas. Lots three acres or less may have up to 75% impervious coverage.
[Amended 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
Notwithstanding and in addition to the above requirements, the developer shall also
demonstrate compliance with the following:
The minimum horizontal distance between groups of townhouses, attached garden lots,
quadraplexes, apartments, low rise apartments and multifamily dwelling shall be:
One and one-half times the average height of the two groups of such buildings for
front or rear walls facing front or rear walls; architectural features that are less than
10 square feet in area and decks shall be permitted in this required setback area as
long as they are at least 40 feet from an adjacent deck or projection. Decks shall be
set back 20 feet from paved edge of alley;
[Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-12]
Twenty feet for front or rear walls facing side walls; and
Twenty feet for side walls facing side walls.
Low rise apartment buildings may be permitted by conditional use to a maximum height
of 65 feet or five stories, whichever is less, provided that:
They comply with all provisions of the Uwchlan Township Building Code;[3]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 469/620
[3]
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
e.
(1)
(2)
(3)
f.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Construction Codes, Uniform.
There is a corresponding decrease in both maximum impervious coverage and
building coverage by 0.7% for each foot of height in excess of 35 feet; the decrease
in impervious coverage shall be 0.2% for each one foot over 35 feet height limit for a
structure in Town Center only; and
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
Any such building is equipped with an interior sprinkler system and standpipe
system, and is not of height that exceeds the capability of available fire and
emergency equipment.
Access and service shall be provided in the front of each dwelling. Parking may be
provided on the lot, as carports or garages; as an integral part of the dwelling; or as a
joint parking facility for a group of dwellings with such deed restrictions as are necessary
to determine ownership and maintenance of common parking facilities and methods of
assigning charges for snow removal and repairs.
Multifamily dwelling unit buildings shall not exceed 260 feet in length.
The minimum setback of any townhouse or multifamily building abutting a parking area or
its accessway shall be not less than 10 feet.
Rooftop air conditioners or other external mechanical equipment on apartments, low rise
apartments and multifamily dwellings shall be adequately screened on all four sides, not
to prevent proper operation.
Other regulations.
The developer shall, during the conditional use hearing, demonstrate the feasibility of
compliance with the standards, criteria, regulations, and specifications contained in this
ordinance and in the Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The final
plan shall be in conformance with the said standards, criteria, regulations, and
specifications. Where the standards of this section are manifestly inconsistent with
standards otherwise applicable, the standards of this section shall control.
The application for conditional use approval shall contain all materials and shall depict all
information specified in § 401 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
together with all materials and information necessary to establish compliance with this
section.
Parking requirements.
Minimum parking requirements. All buildings and other structures within the residential
portions of the PCID shall be provided with the minimum of 2 1/2 off-street parking
spaces, which may include garage spaces, per dwelling unit. The visitor parking shall be
indented eight feet from the travel lane and on a private street only. Age-restricted
apartments in the Town center shall require two spaces per unit.
[Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-12; 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
Shared parking. One or more parking lots may be designed to service a group of
semidetached, attached, or multifamily residential units so long as the total number of
such parking spaces is no less than 2 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit served thereby and
each dwelling unit served thereby has convenient access to the associated parking.
Paving. All required parking areas and all access drives shall have a macadam or
concrete surface.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 470/620
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
g.
(1)
(2)
h.
(1)
i.
Parking within front yard. Required parking shall be permitted within required front or side
yards unless prohibited by other requirements of this ordinance.
Parking requirements. In the case of single-family garden lot development, attached
garden lots, townhouses or quadraplexes, multifamily or apartments and
townhouse/retail, the following parking requirements shall apply:
Minimum parking requirements. All single homes shall be provided with the minimum
of 2 1/2 off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit. Garage spaces shall be included
in meeting the minimum requirements.
Parking space and garage setbacks shall be as required by § 508.10.c (chart).
On-street parking shall be permitted when alleys, parking areas or driveways are
used for vehicular access to the dwelling units. No parking shall be permitted on the
rear alley and such rear alleys shall be appropriately signed to prohibit rear alley
parking and to indicate that such rear alleys are fire lanes. Parking shall be limited to
one side of the street only unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors that parking on both sides of the street can be
accommodated in a safe and efficient manner.
Storage of trash and rubbish. Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be well
screened on all four sides; one side or portion thereof being a gate, and contained in airtight,
verminproof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall, at all times, be kept
in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
Standards for location and management of common open space, recreation facilities and
required open space.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
No less than 25% of the gross area of the portion of the PCID to be developed for
residential use shall be common open space, exclusive of buildings, parking areas, and
other improvements; lots and required lot areas; and existing and proposed street rightsof-
way. Common open space must remain in its natural condition unless designed for
active or passive recreation as outlined below. No less than 50% of the common open
space must be adequate for the development of active recreation facilities. These
facilities may include, but are not limited to, playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis courts,
ball diamonds, recreation centers and basketball courts. The number and dimensions of
such facilities shall be in accordance with the standards published by the National
Recreation and Park Association and as approved by the Board of Supervisors. Where
possible, the open space shall be designed as a contiguous area easily accessible to the
residents and preserving natural features.
The governing documents for the development shall include provisions which insure that
the common open space land shall continue as such and be properly maintained in
accordance with an approved open space management plan as described in § 617 of this
ordinance. These provisions shall be in a form acceptable to the Township’s Solicitor. The
developer shall either: a) dedicate such land to public use of the Township or other public
agency that has indicated it will accept such dedication; b) retain ownership and
responsibility for maintenance of such common open space land; or c) provide for and
establish one or more organizations for the ownership and maintenance of all common
open space. In the case of (c) above, each organization shall be a nonprofit
homeowners’ association.
Management, maintenance, and repair of public facilities and community services.
The developer shall assume responsibility for the management, maintenance, repair, and
operation of the following facilities: roads, gutters, sidewalks, curbs, drainage system,
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 471/620
j.
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
b.
508.11
water distribution system, sewerage system, public lighting system, public signs,
recreation facility and any other public facility not listed, if not dedicated to the Township
or a Municipal Authority.
The developer shall assume responsibility for the provision of the following community
services: refuse collection, snow removal, leaf removal, street cleaning, and the
operation of community buildings.
The developer may divest himself of any or all management, repair and operational
responsibility by dedication of such facilities to the Township or a Municipal Authority, if
acceptable to these bodies, or by creating an organization acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors for the management, repair and maintenance of public facilities.
Standards for fences, walls and hedges.
Fences, walls and hedges shall be permitted in any yard, provided no fence, wall or hedge
in a required front yard shall be greater than four feet. Any fence in a front yard that exceeds
36 inches shall be an ornamental fence that contains an open area of not less than 75%.
Where a fence located in a front yard is situated within an applicable sight triangle for a
street, alley or driveway, the height of the fence shall be no greater than three feet.
Requirements governing town center uses. Town center uses shall be permitted on a specific
site set aside and designated for town center development by the applicant. This site shall comply
with the density and area and bulk requirements of this § 508.11. Any or all of the following
standards may be waived or modified by the Board of Supervisors upon demonstration by the
applicant that innovative layout of lots, siting of structures and architectural design does not
adversely affect the health and general welfare of the residents of the Township.
Permitted residential density. For the purpose of calculating the residential density in the town
center, the applicant shall use the entire area of the town center development. The maximum
permitted residential densities shall be as follows:
Garden apartments (one- or two-story apartments), low rise apartments (three- to fivestory
apartments): 12 dwelling units per acre.
Apartments designed and intended for occupation by senior citizens: 16 dwelling units
per acre.
Townhouse or townhouse/retail: eight dwelling units per acre.
Permitted uses in town center. Any combination of the following uses:
Residential uses, including: townhouses, townhouse/retail, garden apartment buildings,
low rise apartment buildings, and low rise apartment buildings specifically designed and
intended for occupation by senior persons. Unless otherwise specified, for purposes of
townhouse uses in the town center, the area and bulk regulations of § 508.10 shall apply.
Commercial uses, including: convenience retail stores, restaurant, cafe, tavern, bank
(including drive-through service), day-care facilities and inn or hotel (including attached
banquet and meeting room facility).
[Amended 1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-01]
Office uses, including: professional offices, medical offices.
Public uses, including: post office, public library, municipal uses, schools and any other
similar use located in town centers or villages.
Indoor recreational uses subject to reasonable limitations on hours of operation.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 472/620
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
c.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
d.
Any other similar use as permitted by the Board of Supervisors.
Town center accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the town
center:
Surface, underground, under-building and structured parking (as set forth in § 508.11.f).
[Amended 1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-01]
Loading/service areas (as set forth in § 508.11.g).
Outdoor recreational uses subject to reasonable limitations on hours of operation.
Town center area and bulk regulations.
Minimum town center site area: 15 acres.
Minimum distance between detached building: 20 feet.
Parking setbacks:
[Amended 1-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-01]
Minimum distance from dedicated road rights-of-way to parking lots: 15 feet, provided
that this setback may be reduced to 10 feet where deemed appropriated by the Board
of Supervisors and that where on-street parking is permitted there shall be no setback
from the right-of-way, but the minimum distance of 10 feet from parking to buildings
shall be maintained as provided in this subsection.
Minimum distance from town center building: 10 feet, except in the case where parking
extends to adjacent parking beneath a building or into a parking structure, zero feet.
Building height: The provisions of Zoning Ordinance § 508.6.d shall apply.
Maximum building length: 300 feet. This 300 feet shall not include building length as
governed by Section 508.11.e.(2).
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
Minimum building setback from the town center site area boundary and/or dedicated road
rights-of-way.
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Front 25*
Rear 25*
Side 25
*The front and rear yard setback may be reduced upon approval of the Board of
Supervisors when townhouse/retail or retail buildings or a public use abut a street
where parallel parking is permitted.
Special provisions. In the case where a retail building and the land upon which such
building is situated in the town center is intended to be subdivided into a separate unity,
each of which is intended to be held in separate ownership, the individual units will not be
required to individually meet the dimensional requirements above so long as the retail
building in which such units are located meets such requirements.
Area and bulk regulations for townhouse/retail. Notwithstanding the foregoing area and
bulk regulations, the following area and bulk regulations shall apply to those areas of the
town center where townhouse/retail is proposed:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 473/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
e.
(1)
(2)
(3)
f.
Minimum building width: 22 feet.
Minimum side yard: eight feet (end of buildings); provided, however, unroofed stairs
attached to the house or porch structure may extend into the required side yard as
provided in § 508.11.d(8)(h) herein below.
[Amended 11-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-07]
Minimum rear yard: 75 feet; provided, however, the minimum rear yard may be
reduced to 70 feet for residential/retail buildings to accommodate entry halls and
laundry facilities only; and further provided the minimum rear yard may be reduced
to 62 feet for residential/retail buildings to accommodate a garage structure only with
a flat roof not exceeding a maximum building height of the lesser of one story or 10
feet. An unroofed deck may be constructed on the flat roof restricted to residential
use unroofed only by restrictive covenants satisfactory to the Township publicly
recorded against the property.
[Amended 11-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-07]
Minimum front yard: 10 feet; provided, however, unroofed stairs attached to the
house or porch structure may extend into the required front yard as provided in
§ 508.11.d(8)(h) herein below.
[Amended 11-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-07]
Parking area setback from lot line or street right-of-way: 10 feet (parking lots).
Maximum building height: the lesser of three stories or 38.5 feet.
Street standards shall be proposed by the applicant based upon the proposed
function of the roadways and may vary from the street standards otherwise provided
in the Township ordinances where approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Encroachments into minimum front and side yards: stair structures attached to
porches or buildings may extend into the required front or side yard but by no more
than four feet. The uppermost portion of the stair structure extending into the front or
side yard shall not exceed 96 inches vertically above grade and shall be unroofed.
[Amended 11-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-07]
Additional regulations. In addition to the above requirements, the developer shall also
demonstrate compliance with the following:
No group of townhouses or townhouse/retail shall consist of more than 10 attached
buildings.
Multifamily dwelling unit buildings shall not exceed 300 feet in length; provided, however,
that a building may be increased to not more than 375 feet in length when units are
served by a common corridor and with approval by the Board of Supervisors.
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
Parking requirements in a town center. The minimum number of parking spaces for each use
within the town center shall be required by § 607.2 of this ordinance, except as follows:
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
Subsidized elderly apartment units: 0.5 spaces for each dwelling unit.
Market rate town center age-restricted units shall have two spaces per unit, at a
minimum.
The requirements of § 508.10.f(5) shall apply in the town center.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 474/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
g.
a.
b.
c.
d.
508.12
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
508.13
Loading requirements in a town center. The minimum loading space standards for each use
within the town center shall be as established in § 607 of this ordinance, except as follows:
Individual loading/service areas will not be required for each new building or unit within a
building. Proposed buildings or units within a building of the same or different uses shall
be permitted to share loading space where practical.
Individual or shared loading spaces shall be a minimum of 40 feet in depth, 12 feet in
width, with an overhead clearance of 10 feet.
Loading spaces will be permitted between the dedicated road right-of-way and the
building line where approved by the Board of Supervisors. The applicant must
demonstrate the ability to provide a screen (to consist of any combination of landscaping,
berming or fencing) between the loading spaces and the street line adequate to screen
the loading activities from the dedicated road traffic. No loading spaces shall be permitted
on a dedicated street.
Maximum building coverage and height. Except where otherwise specified in § 508, the
maximum building coverage and height in the PCID Zoning District shall be as follows:
Maximum building coverage: 50%.
Maximum building height: three stories or 35 feet, whichever is less, except that building
height may be increased to 65 feet as provided in § 508.6.d. Buildings exceeding two stories
in height shall be constructed with an interior fire protection sprinkler system and standpipe
system.
Maximum impervious coverage: no lot three net acres or larger shall be covered by more than
65% of impervious surface, including but not limited to principal and accessory buildings,
driveways and walkways and parking areas.
Lots three acres or less may have up to 75% impervious coverage.
Planned life care facility. A planned life care facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements:
[Added 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
The facility shall be located on a lot that is within 100 feet of a Town Center.
Minimum lot size and open space: in compliance with § 508.8, except the minimum lot size
shall be 10 acres.
Minimum yard dimensions: in compliance with § 508.9.
Building height: up to 65 feet, provided, however, that for every foot in height above 35 feet,
there shall be a reduction in impervious coverage of 0.2% and a reduction in building
coverage of 0.7%.
Maximum building length: 300 feet; provided, however, that the building length may be
increased to a maximum of 375 feet when the units in such building are served by a common
corridor with hold open device doors and with conditional use approval by the Board of
Supervisors.
Maximum density: 26 units per gross acre of lot area (notwithstanding any other provision or
limitation of the Zoning Ordinance). For purposes of density calculations and this § 508.13, a
"unit" shall mean an individual assisted living unit or independent living unit arranged,
designed and intended for occupancy (and actually occupied) by a maximum of two
individuals with access to each unit from a separate doorway on a common hallway. The unit
shall be a residence of the occupants, both of whom shall be 62 years of age or older. No
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 475/620
g.
h.
i.
j.
509.1
509.2
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
[1]
h.
509.3
a.
509.4
other individuals shall reside in or occupy the units, except guests and invitees of the
residents for a period not to exceed a maximum of 14 days per each calendar year for all
guests and invitees.
The facility shall be located in a single structure; the single structure may consist of building
components connected by conditioned walkways.
The facility must be owned by a single individual or entity; the facility must also be operated
by a single individual or entity which need not be the same as the owner.
The facility must include both independent and assisted living units. A minimum of 30% of the
total units must be assisted living units. The assisted living units must be licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as an assisted living facility or a personal care home.
Minimum parking: 0.5 space for each assisted living unit; and two spaces for every
independent living unit; and one space for each employee during the largest shift. Up to 20%
of the total parking required may be placed in reserve when approved by the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with § 607.2.e(2). A minimum of 10% of the total parking required
shall be under the building or covered.
§ 509. PI Planned Industrial District.
Purpose. The purpose of the PI Planned Industrial District is to provide sufficient space, in
appropriate locations, to meet the anticipated future needs for limited light industrial activity. Any
use permitted in this district by right, special exception or condition and described in § 611 of this
ordinance is subject to the requirements set forth in § 611.
Review procedure. In order to assure the satisfactory development of the PI Planned Industrial
District, it shall be required that development plans be submitted to the Board of Supervisors
under the procedures established in this ordinance.
Permitted uses.
Manufacturing, wholesaling, processing, warehousing, and distributing, provided that no bulk
storage of liquid or gaseous fuels shall be permitted except for consumption on the premises.
Laboratory for scientific research and development.
Agriculture, except intensive agriculture.
Passenger station for public transportation; electric substation; telephone central office.
Business or professional office and banks.
Churches.
Public uses, structures or buildings owned, operated or subsidized by the Township, an
Authority created by the Township or an Authority of which the Township is a member.
Grower/processor, subject to all applicable requirements of the Uwchlan Township Zoning
Ordinance and the Medical Marijuana Act.[1]
[Added 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
Permitted accessory uses, located on the same lot with the permitted principal uses.
Off-street parking areas pursuant to § 607.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 476/620
b.
c.
a.
b.
c.
[2]
d.
1.
2.
3.
4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
e.
509.5
Signs pursuant to § 606.
Other accessory uses, structures, or buildings, provided such are clearly incidental to the
principal use.
Uses permitted by conditional use.
Structures up to 65 feet in height may be permitted, provided they are sprinklered and have
standpipe systems in accordance with the Uwchlan Township Fire Code, and provided that for
each foot in excess of 35 feet, there shall be a corresponding decrease in both maximum
impervious coverage and building coverage by 0.7% and provided such height increase does
not impinge on the rights of existing or future residents in the community.
Any other use as determined by the Board of Supervisors to be of the same general character
as the permitted uses.
Sale of new automobiles, including repairs and used car sales only as accessory to new car
sales.
Adult entertainment pursuant to Ordinance Nos. 98-14, 98-15, 98-16, 98-17 and 99-08.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Adult Entertainment.
Each adult entertainment use shall be subject to the following separation distance, buffering,
and screening regulations:
[Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
NOTE: For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of
the premises of the listed use. The presence of a municipal, county or other political
subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the
distance requirements of this section.
No adult entertainment use (or building containing such use) shall be located:
Within 400 feet of:
A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for
religious worship and related religious activities;
A public or private educational facility, including but not limited to child day-care
facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools,
private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high
schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools,
junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does
not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally
as a school;
A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
Any other adult entertainment use;
Or within 800 feet of a boundary of a residential district as defined in the Uwchlan
Township Zoning Ordinance or any property devoted to a residential use;
Or within 500 feet of:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 477/620
1.
2.
(2)
(3)
f.
[3]
a.
509.6
a.
b.
509.7
a.
b.
c.
509.8
509.9
A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or
recreational activities, including but not limited to a park, playground, nature
trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts,
pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the
Township which is under the control, operation, or management of the Township
park and recreation authorities, or other similar land within the Township which
is under the control, operation or management of private parties and open and
available for use by the general public.
An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children and
family entertainment.
Screening, buffering, and signage. Any lot which is to be used for any adult entertainment
use shall contain screening and buffering along property lines adjoining other zoning
districts in accordance with the provisions of § 608, Screening, of this ordinance. In
addition to strict compliance with all other regulatory provisions applicable to signage, no
sign shall contain a graphic representation of or refer descriptively to any "specified
anatomical area" or "specified sexual activity."
Data. Sufficient additional data shall be submitted to enable the Planning Commission
and the Board of Supervisors to determine that the requirements of this and other
ordinances of the Township relevant to the proposed use have been fulfilled.
Any legitimate use not specifically provided for in any zoning district and which is not
inherently objectionable.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Uses permitted by special exception.
A private-use helistop as an accessory use or a private-use heliport. Both such facilities shall
be subject to Planning Commission review and recommendation and the general conditions
prescribed in § 610.[3]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection 509.6b which immediately followed this subsection was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch, 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Minimum lot area.
Area. The average area of all lots within a single development shall not be less than four
acres, provided no lot shall be less than two acres.
Width. There shall be a minimum lot width at the building line of 200 feet plus 50 feet for every
acre of lot area in excess of two acres but in no event shall the required lot width be more
than 400 feet.
Minimum yard dimensions.
Front yard: minimum of 40 feet, except when an agricultural or residential district is adjacent
to the front yard, in which case the front yard setback shall be 150 feet minimum.
Each side yard: minimum of 15 feet, except when an agricultural or residential district or lot
containing an occupied dwelling is adjacent to the side yard, in which case the side yard
setback shall be 150 feet on the side thus abutted. On a corner lot there shall be a side yard
of not less than 40 feet.
Rear yard: minimum of 15 feet, except when an agricultural or residential district, or lot
containing an occupied dwelling unit, is adjacent to the rear yard setback shall be 150 feet.
Maximum lot coverage and building height.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 478/620
a.
[4]
(1)
b.
[1]
510.1
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
b.
c.
510.2
Building coverage.
Lot Area
(acres) Maximum Building Coverage
At least 2, not over 3 40%
Over 3, not over 7 45%
Over 7, not over 10 50%
Over 100 55%
Maximum impervious coverage: no lot three net acres or larger shall be covered by more
than 65% of impervious surface, including but not limited to principal and accessory
buildings, driveways and walkways and parking areas.
Lots three acres or less may have up to 75% impervious coverage.
[Amended 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
Maximum height of buildings: 35 feet (see § 509.5.a) and structures 2 1/2 stories.
Buildings over two stories in height shall be sprinklered, and shall have a standpipe, in
accordance with the Uwchlan Township Building Code.[4]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 510. Floodplain management.
[Amended 9-25-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-06; 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06; 7-10-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-05]
Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the
passage of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,[1] delegated the responsibility
to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations to promote public health,
safety, and the general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Uwchlan does hereby order as follows.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
General provisions.
Intent. The intent of this section is to:
Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or
minimize flood damage in the future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its
residents, by preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
Applicability. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to
undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within the
Township of Uwchlan unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
Abrogation and greater restrictions. This section supersedes any other conflicting provisions
which may be in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 479/620
d.
(1)
(2)
e.
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
(1)
[2]
(2)
c.
510.3
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If
there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this section, the more restrictive shall
apply.
Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this section
shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of the section, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this
purpose the provisions of this section are hereby declared to be severable.
Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this section is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of
study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This section
does not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This section shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Uwchlan or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Administration.
Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
The Township Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this section
and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator
may: A) fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations; B) delegate
duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel,
plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees; or C) enter into a written agreement or
written contract with another agency or private sector entity to administer specific
provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal
Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator
duties are to be fulfilled by the Assistant Township Zoning Officer.
Permits required. A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Township of Uwchlan.
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that
the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this
and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
application for the permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required
by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam
Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean
Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);[2] and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404,
33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et
seq., respectively.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 480/620
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
d.
In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any development/permit, the
Floodplain Administrator shall review the proposed cost of improvements or repairs and
the preimprovement market value of the structure, so that a substantial
improvement/substantial damage determination can be made, in accordance with
FEMA's Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference.
In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any development/permit, the
Floodplain Administrator shall review the history of repairs to the subject building, so that
any cumulative substantial damage concerns can be addressed before the permit is
issued.
During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official
shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with
the information provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws
and ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of
the work as are necessary.
In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to
enter any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area,
upon presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions
of this section.
In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with
the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a
false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for whatever action it
considers necessary.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity, or for the lifetime of the
structure, all records associated with the requirements of this section including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to
FEMA concerning community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program as
requested.
The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate
responsibility lies with the person identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain
administrator/manager.
The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code and the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision thereof as adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Application procedures and requirements.
Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator on
forms supplied by the Township of Uwchlan. Such application shall contain the following:
Name and address of applicant.
Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
Name and address of contractor.
Site location including address.
Listing of other permits required.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 481/620
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(2)
(a)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
(b)
1.
(c)
(3)
Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of floodrelated
cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred
where appropriate.
A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction
as well as any existing buildings or structures.
If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any
identified floodplain area, applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary
information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to
determine that:
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and
conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement;
Building materials are flood-resistant;
Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other
service facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or
accumulation.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent
information as may be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above
determination:
A completed permit application form.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal
to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale, and date;
Topographic contour lines, if available;
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other
improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision
and development;
The location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified
floodplain areas, and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and
the flow of water including direction and velocities.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at
suitable scale showing the following:
The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North
American Vertical Datum of 1988;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 482/620
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
(a)
(b)
5.
6.
7.
(d)
(4)
e.
f.
The elevation of the base flood;
Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, the 2009
IBC or the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision thereof as adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The following data and documentation:
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base flood.
Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to
show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development within any
identified floodplain area (See § 510.4a) when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not cause any increase in the base flood
elevation.
A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which
states that the proposed construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces
associated with the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of the
type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been incorporated into
the design of the structure and/or the development.
Detailed information needed to determine compliance with §§ 510.5c(6)
Storage, and 510.5d, Development which may endanger human life, including:
The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred
to in §§ 510.5c(6) and 510.5d which are intended to be used, produced,
stored or otherwise maintained on site.
A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the
proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or
substances listed in § 510.5d during a base flood.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's
Planning Module for Land Development.
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements
of the Department of Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality based
upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain
Administrator.
Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed
construction or development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/or
individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
Changes. After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any
kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other
documents submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 483/620
g.
(1)
(2)
(3)
h.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
i.
Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be
submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
Placards. In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard, or
similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its issuance, and be
signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
Start of construction.
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days after the
date of issuance of the development permit. Work shall also be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant,
who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to
approve such a request and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance and
FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.
Enforcement.
Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal
representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provisions of this section, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing;
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the performance of
any act it requires;
Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided,
however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served
upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this section.
Penalties. Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which has violated or permitted
the violation of the provisions of this section shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 484/620
(1)
[3]
(2)
[4]
[5]
(3)
j.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
a.
(a)
(b)
(1)
b.
510.4
civil enforcement proceeding commenced hereunder, pay a judgment of not more than
$500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township
as a result thereof.
Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator
concerning the administration of the provisions of this section may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the appeal in
accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code[3] and Uwchlan Township Code
Chapter 265, Article 9.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief
therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the Municipalities Planning Code,[4] the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act[5] and any other applicable law.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Identification of floodplain areas.
Identification.
The identified floodplain area shall be:
Any areas of Township of Uwchlan, classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs)
in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated September 29, 2017, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital
data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study; and
Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments
are hereby adopted by Township of Uwchlan and declared to be a part of this section.
Description and special requirements of identified floodplain areas. The identified floodplain
area shall consist of the following specific areas:
The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the FIRM as floodway
and which represent the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface
elevation by more than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of information for those
special flood hazard areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has
been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall be allowed,
unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 485/620
(a)
1.
2.
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
c.
The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included
in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided.
The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations
have been provided and a floodway has been delineated.
AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have
been provided but no floodway has been determined.
No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development shall be permitted in an AE Zone without floodway, unless it
has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed development
together with all other existing and anticipated development, would not result in
an increase in flood levels of more than one foot within the entire community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
No new construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in
the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base flood elevations have been provided.
For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or other
acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable information is
not available, the base flood elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a
point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction
site. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality. In the absence of
any of the above data or documentation, the community may require elevation of the
lowest floor to be at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones AO and AH on the
FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to inundation by one-percent-annualchance
shallow flooding where average depths are between one foot and three feet. In
Zones AO and AH, drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around and
away from structures on slopes.
Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where Township of
Uwchlan has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as delineated and adopted
on a local flood hazard map using best available topographic data and locally derived
information such as flood of record, historic high-water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
Changes in identification of area. The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by
the Board of Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change to the
special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a
community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
technical or scientific data. See § 510.5a(2) for situations where FEMA notification is required.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 486/620
d.
e.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
510.5
Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Township of Uwchlan and any party aggrieved by
this decision or determination may appeal to the Board of Supervisors. The burden of proof
shall be on the appellant.
Jurisdictional boundary changes. Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation
or other corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community shall
review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The community
shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to annexation or corporate
boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
Technical provisions.
General.
Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any
watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action
have been notified by the municipality, and until all required permits or approvals
have first been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any
watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way.
In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any
watercourse.
When Township of Uwchlan proposes to permit the following encroachments: any
development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway; or any
development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway,
which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges); the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the
encroachments to occur.
Upon receipt of the FEMA Administrator's conditional approval of map change and
prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide evidence
to FEMA of the adoption of floodplain management ordinances incorporating the
increased base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the post-project
condition.
Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, the applicant shall provide as-built
certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such
certifications in accordance with 44 CFR Part 67.
Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified
floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in
this section and any other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
Within any identified floodplain area, no new structures shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 487/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
1.
2.
(a)
(2)
b.
Permitted uses: The following uses and activities are permitted, provided they are in
compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by another
ordinance and provided that they do not require structures, fill or storage of materials and
equipment.
Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks, day camps, picnic
grounds, golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, hiking and horseback
riding trails, wildlife and nature preserves, fish hatcheries, and fishing areas.
Municipal use.
Temporary uses such as carnivals or festivals provided that natural vegetative
ground cover remains as it was prior to the temporary event and is not destroyed,
removed or altered in a way to create sedimentation of erosion.
Accessory uses, such as yard areas, open space areas, gardens, play areas, and
pervious parking areas, driveways, and roadways.
Elevation and floodproofing requirements. Within any identified floodplain area any new
construction or substantial improvements not listed in § 510.5a(5) above shall be prohibited. If
a variance is obtained for new construction or substantial improvements in the identified
floodplain area in accordance with the criteria in § 510.8, then the following provisions apply:
Residential structures.
In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation.
In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any
new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 510.4b(3) of this section.
In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) at or above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as
the depth number specified on the FIRM.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009
International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code
(IRC) or the latest edition thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) shall be utilized,
where they are more restrictive.
Nonresidential Structures.
In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up
to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that
the space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water; and
Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 488/620
(b)
(c)
(d)
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
2.
(e)
In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated or completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 510.46(3) of this section.
In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have their
lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed above the highest adjacent grade to
at least as high as the depth number specified on the FIRM.
Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space
classification standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and
specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the above-referenced
standards. There should be a statement submitted with the permit application and a
statement submitted with the as-built floodproofing certificate prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy.
Any nonresidential structure that will be floodproofed must submit the following to the
Floodplain Administrator along with the nonresidential floodproofing certificate and
prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy:
An inspection and maintenance plan detailing the annual maintenance of
floodproofed components ensuring that all components will operate properly
under flood conditions. Components that must be inspected include at a
minimum:
Mechanical equipment such as sump pumps and generators;
Flood shields and closures;
Walls and wall penetrations; and
Levees and berms (as applicable).
Flood emergency operation plan detailing the procedures to be followed during
a flooding event, and must include information pertaining to how all components
will operate properly under all conditions, including power failures. The design
professional must produce the plan. An adequate plan must include the
following:
An established chain of command and responsibility with leadership
responsibilities clearly defined for all aspects of the plan.
A procedure for notification of necessary parties when flooding threatens
and flood warnings are issued. Personnel required to be at the building
should have a planned and safe means of ingress and should have no
other emergency response duties during a flood event. Alternates should
be assigned in the event that the primary persons responsible are unable to
complete their assigned duties under the plan.
A list of specific duties assigned to ensure that all responsibilities are
addressed expeditiously. The locations of materials necessary to properly
install all floodproofing components must be included in the list.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 489/620
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
1.
2.
3.
(c)
(3)
(4)
1.
2.
3.
(a)
(1)
c.
An evacuation plan for all personnel or occupants; those without duties for
the flood emergency as well as those with duties for implementing the plan.
All possible ingress and egress routes must be identified.
A periodic training and exercise program to keep personnel and occupants
aware of their duties and responsibilities. Training drills should be held at
least once a year and should be coordinated with community officials.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009
International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code
(IRC) or the latest revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405, as amended)
shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Space below the lowest floor.
Basements are prohibited.
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be
used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an
area other than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed space installed on two separate walls.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this section must comply with all
section requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific section requirement will cause removal
of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic
Preservation Officer. Any exemption from section requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Design and construction standards. The following minimum standards shall apply for all
construction and development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
Fill. Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be prohibited. If a variance is
obtained in accordance with the criteria in § 510.8, then the following provisions apply:
If fill is used, it shall:
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;
Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall not be
permitted;
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion,
scouring, or settling;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 490/620
4.
5.
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(8)
(a)
(9)
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data
justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain
Administrator; and
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of
stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper
drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system
shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall
be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and
the infiltration of floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of
untreated sewage into floodwaters.
No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within any identified
floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for
such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.
The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No. 348, "Protecting
Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and "the International Private Sewage
Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall
be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of
impairment during a flood.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below
the regulatory flood elevation.
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of flooding
could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in § 510.5d, Development
which may endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed,
located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and
shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted
engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components
located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to
prevent flotation.
Floors, walls and ceilings.
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain
without causing structural damage to the building.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 491/620
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(10)
(a)
(b)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(12)
(13)
(a)
(b)
(14)
d.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or
water-resistant variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
Paints and adhesives.
Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
marine or water-resistant quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or
water-resistant variety.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other
finishing material.
Electrical components.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the base flood
elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Equipment.
Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the
regulatory flood elevation and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed
to remain water resistant.
Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into
floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and specifications contained in
34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) and not limited to the following
provisions shall apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this section, to
the extent that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this section.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest revision thereof as adopted by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612,
3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest revision thereof as
adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322,
Appendix E, and Appendix J.
Development which may endanger human life. Within any identified floodplain area, any
structure of the kind described in Subsection A., below, shall be prohibited. If a variance is
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 492/620
[6]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(4)
obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
(5.04 B, C, & D)
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,[6] and the regulations
adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by
the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which: will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will
be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons,
or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or substances
on the premises; or will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of
radioactive substances; shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all
other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure of the
kind described in Subsection (1), above, shall be prohibited within the area measured 50
feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection (1), above,
shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved residential structure of the kind described in § 510.5d(1), above,
shall be elevated to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with § 510.5a, b and c.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
nonresidential structure of the kind described in § 510.5d(1), above, shall be built in
accordance with § 510.5a, b and c, including:
Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2
feet above base flood elevation; and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 493/620
(b)
(c)
(5)
e.
(a)
(b)
(1)
f.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
a.
510.6
Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a
base flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for
completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing
Regulations (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992),
or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in time of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal or plant life, and not listed in § 510.5d(1), above, shall be
stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or be floodproofed to the maximum
extent possible.
Special requirements for subdivisions and development. All subdivision proposals and
development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the
lesser, in identified floodplain areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall
be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR) and letter of map revision (LOMR). Submittal requirements and processing fees
shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
Special requirements for recreational vehicles. Within any identified floodplain area
recreational vehicles shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the
criteria in § 510.8, then the following provisions apply:
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
Prohibited activities.
General. In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of
Community and Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act,[7] the following activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain
area. No variance shall be granted:
The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following
activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home, new
manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home or manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
Cemeteries.
Sanitary landfills, dumps, and junkyards.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 494/620
[7]
a.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
b.
510.7
a.
(1)
(2)
b.
510.8
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
Existing structures. The provisions of this section do not require any changes or
improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is
made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 510.7b shall apply.
Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an
existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any
identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District(s),
BFEs are determined using the methodology in § 510.4b(3).
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing
structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value shall constitute a
substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
provisions of this section.
The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code, as amended,
and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent revision thereof as adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Within any Floodway Area/District (See § 510.4b(1)), no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
Within any AE Area/District without Floodway (See § 510.4b(2)), no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing
structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated
and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind that meets the
definition of "cumulative substantial damage" shall be undertaken only in full compliance
with the provisions of this section.
Variances.
General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this section would result in an
exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Township of
Uwchlan Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of
the requirements.
Variance procedures and conditions. Requests for variances shall be considered by the
Township of Uwchlan Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures contained in
§ 510.3; and the following:
No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area that would cause any
increase in BFE. In A Area/District, BFEs are determined using the methodology in
§ 510.4b(3).
Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation requirement involved,
no variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
development regulated by Development Which May Endanger Human Life (§ 510.5d).
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 495/620
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
(a)
(b)
1.
2.
(c)
(7)
(8)
(9)
a.
b.
510.9
No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (§ 510.6).
If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
In granting any variance, the Township of Uwchlan Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this section.
Whenever a variance is granted, the Township of Uwchlan Zoning Hearing Board shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township of Uwchlan Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant.
That the granting of the variance will:
Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense;
Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any
other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
Township of Uwchlan Zoning Hearing Board. In addition, a report of all variances granted
during the year shall be included in the annual report to the FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and
constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one-percent-annual-chance flood.
Definitions.
General. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this section shall be
interpreted so as to give this section its most reasonable application.
Specific definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD
A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
(also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or "one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE
The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it passes a given location within a
given time, usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 496/620
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30
that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percentor-
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof.
Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions
during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event,
on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the
damages occurred.
DECLARATION OF LAND RESTRICTION (NONCONVERSION AGREEMENT)
A form signed by the property owner to agree not to convert or modify in any manner that
is inconsistent with the terms of the permit and these regulations, certain enclosures
below the lowest floor of elevated buildings and certain accessory structures. The form
requires the owner to record it on the property deed to inform future owners of the
restrictions.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited
to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of
buildings or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other
paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes
flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 497/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual
and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by
the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to
the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
This term is an umbrella term that includes all of the areas within which the community
has selected to enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as
the special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance
Study, but may include additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 510.4a and
b for the specifics on what areas the community has included in the identified floodplain
area.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished,
flood-resistant partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, and incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered
the lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that
the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
section.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis,
and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 498/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
required utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other
similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective start
date of this floodplain management ordinance and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after September 30, 1980,
and before the effective start date of this floodplain management ordinance is subject to
the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of
construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after December
31, 1974, or on or after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
September 30, 1980, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before
December 31, 1974, or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
dated September 30, 1980, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as determined using simplified
methods plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. The freeboard safety factor also
applies to utilities and ductwork.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 499/620
An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the
date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months after the date
of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally
aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more
lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which
the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage or cumulative substantial damage regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and
which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999
applicable to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International Residential
Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction
standard applicable with the state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes,
references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 500/620
(1)
(2)
a.
510.10
[1]
601.1
601.2
601.3
601.4
VARIANCE
A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44
CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Severability; enactment.
Severability; enactment.
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this section shall be held
to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity, illegality, or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair the remaining
provisions, sections, sentences, clauses, or parts of this section, it being the intent of the
Board of Supervisors that the remainder of the Ordinance shall remain in full force and
effect.
This section shall be effective five days from the date of enactment and shall remain in
force until modified, amended or rescinded by Township of Uwchlan, Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
Article 6. Supplementary Regulations for All Districts
Editor's Note: Check PCID requirements for applicable requirements.
§ 601. General regulations for all districts.
Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot nothing shall be erected (except street signs, utility
poles, traffic signs, or trees whose branches are trimmed to a height of 10 feet), placed, planted,
or allowed to grow in such manner as to impede vision between a height of 2 1/2 and 10 feet
above the center line grades of the intersecting streets in the area bound by the street center lines
of such intersecting streets and a line joining the street center lines at a distance of 75 feet from
the point of intersection.
Fences, walls, hedges, and trees. Fences, walls, hedges, and tree rows shall be permitted in
any yard; provided, however, that no fence, wall (except retaining walls) or hedge in a required
front yard shall be over 36 inches in height. Ornamental fences in front yards exceeding 36 inches
shall be permitted, provided that said fence contains an open area of not less than 75%, and
further provided that the maximum height shall not exceed six feet.
Erection of more than one principal structure or building on a lot. In any district, except where
expressly prohibited, more than one structure or building housing a permitted principal use may be
erected on a single lot, provided that lot area, yard and other requirements of this ordinance shall
be met for each structure or building as though it were on an individual lot. A sketch plan
illustrating compliance with lot area, yard and other requirements of this ordinance shall be
submitted by the applicant.
Exceptions to height regulations. The height limitations contained herein are applicable to
buildings and structures but are not applicable to spires; clock towers, cupolas, mechanical
systems; water tanks; ventilators; heating and air-conditioning components, including refrigerant
coils and compressors; chimneys; antennas for the reception or transmission of radio, television or
microwave signals; elevators; or stair bulkheads, provided that such accessory structures are
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 501/620
a.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
b.
[1]
c.
601.5
601.6
601.7
601.8
located on and permanently affixed to the roof of a permitted building and provided further that the
said accessory structures or building components shall not exceed the applicable height limitation
by more than 10 feet and shall not occupy more than 20% of the area of the uppermost floor of the
supporting building. The height limitations contained herein shall not apply to silos, flagpoles not
attached to any building or to radio towers erected by a licensed amateur radio operator as a use
accessory to the operator's residence, provided that the maximum height of the said silo, flagpole
or radio tower shall be 65 feet and further provided that no such silo, flagpole or radio tower shall
be erected less than a distance equal to 1 1/2 times the height of the structure from any property
boundary; street; pedestrian, street or utility right-of-way; parking lot or area; common open space
area; recreation area or facility; or flood hazard district.
Standard antennas for the reception of local radio and television transmission are also
excepted from the height regulation.
Microwave antennas for satellite communications shall be governed by the following section:
In all districts, microwave antennas shall be permissible as accessory use subject to the
following:
Roof-mounted dishes are restricted to a maximum diameter of four feet.
When ground mounted, the entire structure, including the dish, shall not exceed 15
feet in height.
When ground mounted, the dish shall be placed in the rear yard only and shall
comply with all setback requirements for the district in which it is erected.
All dishes in excess of four feet diameter shall be screened as per ordinance, but not
to preclude proper reception.
When roof mounted, the dish shall be placed on the portion of the roof sloping away
from the front of the lot and shall not stand more than four feet above the roof peak.
Only one dish shall be permitted on any lot.
Before erection, the applicant shall secure a building permit from the Township.
Any microwave transmitter shall be permitted only in PC, PI, PIC, PCID or PC-2 zoning
districts and only then by special exception.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Buildings to have access. Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to
a public street or a private street approved by the Board of Supervisors, and all buildings shall be
so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and
required off-street parking.
Corner lot restriction. On every corner lot there shall be provided on each side thereof, adjacent
to a street, a yard equal in depth to the required front yard of the prevailing zoning district in which
the corner lot is located.
Lots in two districts. Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership prior to the effective date of this ordinance, placing 75% or more of the lot area in a
particular district, the location of such district boundary line may be construed to include the
remaining 25% or less of the lot so divided.
Lot area and lot width for lots not served with public water and/or sanitary sewers. Where a lot is
not served by a public water supply and/or sanitary sewerage system and the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, or other state or local ordinance in force require a
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 502/620
601.9
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
601.10
601.11
[2]
601.12
601.13
higher standard for lot area or lot width than this ordinance, the more restricted regulations of such
other ordinance or regulation shall apply.
Front yard exceptions. When an unimproved lot is situated between two improved lots with front
yard dimensions less than those required for the particular district, the front yard required may be
reduced to a depth equal to the average of the two adjoining lots; provided, however, that in no
case shall the front yard be reduced by more than 50% of the required front yard for that district.
Projections into required yards. The following projections shall be permitted into required yards
and shall not be considered in the determination of yard requirements or building coverage.
Terraces or patios, provided that such terraces or patios are unroofed or otherwise
unenclosed and are not closer than five feet to any adjacent lot line.
Projected architectural features (bay windows, cornices, eaves, fireplaces, chimneys, window
sills, or other architectural features), provided that any single feature does not exceed eight
square feet in external area.
Uncovered decks, stairs and landings, provided such stairs or landings do not exceed 36
inches in height.
Lamp posts, walkways, driveways, retaining walls or steps shall be permitted within any
required yard.
Open balconies, provided such balconies are not supported on the ground and do not project
more than five feet into any yard nor closer than three feet to any adjacent lot line.
Temporary structure for exhibits, construction offices or similar purposes.
Unroofed playground equipment designed for use by children.
Restrictions on air pollution. All sources of air pollution must comply with rules and regulations
as defined and established by the Air Pollution Commission of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection, or as modified by additional restrictions
imposed by local or regional health department. The term "air pollution" shall refer to the presence
in the outdoor atmosphere of any form of contaminant, including, but not limited to, the discharging
from stacks, chimneys, openings, buildings, structures, open fires, vehicles, processes, or any
other sources of any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinders, dirt, toxic or radioactive substances,
waste or any other matter in such place, manner, or concentration which may be harmful to the
public health, safety, or animal life, or to property, or which unreasonably interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
Solid waste disposal. All methods and practices of solid waste or refuse disposal shall be in
compliance with Acts 241 and 101[2] (Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Acts) of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or as specified by additional local
ordinances and zoning requirements. Solid wastes are defined to mean garbage, refuse, and
other discarded materials, including, but not limited to, solid and liquid waste materials resulting
from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and residential activities.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
Requirements for sewage and liquid waste disposal. All sewage and liquid waste disposal
practices must be in accordance with rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the Downingtown Area Regional Authority. The requirements are
such that all new facilities or major revisions to existing waste treatment or disposal facilities must
have a permit issued by this authority. All operators of such treatment or disposal facilities must
also be properly licensed as called for by the Department of Environmental Protection.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 503/620
a.
b.
c.
[3]
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
601.14
[4]
601.15
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
601.16
Performance standards for all uses. No use or operation shall be permitted which creates a
public nuisance or hazard by reason of fire, explosion, radiation, odor, noise, dust, vibration, glare,
air and/or water pollution, or other similar causes. All uses shall be subject to the following
regulations, where applicable:
Noise pollution and vibration. "Rules and Regulations" of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
Air pollution, airborne emissions and odor. "Rules and Regulations" of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
Water pollution. The Clean Streams Law, June 22, 1973, P.L. 1987, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
and amendments thereto.
Mine reclamation and open pit setback. Pennsylvania Act 147, the Surface Mining
Conservation and Reclamation Act of 1971 and amendments thereto.[3]
Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 1396.1 et seq.
Glare and heat. "Rules and Regulations" of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
Outside residential storage. No outside storage of junk or discarded materials shall be
permitted, and no more than one inoperable or unregistered vehicle per lot shall be permitted.
Outside industrial storage. No outside industrial storage, including junkyards, shall be located
on land with a slope in excess of 5% or within 100 feet of a public right-of-way.
Traffic analysis. A detailed traffic analysis, prepared by a qualified traffic engineer, may be
requested by the Board of Supervisors, for the purpose of showing what impact a proposed
development will ultimately have on the safety and welfare of the public.
Front yard prohibited uses [includes street(s)]. Camping trailers, house trailers, mobile homes,
boats, unregistered or inoperative motor equipment, or similar durables shall not be stored nor
parked within the required front yard except as specifically provided in other provisions of this
ordinance.[4]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Off-site water systems.
An off-site water system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the latest
Aqua Pennsylvania "General Specifications for Water System Construction," and all designs
shall be approved by Aqua Pennsylvania prior to the start of construction.
All buildings shall be served from the Aqua Pennsylvania water system, whenever such
service is determined by Aqua Pennsylvania to be feasible.
If Aqua Pennsylvania determines that service from its system is not feasible, then service
shall be provided from another existing public or private off-site water system, subject to the
approval of Aqua Pennsylvania.
If Aqua Pennsylvania determines that it is not feasible to extend service from any existing offsite
water system, then the building(s) shall be served by designing and constructing an offsite
water system under an agreement with Aqua Pennsylvania, which system shall be
deeded to Aqua Pennsylvania at no charge.
If Aqua Pennsylvania determines that it is not feasible to provide off-site water system service
under any of the procedures described above, then Aqua Pennsylvania will grant approval for
the building(s) to be served by means of on-site water system.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 504/620
601.17
601.18
a.
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
d.
602.1
All structures intended for human occupancy shall be required to maintain, in constant view, a
sign displaying numbers, three inches minimum in height, which denote the street address of the
building. In the case of commercial development with rear exits, the rear must also be marked to
denote the tenant or occupant of the space or the street address.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance or any other ordinance or regulation, with
respect to any proposed use consisting of initially or in the aggregate of 15 or more residential
units or lots, or 25,000 square feet or more of gross floor area, or any proposed use proposing one
or more private or public streets, the developer shall prepare and submit as part of the preliminary
land development plan a detailed study to ascertain the total potential build-out of the lot or tract. A
traffic study shall be prepared and submitted by the developer assuming 100% build-out of the lot
or tract. All movements of all entrance and exit driveways to and from the proposed use, and all
intersections along any new street to existing streets, shall operate at Level of Service D or better
as defined in the latest edition of the Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
[Added 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-03]
§ 602. Home occupation regulations.
When authorized by the Zoning Officer, any single-family dwelling unit and accessory structure with
direct access to a public street may be used for the practice of a home occupation, provided such
occupation is clearly incidental or secondary to the use of the property as a residence, and further
provided that such use of the dwelling or accessory structure does not change the character thereof or
have any exterior evidence of such secondary use other than a small nameplate as provided in this
ordinance.
Standards.
Home occupations shall be limited to activities customarily carried on in a single-family
dwelling or in a building accessory to a single-family dwelling by one or more occupants of the
dwelling together with a maximum of two paid or unpaid assistants or employees.
Off-street parking spaces, designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable
regulations of the Township, shall be provided for each home occupation use. The number of
off-street parking spaces provided shall be equal to the aggregate of two plus one space for
each employee plus one space for each 150 square feet of floor area devoted to the home
occupation use.
Home occupations shall not occupy more than 25% of the first floor area of the dwelling unit.
No additions or alterations to the building shall be permitted to directly increase the space
housing the home occupation or adding to the first floor area in an effort to increase the 25%
available for home occupation use.
Home occupations shall be subject to, but not limited to, the following criteria.
No emission of unpleasant gases or other odorous matter beyond the dwelling unit or
building in which the home occupation is conducted shall be permitted.
No emission of noxious, toxic, or corrosive gases or fumes injurious to persons, property,
or vegetation beyond the dwelling unit or building in which the home occupation is
conducted shall be permitted.
No glare or heat shall be emitted from any dwelling unit or building in which the home
occupation is conducted.
No discharge is permitted into a reservoir, sewage or storm disposal system, stream,
open body of water, or into the ground, of any materials in such a way or of such nature
or temperature as could contaminate any water supply, or damage or be detrimental to
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 505/620
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
602.2
any sewage system or any sewage treatment process, or otherwise could cause the
emission of dangerous objectionable elements.
No vibration perceptible beyond the dwelling unit or building in which the home
occupation is conducted shall be permitted.
No noise which would reasonably be judged to be objectionable shall be audible beyond
the dwelling unit or building in which the home occupation is conducted.
Electric or electronic devices shall be shielded in such a manner as not to interfere with
radio or television reception or transmission of any kind.
Any other reasonable conditions that the Board of Supervisors may deem necessary to
protect the public interest.
No more than one home occupation shall be permitted in a dwelling or on a residential
lot.
The operation of a boarding home, motor vehicle repair shop, stable, kennel, funeral
home, veterinary office, or the housing, care or education of persons who normally would
be subject to institutionalization for physical, mental, criminal or like reasons shall not be
considered a home occupation.
No storage or display of goods, materials, products or equipment shall take place out-ofdoors.
No interior display of goods, materials, products or equipment shall be visible from
outside the dwelling.
No business or commercial vehicle shall be stored outdoors unless screened in
accordance with § 608 and/or complies with § 607.2.i of this ordinance.
No retail sale of goods of any type shall be conducted on the lot encompassing the home
occupation, and no manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work performed in
connection with such home occupation shall be performed out-of-doors.
HO-2 Home Occupation Overlay.
[Added 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-10]
It is the intent of the HO-2 Home Occupation Overlay standards to provide continued
opportunity for home occupation use within single-family dwellings. Uses permitted as home
occupations within the HO-2 Home Occupation Overlay are to be origin/destination in nature
and are not to alter the external appearance of the dwelling. The HO-2 Overlay applies only to
properties with frontage along PA Route 113 located generally between Woodland Drive and
Foxcroft Drive, specifically described by metes and bounds in Exhibit A attached hereto.
The HO-2 Home Occupation Overlay is depicted on the Zoning Map.
Major home occupations shall be limited to those listed in § 602.2.e hereof carried on in a
single-family detached dwelling or in a building accessory to a single-family detached dwelling
by one or more occupants of the dwelling who maintain full-time residence in the dwelling or
the owner together with a maximum of four paid or unpaid assistants or employees. The
single-family dwelling need not be owner occupied. A livable occupied residence must be
maintained at all times.
This overlay applies only to residence on Route 113, and each one must apply individually for
a home occupation permit and submit a site plan showing compliance with § 602 in its
entirety.
The following are permitted major home occupation uses within the HO-2 Overlay:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 506/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
Professions of lawyer, doctor, dentist, architect, planner, engineer, financial consultant,
insurance agent and accountant;
Computer programming that involves services to outside clients — no schools or learning
centers;
Telephone answering, typing, and bookkeeping;
Tutoring, limited to not more that two students at any one time;
Beautician or barber services by appointment only, limited to not more than two clients at
any one time;
Dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring;
Painting, sculpting, writing or music — no schools or studios for more than one student at
a time;
Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, pottery, jewelry, florist, cabinet making,
and wood crafting;
Home cooking and catering; provided all food is catered off premises;
Service businesses like vacuum and TV/computer; repair and locksmith.
Major home occupations shall not occupy more than 50% of the floor area of the dwelling unit.
No additions or alterations to the building shall be permitted to directly increase the space
housing the home occupation or adding to the floor area in an effort to increase the 50%
available for home occupation use. Home occupation use must not exceed a maximum of
1,000 square feet.
In addition to the parking requirements of § 602.1.b, all parking for the major home occupation
shall be located within the front yard, unless a twenty-five-foot setback can be provided
between the property lines of the adjacent residential lots for any parking located in the side
or rear yard and be screened in accordance with § 608 of this ordinance.
No outside storage is permitted. No interior display of goods, materials, products or
equipment shall be visible from outside the dwelling.
One commercial vehicle used in the major home occupation may be stored outdoors if
screened in accordance with § 608 and complying with § 607.2.i of this ordinance.
Retail sales of goods of any type conducted on the lot encompassing the home occupation
shall be done in accordance with the requirements of an accessory use as outlined in the
Zoning Ordinance with service being the primary use and sale the accessory use. No
manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work performed in connection with such home
occupation shall be performed out-of-doors.
Home occupations shall be subject to the criteria in § 602.1.d(1) through (12) of this
ordinance.
EXHIBIT A
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 507/620
603.1
603.2
EXHIBIT A
The Uwchlan Township Official Zoning Map, incorporated by referenced as part of the
Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance of 1994, as amended, by Section 401 thereof, is
hereby amended by adding a HO-2 Home Occupation Overlay in the R-1, Low Density
Residential Zoning District for all or a portion of Tax Parcels 33-4-76, 76.1A, 77, 78, 79, 80,
81, 82, 83, 84, 85.1, 85.2, 85.3, 85.4, 85.5, 87.2, 88, 89.1, 90.1, 90.2A, 91.1,94, 95, 97,
98,99; 33-4P-10,11, 12, 13 and 33-4Q-7, having frontage and direct access to State Route
0113 being more fully described as follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of S.R. 0113, Uwchlan Avenue and T-415, Woodland Drive;
thence from the point of beginning along the center line of S.R.0113, R/W variable in width,
in a southwesterly direction approximately 500 feet to a point; thence leaving said center line
of S.R. 0113 in a southeasterly direction along the eastern property line of Tax Parcel 33-4-
99 measured 230 feet from the center line of S.R. 0113; thence leaving said point in a
southwesterly direction through Tax Parcel 33-4-99, 98, 97, 95, 94, 91.1, 90.1, 90.2A, 89.1,
88, and 87.2, along a line measured 230 feet parallel to the center line of S.R. 0113 to a
point of the western property line of Tax Parcel 33-4-87.2; thence along said western
property line of Tax parcel 33-4-87.2 in a northerly direction 230 feet to the center line of
S.R. 0113; thence along said center line of S.R. 0113 in a southwesterly direction
approximately 1,234 feet to a point being the intersection of the western property line of Tax
Parcel 33-4P-10 with the center line of S.R. 0113; thence leaving said center line of S.R.
0113 in a northern direction along said western property line of Tax Parcel 33-4P-10 to a
point measured 155 feet perpendicular from the center line of S.R. 0113; thence continuing
in a northeasterly direction along a line measured 155 feet parallel to the center line of S.R.
0113 through Tax Parcels 33-4P-10, 11, 12, 13, and 33-4Q-7, approximately 831 feet to a
point on the eastern property line of Tax Parcel 33-4Q-7; thence along said eastern property
line of Tax Parcel 33-4Q-7, in a southeasterly direction 155 feet to the center line of S.R.
0113; thence along the center line of S.R. 0113 in a northeasterly direction approximately
315 feet to the intersection of the western property line of Tax parcel 33-4-76.1A with said
center line of S.R. 0113; thence along said western property line of Tax Parcel 33-4-76.1A to
a point measured 280 feet perpendicular to the center line of S.R. 0113; then continuing in a
northeasterly direction along a line measured 280 feet parallel to the center line of S.R. 0113
through Tax Parcels 33-4-76.1A, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, and 84, approximately 1,512
feet to a point of the eastern property line of Tax Parcel 33-4-84; thence along said eastern
property line of Tax Parcel 33-4-84; thence along said eastern property line of Tax Parcel 33-
4-84; thence along said eastern property line of Tax Parcel 33-4-84 in a southerly direction
approximately 80 feet to the northwest corner of Tax Parcel 33-4-85.4; thence leaving said
eastern property line of Tax Parcel 33-4-84 and continuing along the northern property lines
of Tax Parcels 33-4-85.4 and 85.1 in an eastern direction approximately 183 feet to a point
on the western property line of Tax Parcel 33-4-85.5; thence leaving said western property
line of Tax Parcel 33-4-85.5 along a line measured 120 feet parallel to the northern right-ofway
line of S.R.0113 through Tax Parcel 33-4-85.5, 85.3, and 85.2, approximately 583 feet
to the center line of Woodland Drive; thence along the center line of Woodland Drive in a
southeasterly direction approximately 300 feet to the intersection of the center line of
Woodland Drive and S.R. 0113 the point and place of beginning.
§ 603. Permitted accessory uses, buildings or structures.
Accessory buildings or structures, excluding garages up to 120 square feet, may be erected in
any required rear yard, provided that no detached accessory building or structure shall be erected
within 10 feet of the rear property line or closer to the side property line than is permitted in the
district.
Private noncommercial swimming pools, which are designed to contain a water depth of 24
inches or more, must be located in a rear or side yard only, not less than 15 feet from the dwelling,
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 508/620
603.3
603.4
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
603.5
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
b.
603.6
side or rear lot lines. All pools shall be entirely enclosed with a permanent fence not less than four
feet in height. Such fence shall contain a self-latching gate which can be locked.
No nonresidential activities shall be permitted in any residential district except those permitted by
the home occupation regulations of this ordinance.
Agricultural uses or individual gardens for home consumption shall be limited in a front yard to a
maximum of 200 square feet (providing they do not infringe upon more than 1/2 the minimum
required front yard), and shall not extend into more than 1/2 of the minimum side or rear yards
required in the applicable zoning district.
Structures limited in use and functions to the reception of television signals and accessory to a
single-family detached residence may be located in the required side or rear yard areas of the lot
on which the dwelling is located, provided that:
No such structure shall be located less than the distance required by the applicable yard
regulations of the zoning district in which the structure is located.
No such structure shall be at any time more than 15 feet in height.
No such structure shall result in any noise, vibration or electrical, television or radio
interference beyond the property boundary.
All such structures visible from adjoining properties shall be screened in accordance with
§ 608 of this ordinance.
Provisions of Swction 601.4 shall also govern.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit other uses not mentioned so long as they
are clearly accessory to the principal permitted use of the land and do not create a threat to
the public health, safety and/or welfare of the community.
Accessory structures and systems on properties that provide alternative energy sources for the
property ["system(s)"]. System structures may be installed in side or rear yards, except to the
extent permitted in section a.(1) below. All systems are subject to permits under the Township
Building Code in effect at the time of construction.
[Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-07]
Solar energy systems.
To minimize visual impact, rooftop arrays shall be placed on the side of the roof away
from any road when efficiently possible.
Rooftop arrays shall not be higher than the peak of the roof or higher than 15 inches
above the roof surface at any point.
Ground-mounted solar panels shall be placed in side or rear yards only.
The maximum height of a ground-mounted solar panel array shall be 15 feet to its
highest point and all portions of the solar panels shall be within the side and rear yard
building setbacks but in no case less than 15 feet from a property line. The area of the
panels shall be calculated and added to the maximum building and impervious coverage
that is permitted on the subject property.
Ground-mounted assemblies must be screened in accordance with § 608 of the
ordinance, but not to an extent which precludes adequate and efficient operations.
Windmills.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 509/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
c.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
d.
One windmill per lot will be permitted.
Windmills shall be permitted in side or rear yards only.
The maximum height of the windmill shall be the same as the maximum height permitted
in the district and shall be measured with the blade in maximum vertical position from tip
of blade to ground.
All windmills shall be mounted on a single-pole system with no guy wires or other
supports except its foundation.
No portion of the windmill shall be within the side or rear yard setback or within 1 1/2
times its height from the property lines and the residential structure, whichever is greater.
No windmill blade in any position shall be closer than 12 feet to the ground.
Geothermal installations.
All Geothermal installations shall be in accordance with Township Stormwater Ordinance
provisions.
In-ground bed/tank systems will require a Township grading permit.
All liquid slurry products of well drilling shall be properly drained so any water leaving the
site or entering Township storm sewers will be absent of solids/particulates.
No waste or overflow from the system shall be permitted to be discharged to the
Township sanitary sewer system.
All geothermal installations shall comply with regulations set forth by the Chester County
Health Department when drilled wells are involved.
General requirements.
All alternate energy systems shall require Township permits and permits from other
agencies having jurisdiction.
No system shall cause any excessive noise, glare, vibration or communications
interference to neighboring properties.
All exterior wiring for systems shall be underground, or in instances when it is required to
be above ground, within hard wall conduits.
All exterior signs of these systems shall be constructed in a manner to be harmonious
with neighboring properties and those on adjacent public or private streets.
All exterior portions of alternate energy systems shall be removed from sight if the
system has been abandoned for any reason for a period of one year.
All systems shall be constructed in compliance with the provisions spelled out in this
ordinance. Any variations to these requirements may be requested through the
conditional use process.
Any systems that are damaged, become inoperable or use of which is halted because of
damage or abandonment of use shall be removed by the owner within six months of such
damage or inactivity.
§ 604. Multifamily residential or townhouse development.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 510/620
604.1
[1]
604.2
604.3
a.
604.4
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
The PCID Planned Commercial Industrial Development Districts are excluded from these provisions.
See § 508 for applicable regulations.
Permitted uses. Multifamily or townhouse buildings shall consist solely of residential dwelling
units, rental office, recreational and parking facilities; however, coin-operated washing and drying
machines, and vending machines for food, beverages, newspapers or cigarettes located inside the
building shall be permitted, provided that these are for the tenants' use only. Sample apartments
or townhouses for display purposes shall be permitted for each type of construction.
Water and sewer. The proposed development shall be served by public water supply and
sewage disposal systems, or a community water supply and sewage disposal system approved by
the Department of Environmental Protection and the Municipal Authority. All garden apartments
shall be fully sprinklered in conformance with the Uwchlan Township Building Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Construction Codes, Uniform.
Area and bulk regulations. All multifamily residential or townhouse developments shall conform
to all of the requirements as herein established:
Garden Apartments Townhouses
a. Minimum lot area: 20 acres 20 acres
b. Minimum lot width at building
line:
300 feet 22 feet
c. Maximum building coverage of
lot area:
15% 15%
d. Minimum side yard: 50 feet 30 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 75 feet 30 feet
f. Minimum front yard: 75 feet 30 feet
g. Distance between buildings: See § 604.4 See § 604.4
h. Parking area setback from lot
line or street ultimate right-ofway:
30 feet 20 feet
i. Maximum dwelling units per acre
of lot area (as defined in this
ordinance):
12 6
j. Minimum usable open space
(not including parking or
driveway areas) devoted solely
to recreational use and activities:
15% of the tract 10% of the tract
k. Maximum height: 3 stories or 35 feet 3 stories or 35 feet
l. Maximum impervious coverage: 60% 60%
NOTES:
(1) Minimum width of a townhouse dwelling unit is 22 feet per unit.
(2) Applies to end building only.
(3) Applies only to parking lots and joint parking areas, not to separate parking areas for
individual townhouses.
(4) Usable open space shall not include front, side, and/or rear yards of an individual building.
In addition to the provisions of the above requirements, the following shall also apply:
There shall be no group of townhouses consisting of more than five dwelling units.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4) (4)
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 511/620
b.
(1)
(2)
(3)
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
a.
[2]
(1)
(2)
(3)
b.
604.5
The developer should vary architectural treatments within apartment projects, individual
apartments, and between dwelling units in a townhouse development. Variations may include
those of exterior elevation, building setback, provision of balconies, architectural details, pitch
of roof, exterior materials, or use of color. Variety and flexibility in design layout and
arrangement, of buildings, parking areas, services, recreation areas, common open space,
and planting that fully considers the particular physical characteristics of the site and natural
amenities is highly desired.
The horizontal distance between groups of townhouses or garden apartments shall be:
Two times the average height of the two groups of townhouses and garden apartments
for front or rear wall facing front or rear walls;
One and one-half times the average height for front or rear walls facing side walls; and
Equal to the height of the highest building for side walls facing side walls.
The minimum width of any side yard abutting a street, driveway parking area should not be
less than 30 feet.
Access and service shall be provided in the front of each townhouse. Parking may be
provided on the lot, as carports, as an integral part of the townhouse, or a joint parking facility
for a group of townhouses with such deed restrictions as are necessary to determine
ownership and maintenance of common parking facilities and methods of assigning charges
for maintaining snow removal and repairs.
Usable open space devoted to recreational use as herein required shall be designed for use
by tenants of the development and shall be improved and equipped by the developer in
accordance with plans submitted to and reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved
by the Board of Supervisors. Common open space must remain in its natural condition unless
designed for active or passive recreation as delineated on the approved land development
plan and shall be properly maintained in accordance with an approved open space
management plan as described in § 617 of this ordinance.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Garden apartment buildings shall not exceed 160 feet in length.
In the event a development is designed to contain more than one permitted use, the plan
submitted shall indicate an area designation for each such use and all requirements of this
ordinance for each area so designated.
Parking facilities.
Number of spaces. Off-street parking, whether garage or on-lot, shall be provided on the
premises at the rate of three spaces for each dwelling unit.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Requirement for parking lots shall be as follows:
All access drives and parking lots shall be at least 20 feet from any building on the lot
and from exterior lot lines.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
Parking areas shall not be designed or located so as to require or encourage cars to
back into a public or private street in order to leave the lot.
All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient back up area for the end
stalls of the parking area.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 512/620
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
a.
604.6
604.7
604.8
604.9
a.
b.
c.
605.1
Evergreen plantings shall be provided of sufficient height and density to screen off-street
parking from public street view and from adjoining residential districts. A planting plan
specifying type, size, and location of existing and proposed planting material shall be
submitted with the application for approval.
All accessways and parking areas shall be suitably paved with a permanent hard-surface
covering.
No more than 15 contiguous spaces shall be permitted in any continuous row without
interruption by landscaping.
No more than 60 parking spaces shall be accommodated in any single parking area.
No more than two interconnected parking areas shall be permitted without having direct
access to a public street or a private street meeting Township street standards.
The total length of any single or combined parking area shall not exceed 500 feet. The
length shall be measured from the center line of the public or private street providing
access to the furthest point of the parking area.
The requirements listed in Subsections (6) through (9) above may be varied to permit a
more desirable and efficient design subject to Planning Commission review and approval.
Drainage. A storm runoff and drainage system shall be installed by the developer in accordance
with sound engineering practice so as to adequately drain the project site, to adequately dispose
of all runoff and drainage away from the project site, and so as not to permit excess flow of water
across streets or adjoining properties. The rate of any discharge shall not be greater than existed
prior to the development based on a one-hundred-year storm frequency. Plans for such drainage
system shall be submitted and shall be subject to approval by the Township Engineer.
All provisions of existing ordinances and the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
regarding storm drainage shall be complied with.
Lighting. Lighting for building, accessways, and parking areas shall be in accordance with § 615
of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
Storage of trash and rubbish. Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be well screened
on all four sides; one side or portion thereof being a gate, and contained in airtight, verminproof
containers. Interior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and
sanitary fashion.
Site plan review and approval. Multifamily and townhouse developments shall be subject to the
procedures established by the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
§ 605. Shopping centers.
Shopping centers shall be in single ownership or under a guaranteed unified management control.
Shopping centers shall consist of harmonious selection of uses and groupings of buildings, service and
parking areas, circulation and open space, and shall be subject to the following provisions:
Permitted principal uses:
Stores for the sale of goods at retail or the performance of customary personal services or
services clearly incidental to retail sales.
Business, professional, or banking offices.
Restaurants, cafes, or similar places serving food and/or beverages.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 513/620
d.
[1]
a.
605.2
a.
b.
c.
[2]
d.
e.
f.
g.
605.3
[3]
605.4
605.5
605.6
605.7
Parking areas for transient motor vehicles, but not for the storage of new or used motor
vehicles for lease or sale.
Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use.
Only the customary accessory uses associated with a commercial district shall be permitted,
provided they are limited to the same lot as the principal uses.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection 605.3, special exceptions, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Area and bulk regulation.
Lot size: The area for development shall be a minimum of five acres.
Building coverage: 20% maximum.
Impervious coverage: No lot shall be covered by more than 65% with impervious surface,
including, but not limited to, principal and accessory buildings, driveways and walkways, and
parking areas. Notwithstanding the foregoing, lots with lot area of three acres or less may
increase impervious coverage to 75%.
[Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-03]
Building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet maximum.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Front yard: 200 feet minimum.
Side yards: 100 feet minimum each side.
Rear yard: 100 feet minimum.
Supplementary regulations. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided on the
premises at a ratio of nine spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Provided, however,
that approval of off-street parking at a ratio of no less than five parking spaces per 1,000 square
feet of floor area may be permitted by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use when sought
as part of an application for approval of a plan for subdivision or land development. Parking shall
be permitted in the areas required for front, side and rear yard setbacks up to a point of 20 feet
from any front, side or rear lot line of a shopping center. All parking areas shall be suitably paved
with permanent hard-surface coverings, and adequately screened from any existing or proposed
residential uses.[3]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Access and traffic controls. All means of ingress or egress from the shopping center to any
public street or state highway shall be located at least 200 feet from any other intersecting street
or streets and shall be designed to conduct traffic in a safe manner. The developer shall be
responsible for the purchase and erection of any necessary traffic control devices and the
construction of additional acceleration or deceleration lanes as may be required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or by the Township.
Interior circulation. Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent the blocking of
vehicles entering or leaving the site. Areas provided for loading or unloading of trucks and/or other
vehicles or for servicing of shops for rubbish collection or other services shall be adequate in size
and shall be so arranged that they may be used without blocking or interfering with interior
circulation and parking facilities.
Channelization of vehicular movement in shopping centers. Channelization of vehicular
movement in shopping centers shall conform to § 607.5 of this ordinance.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 514/620
605.8
605.9
605.10
a.
b.
605.11
605.12
605.13
[4]
605.14
606.1
a.
b.
c.
606.2
Landscaping standards for channelization islands in shopping centers. Landscaping standards
for channelization islands in shopping centers shall conform to § 607.6 of this ordinance.
Lighting. Lighting for buildings, signs, accessways, and parking areas shall be in accordance
with § 615 of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
Shopping cart storage. Establishments furnishing carts or mobile baskets shall provide definite
areas on the site for the storage of said carts. Storage areas shall be clearly marked and
designated for the storage of shopping carts and/or mobile baskets.
Screening.
All lot lines abutting residential districts, in the Township or an adjoining municipality along the
side yard or rear yard, shall be appropriately screened by fences, walls, evergreen, or other
year-round planting and/or other suitable enclosures of a minimum height of four feet and a
maximum height of seven feet for walls and fences.
If trees, evergreen hedges or other types of year-round plants are used, a landscaped area
shall be provided at least five feet in width along the entire tract boundary.
Storage of trash or rubbish. Storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be completely screened,
and all organic rubbish shall be contained in covered verminproof containers. No such storage
area shall be permitted within any required yard space.
Signs. A uniform scheme for signing shall be presented to the Board of Supervisors for
approval, and sign size and location shall conform to § 606 of this ordinance.
Site plan review and approval. A proposed shopping center shall be subject to the provisions of
the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and the procedures established by
said ordinance for approval of subdivision land development plans shall be followed in obtaining
approval for shopping centers.[4]
Editor's Note: Former Section 605a, Regional shopping centers, added 8-5-1996 by Ord. No. 96-
06, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 606. Sign regulations.
Area of sign. The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on
which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which is
incidental to the display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols together
with the background attached to or painted on a surface (i.e., wall), the area shall be considered to
be the smallest rectangle which can be drawn to encompass all of the letters and symbols.
Permitted permanent signs.
The maximum permitted size of permanent signs and type of signs shall be in accordance with
the following regulations:
P-1: All signs and signals owned or operated by the Township, state, county, or federal
government.
P-2: Identification signs for public and for semipublic facilities, such as schools, churches,
hospitals, libraries, clubs, and public utilities.
P-3: Nameplate identifying the owner or resident of a private property, excluding mailboxes.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 515/620
d.
e.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(3)
f.
(1)
(2)
g.
h.
i.
j.
P-4: Memorial or historical markers or tablets.
P-5: Signs indicating the private nature of a road, driveway, or other premises, and signs
controlling the use of private property, such as the prohibition of hunting and fishing.
P-6: On-site directional signs.
Signs located on an individual lot.
Directional signs located within a mixed use community. Creates three types of
directional signs located within a mixed use community being P-6.B, P-6.C and P-6.D.
[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-03]
Location and material approved by Township.
Maximum of four lines per sign.
Signs shall be generic and only list a use present in the Town Center. Board shall
approve layout and verbage of each sign.
Signs shall be clear of sidewalk.
Signs may be illuminated with Township approval.
P-6.D: Town Center directional sign. Freestanding sign intended to direct visitors to Town
Center uses within confines of Town Center.
[Added 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-03]
P-7.A.: Business and advertising signs for single building and single tenant lot.
P-7.B.: Business and advertising signs for one story, multitenant buildings on single lots.
Freestanding signs.
Building mounted signs to be of unified design, size and shape.
P-7.C.: Business and advertising signs for multistory, multitenant buildings on single
lots.
(1) Freestanding signs.
(2) Directory signs.
P-8: Home occupation signs.
P-9.A.: Permanent identifying signs for the purpose of identifying individual buildings within a
multifamily residential development.
P-9.B.: Permanent identifying signs for the purpose of indicating the name of a multifamily
development. Permittee must submit assurance of satisfactory upkeep.
P-9.C.: Permanent identifying signs for the purpose of indicating the name of a single-family
development. Permittee must submit assurance of satisfactory upkeep.
P-10: Off-premises outdoor advertising signs.
[Added 1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-01; amended 2-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01]
P-10.A.: Off-premises outdoor advertising signs along the Pennsylvania Turnpike.
P-10.B.: Eagleview Boulevard Commercial District sign.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 516/620
[1]
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
[2]
h.
606.3
a.
606.4
For specific requirements governing permanent signs refer to Table 1.[1]
Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this ordinance.
Permitted temporary signs.
Subject to other provisions of this section, only the following types of temporary signs are
permitted in the Township:
T-1: Signs identifying lenders, architects, engineers, contractors, tradesmen, or others
engaged in construction work, on premises wherein their work is proceeding. Such signs shall
be removed as soon as the work ceases or is completed.
T-2.A.: On-site real estate signs, on individual properties that are for sale, rent, or lease or
which have been sold, rented, or leased. The former type shall be permitted for as long as the
property remains for sale or rent, but the latter type shall be removed within a week of the
date of the sale or rental agreement.
T-2.B.: A tent sign announcing open house for a residential resale — within 1,000 feet of
house for sale and property owner consent for placement.
T-2.C.: On-site commercial real estate signs, on individual and multitenant properties that
are for sale, rent or lease or which have been sold, rented or leased. The former type shall
be permitted for as long as the property remains for sale or rent, but the latter type shall be
removed within a week of the date of the sale or rental agreement.
[Added 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
T-3: Real estate signs similar to those described above, but located in housing developments
or large acreages which include more than one house lot. Such signs shall be removed when
90% of the properties have been developed. Signs announcing proposed commercial or
industrial development of the site may be erected but shall be replaced by T-2 signs at 75%
occupancy.
T-4: Signs advertising the sale of farm products, or garage sale, when such sale is conducted
in accordance with all the provisions of this ordinance. Such signs shall be displayed only
when the products are on sale.
T-5: Development directional signs pursuant to § 606.6.
T-6: Temporary signs of cloth or similar material announcing the grand opening of a business
or building, for a period of one week.
T-7: Temporary mobile, internally lit business sign announcing a special event for a period of
one week per year.
T-8: Freestanding political campaign sign to be taken down 48 hours after Election Day.
For specific requirements governing temporary signs refer to Table 2.[2]
Editor's Note: Table 2 is included as an attachment to this ordinance.
Prohibited signs. The following types of signs shall not be permitted in the Township:
Signs of such a design and location that they interfere with, compete for attention with, or may
be mistaken for, a traffic signal. This shall include any sign visible from the public right-of-way
which uses an arrow device or the word "stop." It shall also include signs in which the colors
red and green are used either in direct illumination or in high reflection by the use of special
preparation such as fluorescent paint or glass.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 517/620
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
[3]
h.
i.
606.5
Any sign located in or extending into a public right-of-way, except those owned or operated by
a duly constituted government, or conforming to § 606.6.
Any freestanding or projecting sign within an area bounded by the intersection of two rightsof-
way and points 20 feet from such intersection along the rights-of-way, except directional
signs less than three feet in height; or conforming to § 606.6.
Freestanding or projecting signs over a public sidewalk area.
Animated, sequential, flashing, or oscillating signs.
Open flames used to attract public attention to a place of business or to an advertising sign.
Signs which due to construction and/or location would constitute a hazard or potential danger
to the community.
Off-site signs except T-2.B, T-5, P-10, P-6.B, C and D signs.
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
Supplemental sign regulations.
Projection: No freestanding sign may project beyond the lot line, over a public sidewalk area,
or into a street right-of-way with the exception of T-5 signs.
Height: No sign that is a part of or is supported by a building shall be erected upon the roof of
such building, nor shall any sign extend above the height of the building. Freestanding signs
shall meet the height requirements of the particular district in which they are located, unless
otherwise required.
Clearance. No sign structure erected directly upon the ground shall have less than three feet
of clear space between such sign and the ground, however, necessary supports may extend
through such open space. No sign shall be placed in any site triangle unless a clear site path
between three feet and 10 feet vertical is left. Support posts may be in this open space.
Illumination: Signs may be lighted with nonglaring lights, or may be illuminated by shielded
floodlights that shine directly on sign and do not interfere with traffic; provided, however, that
no red, green, or amber lights shall be permitted and provided that lighting is screened from
adjacent properties and rights-of-way. No lights of intermittent, flashing, sequential, oscillating,
or animated types shall be permitted.
Placement: No signs shall be permitted which are posted, stapled, or otherwise attached to
public utility poles or trees within a street right-of-way. No portion of any freestanding sign
shall be located within five feet of any side lot line.
Construction: All signs, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of durable material and
kept in good condition and repair. Signs that are in disrepair shall be fixed or removed.
Nonconforming sgns: Nonconforming signs, once removed, shall be replaced only with
conforming signs; however, nonconforming signs may be repainted, providing such repainting
or repairing does not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign.
Permits shall be required for the erection, alteration, or maintenance of the following sign
types: P-2; P-6.B and C; P-7.A, B, C; P-8; P-9.A, B, C; P-10; T-1, T-3, T-5, T-6, T-7, T-8.[3]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
No sign shall be located so as to interfere with visibility for motorists at street or driveway
intersections.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 518/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
j. Off-premises outdoor advertising signs are subject to the following regulations in addition to
all other applicable regulations set forth in this § 606:
[Added 1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-01]
Off-premises outdoor advertising signs shall be placed only along the east-west travel
lanes of the Pennsylvania Turnpike on properties that abut the Pennsylvania Turnpike
right-of-way situated between the northern Uwchlan Township boundary with Upper
Uwchlan Township and the western right-of-way line of Gordon Drive where it intersects
the Pennsylvania Turnpike. Off-premises outdoor advertising signs shall be located only
a minimum of five feet and a maximum of 30 feet from the Turnpike east-west travel
lanes right-of-way.
Any lighting of or on off-premises outdoor advertising signs shall comply with § 615 of
this Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
Off-premises outdoor advertising signs are subject to an annual inspection by the
Township Building Inspector or his designee to assure structural integrity and proper
maintenance.
The owner or lessee of the off-premises outdoor advertising sign shall be responsible for
maintenance, cleaning, inspection, and all necessary repairs of the off-premises outdoor
advertising sign, including the structure, lighting, advertising copy and landscaping. The
structure shall be made of materials with permanent finishes requiring minimal
maintenance. All maintenance, cleaning and repair, including repair of torn or worn
advertising copy and removal of graffiti shall be done promptly. In the event the Township
notifies the owner or lessee of any damage, vandalism, graffiti or offensive advertising to
or on the off-premises outdoor advertising sign, the owner or lessee shall repair or
correct the problem within 48 hours of such notification. If repairs and corrections are not
timely made, the Township shall have the right, but not the obligation, to make repairs or
corrections and be reimbursed the cost thereof from the financial security required by
Subsection (6) herein below.
All location, construction, installation, maintenance and operation of off-premises outdoor
advertising signs and their foundations shall comply with the Township Zoning Ordinance
and all applicable federal, state and local statutory and regulatory law. In the event of a
conflict, the requirements of this § 606.5.j shall apply. The off-premises outdoor
advertising sign support structure shall be a single stanchion; the stanchion, sign frame,
and structural components of the off-premises outdoor advertising sign shall be
constructed of galvanized steel or other weather- and vandalism-resistant materials
approved by the Township.
The owner or lessee of the off-premises outdoor advertising sign, prior to the issuance of
a building permit, shall post financial security in an amount mutually determined by the
Township and the owner/lessee necessary to ensure proper maintenance, repair and
removal of the off-premises outdoor advertising sign. A financial security agreement shall
be signed by the owner/lessee in form and substance satisfactory to the Township.
The off-premises outdoor advertising sign, foundation, and all structural components
shall be dismantled, removed from the site and the site restored if the lease or other
agreement that authorizes the placement of the off-premises outdoor advertising sign
expires or the use is abandoned. The use shall be presumed abandoned if there is no
advertising copy on the off-premises outdoor advertising sign, or the advertising copy is
illegible, deteriorated, or out-of-date, for a period of 180 consecutive days.
Off-premises outdoor advertising signs shall advertise only commodities, services, or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location in Uwchlan Township. The
advertising sold or displayed shall be of such a nature that it is not normally objectionable
to members of the public. In the event the Township determines advertising displays to
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 519/620
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
k.
a.
b.
606.6
be offensive or objectionable, the owner or lessee shall remove the same within 48 hours
of written notice thereof from the Township. Advertising of alcohol, tobacco products,
motion pictures and videos with NC-17 or X ratings, and sexually oriented businesses as
defined in this Zoning Ordinance is prohibited.
Off-premises outdoor advertising signs shall be screened to allow only traffic on limited
access highways to view the off-premises outdoor advertising sign structure and
advertising copy. The screening shall consist of coniferous trees 10 feet high when
planted, and planted to provide screening of sufficient height and density to substantially
conceal from view the off-premises outdoor advertising sign structure from all points
except the traffic on the limited access highway.
The Eagleview Boulevard Commercial District sign shall be subject to the following
regulations in addition to all other applicable regulations set forth in § 606 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
[Added 2-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01]
The sign will be located on Tax Parcel 33-4-22 which sign and parcel will be owned by
the same entity that owns the shopping center on Tax Parcel 33-4G-365 located on
Eagleview Boulevard.
The entity owning Tax Parcel 33-4G-365 will be the permittee for the original sign permit
and will also be responsible for the construction, operation and future maintenance of the
sign as long as it exists.
The sign shall be capable of advertising 20 plus businesses that are situated in the
Eagleview Boulevard Commercial District which limits are shown on the subarea plans
for the "Greater Lionville District" dated 11/3/99 by Kummer & Ott Associates, which is
contained in the Uwchlan Township Comprehensive Plan of 2000.
The permittee shall be responsible for all present and future leasing of space on the sign.
Any changes to advertising on the sign shall not require issuance of a new building
permit as long as the requirements of this ordinance and the original approval are
followed and leasing is in conjunction with the restrictive covenant that will be formulated
at the time of application for the permit to construct the sign.
The permittee is responsible to maintain the sign in good repair at all times. In the event
the Township notifies the owner of needed repair, the work shall commence within 48
hours of this notice. If the repairs are not made in a timely fashion, the Township will have
the right but not the obligation to make the repairs and will be reimbursed by the owner.
Should the sign be abandoned or the advertising become illegible for a period that
exceeds 90 days, a condition of the permit will require it to be dismantled and the permit
will be revoked. The condition will also allow the Township to enter onto the property to
dismantle the sign and be reimbursed by the owner for costs incurred should the owner
fail to dismantle the sign in a timely manner.
Development directional signs.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the location, erection, use
and maintenance of informational and directional signs for residential real estate
developments under construction in Uwchlan Township.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated
except where the context or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ADMINISTRATOR
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 520/620
(1)
(2)
c.
An individual appointed by the developers to oversee compliance with and the
enforcement of this ordinance.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
The duly elected governing body of Uwchlan Township, Chester County.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The duly appointed Code Enforcement Officer of Uwchlan Township, Chester County.
DEVELOPER
The owner of a development.
DEVELOPMENT
A residential real estate development under construction within Uwchlan Township of
more than five residential units.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN
A sign authorized by this ordinance which serves solely to designate the location of a
development.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN POST
A post, as hereinafter specified, on which directional signs are attached.
HEIGHT
The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street grade or upper surface of the
street curb to the highest point of a directional sign or directional sign post. Elevated
roadways shall not be used to measure height.
POLE SIGN
A sign, either freestanding or attached to a public utility pole, street sign or other existing
pole or sign post, the purpose of which is to direct potential customers to developments
as defined herein.
TENT SIGN
A removable, relocatable sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or
otherwise, identifying the location of a development.
TOWNSHIP
Uwchlan Township, Chester County.
UNLAWFUL SIGN
A sign which contravenes this section or any other ordinance of Uwchlan Township or
which the Uwchlan Township Code Enforcement Officer declares as unlawful or as
dangerous to public safety by reason of dilapidation, abandonment or otherwise.
Permits, fees and inspection.
Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any developer to erect, construct or move any
directional sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the Township as required by this
§ 606.6. The permit shall authorize the developer to erect one or more directional signs
on authorized directional sign posts.
Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made to the Code Enforcement
Officer upon a form provided by the Township and shall be accompanied by such
information as may be required to assure compliance with this § 606.6 and applicable
laws and regulations of the Township.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 521/620
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
Issuance; denial. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit for the erection of a
directional sign(s) within the Township when an application therefore has been properly
made and the sign(s) complies with the provisions of this § 606.6. The Code
Enforcement Officer may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions
of this section whenever the permit is issued on the basis of a misstatement of material
fact or fraud or when a developer violates the provisions of this § 606.6 or any other
ordinance of Uwchlan Township.
Effect of issuance. No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to constitute
permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign nor shall any permit issued
hereunder constitute a defense in an action to abate an unlawful sign.
Permit fee. Application for permits shall be filed along with an initial basic permit fee as
set from time to time by resolution. In addition, at the time of initial application and/or
before any directional signs are erected, developer shall pay a supplemental fee as set
from time to time by resolution for each directional sign post on which a developer erects
or maintains a directional sign.
Inspection. Any developer, the administrator or any other person erecting, altering or
relocating a directional sign or directional sign post shall notify the Township Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the commencement of any erection, alteration or relocation.
Directional sign specifications.
Location of directional signs. A maximum of 15 directional sign posts shall be erected
within Uwchlan Township at locations specified by the Board of Supervisors. The precise
location of the directional sign posts shall be designated by the Code Enforcement
Officer by physically staking the location. Directional signs and directional sign posts shall
be located such that they do not interfere with the clear sight triangle at any intersection.
Directional sign posts shall be placed within the right-of-way of a Township road where
possible. The developers shall secure permission from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission and any private landowner in any
area where the directional sign post is to be erected in a location other than a Township
right-of-way.
Specifications. Directional sign posts shall be four inch by four inch cedar posts,
unstained and unpainted, with a maximum height of nine feet and a minimum of three
feet buried underground. Directional signs shall be placed on the directional sign posts
not less than a height of five feet.
Size and color of signs. All directional signs shall be of a uniform color, material and design as
approved by the Township. Each directional sign shall be six inches in height by 30 inches in
width. The directional sign shall be limited to letter identifying a development and a directional
arrow which shall be uniform and no logos shall be permitted on any directional sign.
Costs. The developers shall be responsible for all costs associated with directional signs and
the directional sign posts, including but not limited to the cost of purchase, erection,
maintenance, relocation and removal.
Illumination. No directional sign or directional sign post shall be illuminated either directly or
indirectly, in any manner.
Tent signs. Each developer may place two tent signs on Saturdays and Sundays only, one to
be placed at the entrance of the development and the other to be placed in a location chosen
by the developer but such that it will not interfere with the clear sight triangle at any roadway
or driveway intersection.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 522/620
[4]
i.
j.
k.
a.
b.
c.
607.1
Pole signs. As required by Ordinance 94-11 of Uwchlan Township, all pole signs are illegal
and shall be prohibited in the Township. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a written
warning notice to any developer who holds a permit pursuant to this § 606.6 and who erects
or maintains a pole sign(s) or unlawful sign(s) in the Township. If said signs are not removed
within 10 days of the date of the written notice, the developer's directional sign permit shall be
suspended and its directional sign(s) shall be removed by the administrator from the
directional sign posts until all pole signs and unlawful signs are removed from the Township.
In the event a developer fails to remove the pole signs or unlawful signs within 10 days of the
permit suspension, the developer's permit under this § 606.6 shall be permanently revoked.[4]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Temporary directional signs. Any developer holding a permit pursuant to this § 606.6 shall be
prohibited from erecting or maintaining any T-5 temporary directional sign(s) pursuant to
§ 606.3.
Indemnification. Prior to the issuance of any directional sign permit, the developer shall
execute an indemnification agreement in a form satisfactory to the Township Solicitor,
indemnifying and holding harmless the Township, Board of Supervisors, and employees and
representatives of the Township from any and all claims, causes of action, damages, costs
and attorney's fees, including but not limited to claims for personal injury, arising from or
related to the placement, erection, maintenance, relocation and removal of directional signs
and directional sign posts under this § 606.6.
§ 607. Off-street parking and loading.
Required off-street parking space.
Unless specified otherwise in another section of this ordinance, all off-street parking spaces
shall be provided paved and satisfactorily maintained in accordance with the following
provisions for each building or use which, after the effective date of this ordinance, is
established, erected, enlarged or altered for any of the following purposes or uses.
The facilities required herein shall be available throughout the hours of operation of the
particular business or use for which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term
"parking space" includes either a driveway or uncovered parking lot space located off the
public right-of-way.
Minimum off-street parking requirements shall be as provided below.
Off-Street Use Parking Space Required
d. Agricultural uses
(1) Agriculture 1 for each full-time employee
e. Residential uses
(1) Single-family detached and
semidetached and two-family
detached
3 for every dwelling unit
(2) All other types of dwelling units 2 1/2 for every dwelling unit
(3) Home occupation[1] 3 for every dwelling unit plus 1 for every
150 square feet of space used for the
home occupation use
(4) Boarding, rooming or tourist
houses
1 for each guest room, 3 for the host
family plus 2 for employees
f. Public or private recreational uses
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 523/620
Off-Street Use Parking Space Required
(1) Private clubs, lodges 1 for every 50 square feet of floor area
available to patrons
(2) Golf course 4 for each hole plus club requirement as
listed above
(3) Golf driving range 2 for each tee
(4) Miniature golf 2 for each hole
(5) Bowling alley 5 for each lane
(6) Health club, spa 1 for every 200 square feet of gross floor
area devoted to such use
(7) Gymnasium, stadium 1 for every four seats
(8) Public swimming pool 1 for every 120 square feet of water
surface; or 1 for every 5 persons for
which dressing facilities are provided
(whichever is greater)
(9) Outdoor recreation 1 for every 1,500 square feet of area
(10) Indoor recreation 1 for every 150 square feet of gross floor
area devoted to such use
g. Governmental, institutional and educational uses
(1) Places of public or private
assembly including churches,
auditoriums, theaters and
assembly halls
1 for every 4 permanent or temporary
seats, plus 1 for every 100 square feet of
meeting room area
(2) Social, fraternal and social service
buildings
1 for every 50 square feet of assembly
area
(3) Community center, library,
museum
1 for every 250 square feet of floor area
in public use
(4) Hospital 1 1/2 for each bed, plus 1 for each
employee on the shift of greatest
employment
(5) Personal care, continuing care,
congregate care, convalescent
home, nursing home, sanitarium,
and the like
1 per every 2 beds plus 1 for each
employee on the shift of greatest
employment
(6) Private kindergarten, preschool,
day-care center
1 for each adult attendant, 16 years or
older, plus 1 for every 500 square feet of
gross floor area
(7) Schools 1 for each faculty member and other fulltime
employee, plus 2 for each
classroom, plus 1 for every 8 students
aged 16 years or older, plus 1 for every 4
seats for auditorium, gymnasium and/or
stadium
h. Retail, commercial and other business uses
(1) Retail store or shop, including
department store or supermarket
1 for every 100 square feet of store sales
floor area or area serving customers
(2) Personal service businesses such
as barber shops, photo shops,
tailor, beautician, shoe repair and
the like
1 for every 100 square feet of gross floor
area
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 524/620
Off-Street Use Parking Space Required
(3) Restaurant, cafeteria 1 for every 2 seats, plus 1 for each
employee
(4) Tavern, cafe or nightclub[2] 1 per occupant load as determined by the
UCC Code
(5) Fast-food restaurant 1 for every 50 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 for each employee
(6) Self-service laundromat 1 for every 1 1/2 machine
(7) Automobile service and repair (in
addition to gas station and auto
dealer requirements, where
applicable)
4 for each bay, or 1 for every 200 square
feet of floor and ground area devoted to
service and repair (whichever is greater),
plus 1 for each employee
(8) Banks, credit unions and the like 1 for every 75 square feet of floor area for
serving customers
(9) Medical or dental offices and
clinics
5 for every 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
(10) Funeral home 1 for every 4 seats for patron use, or 1 for
every 50 square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is greater
(11) Professional and business offices 1 for every 250 square feet of gross floor
area
(12) Shopping center[3] 5 for every 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area (by conditional use)
(13) Hotel or motel 1 for each rental room or suite, plus 1 for
every employee on the shift of greatest
employment, plus the requirements for
ancillary uses
(14) Inn, bed-and-breakfast inn 1 for each rental room, plus 1 for every
employee on the shift of greatest
employment
(15) Movie theater (part of a shopping
center)
1 for every 4 seats, plus 1 for every
employee on the shift of greatest
employment
(16) Movie theater (freestanding) 1 for every 2 seats plus 1 for every
employee on the shift of greatest
employment
(17) New and used automobile sales
agencies
1 for every 200 square feet of floor and
ground area devoted to sales and
accessory service use, plus 1 for each
employee
(18) Gas station (in addition to
automobile service and repair
applicable)
1 for every pump island, plus 6 stacking
spaces for each pump island
requirement.
(19) Car wash - automated 6, plus 6 dry-off spaces, plus 25 stacking
spaces.
(20) Car wash - nonautomated 2 for each bay, plus 3 stacking spaces for
each bay
(21) MAC/ATM machine when not part
of a bank
5
MAC/ATM machine when part of a
bank
3
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 525/620
[1]
[2]
[3]
a.
b.
c.
d.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
e.
607.2
Off-Street Use Parking Space Required
i. Industrial and other related uses
(1) Industrial and manufacturing,
establishments, truck terminals
and wholesale warehouses
1 for each employee on the combined
major and next largest shift
(2) Research and development
facilities, laboratories
3 for every 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
j. Buildings or uses other than those specified above.
(1) Determination of the appropriate parking space requirements shall be made
by the Zoning Officer consistent with the standards set forth herein for
comparable buildings or uses after review of a study prepared by a qualified
Traffic Engineer.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
General regulations for off-street parking.
Existing parking. Structures and uses in existence at the date of adoption of this ordinance
shall not be subject to the requirements of this section so long as the kind or extent of use is
not changed, provided that any parking facility now serving structures or uses shall not in the
future be reduced below such requirements.
Changes in use. Whenever a structure is altered or a use is changed or extended which
currently complies or is deficient with regard to the required number of parking spaces, but
result in an increase to the parking requirements of § 607.1, then the total additional parking
required for the alteration, change or extension shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of that section.
Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that interferes with its
availability for the parking need it is required to serve.
Continuing character of obligation. All required parking facilities shall be provided and
maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities were designed to serve. Off-street
parking facilities shall not be reduced in total extent except when such reduction is in
conformity with the requirements of this section.
Modification of requirements.
Joint use. Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a common parking lot
either on or off the site, by special exception if the total space provided is not less than
the sum of the spaces required for each use individually, unless otherwise specifically set
forth herein.
The owners of two or more establishments shall submit with their applications for
special exception a site plan showing joint use, written agreement approved by the
Township Solicitor and accepted by the Board of Supervisors and location of a
common off-street parking area.
Some portion of the common off-street parking area shall lie within 200 feet of an
entrance, regularly used by patrons, into the buildings served thereby.
Conditional reduction of off-street parking areas. In order to prevent the establishment of
a greater number of parking spaces than is actually required to serve the needs of the
particular mix of enterprises in a shopping center or large single commercial use, or a
single use such as an office building, stand-alone restaurant, retail store and any other
such use, the Board of Supervisors, after holding a conditional use hearing pursuant to
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 526/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
f.
g.
h.
i.
public notice and consulting with the Township Planning Commission and Township
Engineer, may permit a reduction of parking spaces if the following conditions are
satisfied:
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
The applicant must present written justification for a reduction in the required parking
spaces of a commercial, industrial, or public and semipublic use.
The design of the parking lot, as indicated on the land development plan, required
for the conditional use application, must designate sufficient space to provide for the
total requirement of parking spaces as set forth in § 607.1. In addition to the layout
for the total number of parking spaces the plan shall illustrate these required parking
spaces which one requested to be removed.
The conditional reduction shall permit up to a 20% reduction in the required number
of parking spaces if it can be demonstrated to the Board of Supervisors that the
hours or days of peak parking need for the uses are so different that a lower total will
provide adequately for all uses served by the common parking facility. This initial
phase of the parking provision shall be clearly indicated on the plan.
The required parking space area may be exempted from the required area and bulk
regulations, provided that the remaining area of the total minimum computed parking
area is included as open space. The exempted parking area will not be counted as
permanent provided open space to satisfy other requirements of this ordinance.
The exempted parking area provided for in open space shall no longer be an
exemption to the required paved area, if at the discretion of the Board of
Supervisors, a parking problem is caused.
The landowner or developer shall enter into a written agreement at the time any
conditional reduction is granted with the Board of Supervisors that, at any time after
one year following the issuing of the last occupancy permit, any additional parking
spaces shall be provided at the expense of the landowner or developer, should it be
determined the full parking space requirement, or portion thereof, is necessary to
satisfy the need of the particular mix of uses or single use in a shopping center or
other major commercial use.
Storm drainage and stormwater management facilities must be sized and
constructed to handle the full parking space requirement.
Location of parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot or
premises with the principal use served, except in the case of joint use as per § 607.2.e where
parking may be located on the adjoining lot.
Fractional spaces. Where the computation of required parking spaces results in a fractional
number, the fraction of 1/2 or more shall be counted as one.
Maintenance of parking and loading areas. For parking areas of three or more vehicles, that
portion of the parking and loading area not landscaped and so maintained, including
driveways and entranceways, shall be graded, surfaced, and drained in accordance with the
standards set forth in the Uwchlan Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
to the extent necessary to prevent nuisance of dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across
streets and adjoining properties.
Parking area reservation. All off-street parking areas shall be reserved and used for vehicle
parking only, with no sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind on
lots in any residential districts. Camping trailers, house trailers, mobile homes, boats,
unregistered or inoperative motor equipment, or similar durables shall not be stored nor
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 527/620
j.
k.
l.
m.
a.
b.
607.3
parked within the required front yard except as specifically provided in other provisions of this
ordinance. The parking of one commercial vehicle of up to one ton only within the side or rear
yard is permitted if needed by an individual for his livelihood for a business not conducted on
the premises; or one vehicle used for recreational use such as a travel trailer or recreational
vehicle is permitted for storage purposes only, within the rear yard, and is not to be used for
sleeping, recreational or living purposes at any time or in any way, shape, or form on the lot in
question.
A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of the principal building,
or attached to the outer walls. If separated from the principal building, the garage shall
conform to all setback requirements of the principal building. The garage may be constructed
under a yard or court.
Automotive vehicles, boats, or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall
not be parked or stored on any public street.
No repair to or maintenance of vehicles of any kind, except emergency repairs, shall be
permitted in any accessory parking facility. However, one unlicenced car may be permitted for
the removal of parts, provided that no such vehicle shall be located within the front yard, nor
retained on the premises in excess of six months.
Parking areas cannot be utilized or credited toward required open space.
Parking area design standards. The design standards specified below shall be required for all
off-street parking facilities with a capacity of five or more vehicles built after the effective date of
this ordinance.
All parking spaces shall be a minimum of 9.5 feet by 20 feet, except where nine feet by 18
feet is permitted, and except for handicapped parking spaces which shall be 12 feet by 20
feet. Where parked vehicles abut a grass strip of at least four feet in width, the parking space
may be reduced to nine feet by 18 feet. In the case of single retail stores or shopping centers,
the Board of Supervisors may require up to 50% of the spaces to be 10 feet rather than 9.5
feet wide. The Board of Supervisors may also require more ten-foot-wide spaces if the Board
determines that a proposal for any type of building warrants a percentage of these larger
spaces. The location for any percentage of the larger spaces shall also be as determined by
the Board.
[Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-07; 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06 ]
The minimum dimensions of stalls and aisles in a parking lot with angle parking shall be as
follows:
[Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-07; 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Parking
(feet)
Aisle
(feet)
Angle of
Parking Stall Width Stall Depth One-Way Two-Way
90° 9.5* 20 22 24
60° 9.5* 20 18
45° 9.5* 18 15
30° 9.5* 17 14
Parallel 8 24
* Except at discretion of the Board where a percentage of the spaces shall be 10 feet
wide.
** Where parked vehicles abut a grass strip of at least four feet in width, the parking
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 528/620
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
[4]
l.
m.
space may be reduced to nine feet by 18 feet.
Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the
parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles.
All paved parking areas shall be line striped and properly maintained so as to provide for
orderly and safe parking. Special use spaces such as short-term visitor parking, handicapped
parking and pickup/dropoff zones shall be differentiated from long-term employee parking by
signage and pavement markings approved by the Township.
All parking areas, loading areas and access drives thereto shall be provided with vertical
curbs or concrete wheel stops, except in the case of a residential or agricultural lot in the R-A,
R-R or R-1 or R-2 Districts. Concrete wheel stops shall be installed so as to prevent vehicle
overhang on any sidewalk area or any adjoining area which is planted with shrubs or trees.
Parking shall not be permitted within a public street right-of-way, except in designated areas.
In no case, however, shall trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating over 8,200 pounds, boats,
recreational vehicles, campers, trailers with a gross vehicle weight rating over 2,000 pounds,
unregistered, uninspected or inoperative motor vehicles, motorized equipment, construction
equipment or similar vehicles or equipment be permitted to park on the street in residential
districts or the PCID District.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
All nonresidential parking and loading areas and parallel circulation and service lanes shall be
separated from the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare or adjoining property lines by a
planting strip not less than 20 feet in depth, in nonresidential districts. If additional lanes,
rights-of-way or roadways are dedicated to the Township, the width of the required plant strip
may be reduced to not less than 10 feet from the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare or the
adjoining property lines.
[Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-07; 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
All parking areas for 60 or more cars shall be separated from each other by a ten-foot-wideminimum
landscaped island running parallel to the stall and planted in accordance with §
607.7.b.4.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
In those areas within a parking lot where vehicles are parked, and in aisles adjacent to
parking, a maximum grade of 6% shall not be exceeded. Parking aisles not directly adjacent
to parking and access driveways within a parking lot shall not exceed a grade of 8%. No
grade cut, fill, or height difference between terraced parking areas shall exceed three feet
unless separated by landscaped areas with slopes no greater than 5:1.
In no case shall parking areas be designed to require or encourage cars to back into a street
in order to leave the lot.
Entrances and exits to and from off-street parking areas shall be located so as to avoid
interference with street traffic.
No less than a two-foot radius of curvature shall be provided for all curblines for interior
islands.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06[4]]
Editor's Note: this ordinance also repealed former § 607.3.l, regarding concrete wheel stops,
and redesignated former § 607.3.m through p as § 607.3.l through o, respectively.
All dead-end parking areas shall be designed to provide backup and turnaround areas for the
end stalls of the parking area and shall be clearly marked "no parking." The following
dimensions shall apply:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 529/620
(1)
(2)
n.
o.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
(1)
i.
607.4
Length: fifteen-foot minimum.
Width: ten-foot minimum.
All materials used in the construction of parking areas shall comply with the minimum
standards set forth in the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Handicapped parking shall be in accordance with ICC-ANSI regulations currently enforced as
adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Design and layout of off-street loading facilities.
In addition to the off-street parking space required in this article any building erected,
converted and/or enlarged for any nonresidential use shall provide off-street areas for loading
and unloading and commercial vehicle parking space adequate for their needs.
The minimum size loading space shall be 50 feet in depth, 12 feet in width, with an overhead
clearance of 15 feet, exclusive of drives and maneuvering space, and located entirely on the
lot being served.
All commercial and industrial establishments shall provide loading and unloading and
commercial vehicle storage space adequate for their needs. All loading space shall have
adequate access from a street or way which does not block or interfere with the required
parking as specified in § 607.1. This required space will be provided in addition to established
requirements for patron and employee parking.
In no case shall the public rights-of-way be used for loading or unloading of materials. Further,
no loading dock or space shall be located or arranged in such a way that it is necessary to
back any vehicle into or off any public right-of-way, nor require the use of any public right-ofway
for maneuvering space.
Two-way driveways shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width and a maximum of 36 feet wide.
One-way driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet in width.
All driveways and entranceways shall be graded, paved and drained to standards set forth in
the Uwchlan Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, to the extent
necessary to prevent nuisance of dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across streets and
adjoining properties.
All off-street loading berths shall be provided on either the side or rear of the lot. In no case
shall off-street loading berths be provided in the front of the lot.
Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no time constitute a
nuisance, a hazard, or an impediment to traffic.
Off-street loading requirements as specified below shall be provided on any lot on which a
building exceeding 6,000 square feet of gross floor area for business or industry is hereafter
erected, or whenever the proposed use dictates the need for off-street loading. The
requirement for the number of berths may be waived by the Board for just cause on a caseby-
case basis.
[Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-07]
Every truck terminal, hospital, retail establishment, warehouse or wholesale
establishment, nursing home, industrial plant or manufacturing establishment exceeding
6,000 square feet shall have at least one off-street loading space. Where there is an
aggregate gross floor area of 20,000 square feet or more arranged, intended or designed
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 530/620
(2)
a.
b.
607.5
(1)
a.
607.6
for such use, there shall be provided off-street truck loading or unloading berths in
accordance with the following table:
Square Feet of Aggregate Gross Floor Area
Devoted To Each Use Required Number of Berths
6,000 up to 19,999 1
20,000 up to 79,999 2
80,000 up to 127,999 3
128,000 up to 191,999 4
192,000 up to 255,999 5
256,000 up to 319,999 6
320,000 up to 391,999 7
For each additional 72,000 1 additional berth
Every auditorium, office building, restaurant, hotel, or education facility or other institution
exceeding 6,000 square feet shall have at least one off-street loading space. Where
there is an aggregate gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or more, arranged, intended
or designed for such use, there shall be provided off-street truck loading and unloading
berths in accordance with the following table:
Square Feet of Aggregate Gross Floor Area
Devoted To Each Use Required Number of Berths
6,000 up to 29,999 1
30,000 up to 44,999 2
45,000 up to 119,999 3
120,000 up to 197,999 4
198,000 up to 290,999 5
291,000 up to 389,999 6
390,000 up to 488,999 7
489,000 up to 587,999 8
588,000 up to 689,999 9
For each additional 105,000 1 additional berth
Access for off-street parking and loading areas. Access to and from all off-street parking,
loading, and vehicle service areas along public rights-of-way shall consist of well defined
entrances and exits and shall comply with the following provisions:
Access drives shall not open upon any public right-of-way within 80 feet of the nearest rightof-
way line of any intersecting public street or highway in a nonresidential district and 40 feet
of the nearest right-of-way line of any intersecting public street or highway in a residential
district.
The required sight distance for access drives which open upon any street or highway shall be
in accordance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
Screening and landscaping requirements.
Where any off-street parking area provides more than five parking spaces, screening shall be
placed between such parking area and the lot line. Screening shall be effective at the time of
occupancy, subject to the following provisions:
Effective screens shall be accomplished through the use of one or more of the following:
plant materials, fencing or walls, and/or mounding through the use of earthen berms,
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 531/620
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(4)
b.
forming a continuous visual buffer.
The area for planting, fencing, walls or earthen berms shall not extend beyond the street
right-of-way.
When planting screens are employed the following shall apply:
A buffer planting strip shall be provided. It shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width.
The type of plant materials to be used shall be subject to review and approval by the
Board of Supervisors upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission and
Township Arborist.
Planting screens shall be of sufficient height and sufficient density to constitute a
continuous visual buffer 4 1/2 to five feet in height at the time of planting. The
spacing of plant materials shall be subject to review and approval by the Board of
Supervisors upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission and Township
Arborist.
Any tree or shrub which dies within 18 months of the dedication of public
improvements or occupancy shall be replaced. Any tree or shrub which within the
aforementioned time period is deemed, in the opinion of an agent authorized by the
Township, not to have survived or grown in a manner characteristic of its type, shall
be replaced. Any substitutions shall be approved by the Township.
Whenever fencing or walls are employed, the effective height of the continuous visual
buffer shall be no less than five feet, subject to the provisions of § 601.2.
Whenever earthen berms are employed, the effective height of the continuous visual
buffer shall be no less than five feet in height.
Landscaping within any parking area which provides more than five parking spaces shall also
be subject to the following provisions:
Off-street parking areas and parking lots shall be landscaped to reduce wind and air
turbulence, heat and noise, and the glare of automobile lights; to reduce the level of
carbon dioxide; to provide shade; to ameliorate stormwater drainage problems; to
replenish the groundwater table; to be screened from views; and to provide for a more
attractive setting.
Each parking lot shall have one 2 1/2 to three inch caliper shade tree for every five
parking spaces, if there are no existing shade trees.
The type of plant materials to be used shall be subject to review and approval by the
Board of Supervisors upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission and
Township Arborist.
The landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the
parking lot, except where there are more than 20 parking spaces, in which case the
following shall apply:
Landscaped islands shall be provided to separate every 20 consecutive parking
spaces. Such islands shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and 18 feet in length.
Such islands shall be provided to enhance the appearance of the parking area and
to control access and movement within the parking area and shall be curbed. Each
landscaped island shall have at least one shade tree as required by Subsection b.2,
above.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 532/620
(b)
(c)
a.
607.7
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
607.8
All planting islands and planting beds within a parking lot shall be covered for at least
75% of their area with groundcovers, dwarf shrubs, and other approved plant
materials. Stone mulch may be used in conjunction with groundcovers and shrubs
when approved by the Township. Shredded hardwood mulch shall only be used to
form the plant saucers.
Trees must be located so as to not interfere with lighting fixtures.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Lighting.
All lighting shall be in accordance with § 615 of the Uwchlan Township Zoning Ordinance.
Terraced parking facilities. In order to preserve more green space and reduce impervious
coverage and to serve the needs of larger commercial and industrial uses in the Township, offstreet
parking may be provided in a terraced parking facility (TPF) in the PIC District, provided the
following requirements and procedures herein are met. The applicant applying for a TPF shall
comply with § 607 et seq. (where applicable) except for §§ 607.2.f, 607.3, 607.6 and 607.7 which
are superseded by this § 607.8.
[Added 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-14]
A TPF or loading area and associated parallel circulation and service lanes may serve more
than one principal building and/or more than one lot, provided appropriate cross easements
for access and use are provided prior to final land development and/or subdivision approval.
This subsection shall supersede §§ 607.2.f and 607.3 herein.
Design and layout standards.
A TPF shall not exceed four levels (whether directly stacked above each other or layered
in successive levels) with each level not to exceed 11 feet, four inches or a total of 44
feet in height for all levels measured from the grade to the top level of the TPF.
A subdivision line(s) may be created through the TPF or loading area and associated
parallel circulation and service lanes without requiring the applicable setbacks for the
zoning district in which it is located, provided, if applicable, cross-easements for access
and use are provided prior to final land development and/or subdivision approval. This
subsection shall supersede §§ 607.2.f and 607.3 herein.
Ramps for the movement of vehicles between parking levels shall be constructed within
the TPF except in instances when the topography of a site allows them to extend outside
the TPF on the existing grade. The types of ramps associated with the TPF shall be
defined as follows:
Primary ramps are vehicular ingress/egress points normally consisting of four lanes
(two in/two out) that connect the TPF with adjacent roads, streets or access drives. All
lanes must be a minimum of 11 feet in width and shall not exceed a maximum grade of
10%.
Secondary ramps are internal ramps within the TPF that are two lanes in width. All
lanes must be a minimum of 11 feet in width and shall not exceed a maximum grade of
10%.
Aisle width.
PIC uses, except retail uses.
Within an enclosed TPF, the following aisle widths and parking space angles/lengths
shall apply to all PIC uses except retail use:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 533/620
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
C.
Angle of Parking
Space
Minimum Aisle
Width/ Parking
Space Length
(feet)
Minimum Depth/
Parking Space
(feet)
Minimum Width/
Parking Space
(feet)
30° 17 14 9 one way
45° 18 18 9 one way
60° 22 19 9 two way
90° 22 18 9 two way
Columns can extend into parking stall width by one foot when parking at 90°.
Retail use. The following TPF standards shall apply to retail use:
Angle of Parking
Space
Minimum Aisle
Width/ Parking
Space Length
(feet)
Minimum Depth/
Parking Space
(feet)
Minimum Width/
Parking Space
(feet)
30° 17 14 10 one way
45° 18 15 10 one way
60° 20 18 10 two way
90° 24 20 10 two way
Parking spaces shall be delineated by a single line striped and properly maintained so as
to provide for orderly and safe parking.
In instances where there is both a TPF and a surface parking area(s), the layouts of both
shall be such that there are no abrupt changes in parking angle and aisle widths or
overall layout, so as to avoid a safety hazard or confusion for the motorists.
All TPFs and loading areas and parallel circulation and service lanes shall be set back
from the public right-of-way or adjoining property line by not less than 20 feet in depth
except as provided in §§ 607.8A and 607.8B(2).
In no case shall parking spaces within the TPF be designed to require or encourage cars
to back into ramps, accessways or circulation road in order to leave the TPF.
Entrances and exits to and from a TPF shall be located so as to avoid interferences with
street or circulation road traffic.
Handicapped parking. Where provisions for handicapped parking are located within
terraced parking facilities, all terraced parking facilities shall comply with the current
requirements and regulations of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
All parking areas, loading areas, circulation roads and service drives shall be provided
with vertical curbs, concrete wheel stops and/or other devices designed to prevent
vehicle overhang on any sidewalk area or any area which is planted with shrubs or trees.
All parking areas, loading areas, circulation roads, and service drives adjacent to
elevation changes must be protected with a guide rail, retaining wall or other device
designed to protect a vehicle from such dropoff.
Screening and landscaping requirements.
A TPF shall be screened through the use of one or more of the following: plant materials,
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 534/620
D.
a.
b.
c.
d.
a.
609.1
fencing or walls, and/or mounding through the use of earthen berms forming a continuous
visual buffer. When planting screens are employed, a planting strip shall be provided at 10
feet in width which shall be located within twenty-foot setback referenced in § 607.8B(7)
above and include trees and shrubs reasonably dispersed along the perimeter of the TPF.
Two types of buffer strips shall be used to screen the parking structure:
External screen: a vegetative planting strip used on the periphery of the TPF between
external adjoining property lines and rights-of-way and the TPF itself. The purpose of
this screen is to visually block a significant majority of the TPF from adjoining properties
and roads. Deciduous, evergreen and semi-evergreen vegetation shall be included in
the buffer. A majority of the species used in the screen shall be either evergreen or
semi-evergreen.
Internal screen: a vegetative strip used on the periphery of the TPF between internal
roads, drives and buildings to lightly screen the TPF. Deciduous and semi-evergreen
vegetation shall be used in the buffer. The intent of this buffer is to provide shade and
visually provide a vegetative edge to the TPF. No plantings above 2.5 feet in height may
be used within any driveway or ramp clear sight triangle as defined by the Township.
The type of screening to be employed shall be subject to review during the subdivision and
land development process, at which time, a landscape plan prepared by a landscape
architect registered in the State of Pennsylvania shall be provided.
Lighting. A TPF shall comply with the criteria set forth in § 615 (Lighting Ordinance) except
that § 615C.4.b shall not apply and freestanding lighting fixtures may be placed within the
parking areas of the structure when said fixtures are securely attached to an extended
concrete base extending a minimum of 2'0" above finished grade.
§ 608. Screening.
All outdoor storage, parking, and/or loading areas of industrial uses shall be screened from view
from any residential or commercial development or public right-of-way by a landscape screen or
other visual barrier with planting. The screening shall be placed between the industrial use and
contiguous residential and/or commercial zoning district.
The landscaped screen shall be composed of evergreen plants and trees arranged to provide
screening of sufficient height and density to conceal from view the parking and/or loading areas
from adjacent property owners.
All outdoor use operations, mechanical equipment, and other functional accessories of each
building, such as elevator, penthouse, ventilation pipes and ducts, water pressure tanks, heating,
air conditioning, and power supply units shall have an architecturally compatible building material
screen or covering which is an integral part of the building envelope and/or which is harmonious
with the building design.
An alternative visual barrier shall be an opaque fence or wall with plantings of trees, shrubs,
and/or vines along the surfaces of the barrier facing any adjacent property.
§ 609. Residential open space option.
Intent and qualifying conditions.
In the R-A, R-R and R-1 Zoning Districts, a developer may be allowed to reduce the required
area and bulk regulations, provided that the following procedures and conditions are met. In
all cases there shall be a minimum of 35% open space. As a permitted use or conditional use
in the R-A, R-R and R-1 Zoning Districts, a developer may be allowed to reduce the required
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 535/620
[1]
b.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(3)
c.
area and bulk regulations, provided that the following procedures and conditions are met. In
all cases there shall be a minimum of 35% open space.
[Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-07; 9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-15; 10-14-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16; 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01[1]]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
It is the intent of this section to provide for smaller lots than normally required and in so doing
safeguard sensitive natural features and create and protect open spaces for use by existing
and future residents of the Township. The purpose of this approach is to encourage the
preservation of large, stream valley and hilly lands of the Township as well as other areas for
agriculture, recreation, conservation and various kinds of open space uses while assuring in
all cases that the entire area shall be protected in perpetuity by conservation easements. It is
also the intent of the section to facilitate the conservation of surface and underground water
supplies, the control of soil erosion and surface-water flooding and overall to minimize the
potential adverse effects of land development on the Township.
It is also the intent of this section to discourage intensive development in those locations
unsuited for such uses as described in the above subsection.
[Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-07; 9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-15; 10-14-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
In order to qualify for consideration as a residential open space option, the tract of land to
be subdivided by the applicant must have a minimum lot area of 10 acres. The Board of
Supervisors may allow a reduction of the minimum ten-acre requirement if by conditional
use if it determines the use of the residential open space option on a tract of land less
than 10 acres preserves significant environmentally sensitive areas, historical structures
or the open space enhances the Township's existing open space system.
[Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-06]
The maximum permitted number of lots for development under the residential open
space option shall be determined in accordance with the following table by multiplying the
gross acreage of the tract proposed for development by the applicable factor:
[Amended 3-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2000-02]
District
On-Site Water and
On-Site Sewage
Disposal
Either Off-Site Water
or Off-Site Sewage
Disposal
Off-Site Water and
Off-Site Sewage
Disposal
R-A 0.50 0.75 1.0
R-R 0.726 0.8712 1.0
R-1 0.726 0.968 1.20
Subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, the developer may be able to reduce
the minimum lot size requirement applicable to the district by 50% subject to the 35%
open space requirement. Reduction of lot sizes by more than 50% may be permitted as a
conditional use subject to provisions of § 609.1.c(3)(g). All lot reductions shall be
governed by the following:
[Amended 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
All buildings/dwellings shall be able to connect to a public sanitary sewage disposal
system in operation at the time when a principal building/dwelling is started. Should
public sewer not be available to the site, the open space option may still be
permitted as a conditional use with approval by the Uwchlan Township Sanitary
Engineer of acceptable in-ground on-site sewage disposal systems. This on-site
sewage option shall not be available for any proposals that wish to reduce lot size by
more than 50% or to a size that does not meet the criteria of the Chester County
Health Department for in-ground on-site sewage disposal systems. The method for
calculating the permitted maximum density on a site utilizing sewer on-site shall not
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 536/620
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(d)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(e)
be described in § 609.1.c(2) but shall be derived from the number of lots possible on
a yield plan as defined in § 301.4 of this zoning ordinance.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
All buildings/dwellings shall be able to connect to a public water supply system in
operation at the time when construction of a principal building/dwelling is started.
The number of lots subdivided does not exceed the maximum number of lots
permitted by the zoning regulations and the aggregate impervious coverage of the
tract does not exceed 25% of the entire tract.
The balance of the tract (total tract minus lotted area and street rights-of-way) is
permanently preserved as common open space which may be owned and
maintained in any one, or a combination of several of the following ways which will
be subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors:
Deed common open space to the Township.
Create a homeowners' association to own and maintain.
The common open space be owned by the Township but maintained by the
homeowners’ association, with funds, as determined by the Board of
Supervisors, for future maintenance of the open space being provided by the
developer before dedication of public improvements. The governing documents
for the development shall include provisions which insure that the common open
space land shall continue as such and be properly maintained in accordance
with an approved open space management plan as described in § 617 of this
ordinance.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
The nature, extent, location, and use of common open space shall be subject to
approval by the Board of Supervisors and shall, as a minimum, meet the following
requirements:
Common open space may consist of natural features, woodland or historic sites,
floodplains, alluvial soils or high water table soils (wetlands), agricultural
preservation, walking trails, other passive recreation, protection of other natural
features, and resources, including those which the Board of Supervisors may
determine "unique" to the area. Common open space must remain in its natural
condition unless designed for active or passive recreation as delineated on the
approved subdivision plan as outlined below.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Common open space, or a portion thereof, may be required to be provided with
active recreational improvements as a condition for approval of the residential
open space option. Common open space must remain in its natural condition
unless designed for active or passive recreation as delineated on the approved
subdivision plan as outlined below.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Common open space areas will be suitably landscaped either by retaining
existing natural cover and wooded areas or by an approved comprehensive
landscape plan, submitted with the preliminary and final plans, for improving
open space areas through planting and other means in such a way that future
maintenance costs are minimized.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 537/620
[4]
(f)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(g)
a.
b.
c.
609.2
a.
(1)
b.
609.3
The location, shape, topography and size of the common open space area shall
be subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors and such land shall be in
any acceptable condition before dedication of any public improvements in the
subdivision or in lieu of such condition a bond for any improvements to the
common open space necessitated by the open space option shall be furnished
by the developer.
Nothing herein shall require the Township to accept dedication of common open
space land. However, any property or portion of property, deeded to the Township,
shall be retained for public use. Common open space shall be deed restricted to
prevent any further subdivision and restrict the uses to those set forth herein.
All reductions in lot sizes below 50% of the applicable zoning district requirements
shall comply with the following standards and all other applicable procedures and
standards set forth in this ordinance:
For each 1% below 50% that the lot is reduced there shall be a corresponding
1 1/4% increase in the amount of open space required for the development.
In calculating density for developments that propose a reduction in lot size of
more than 50%, the applicant shall first prepare a yield plan as defined in
§ 301.4 of the Zoning Ordinance. The number of lots shown on the yield plan
shall be the permitted yield on the reduced size lot plan. In any event, the yield
shall never be greater than that allowed under § 609.1.c(2) but may be reduced
by natural features or other constraints.
At no time shall the lot reduction being sought exceed 80% nor shall the actual
size of the lot be less than 10,000 square feet or have side yard setbacks less
than 15 feet.
Area and bulk regulations. All lot width and yard requirements normally applicable to the tract of
land may be waived, subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors, provided that:
Building height shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less.
Yards facing adjacent properties along the tract boundaries shall meet all minimum yard
requirements of the appropriate zoning district, except when adjacent tracts have previously
been built upon, using the open space option, in which case, yard requirements of yards
adjacent to tract boundaries may be reduced to the size used in adjacent built-up lots.
Innovative layout of lots, siting of structures and architectural design is recommended to
provide for the health and general welfare otherwise infringed upon through reduction in lot
size and waiver of yard requirements. As part of any application for approval of an open
space option proposal, the developer shall show siting of all structures within the subdivision,
their setbacks from lot lines and percent coverage of the lot by impervious cover materials.
Design standards.
Subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, sidewalk requirements normally applicable
to any subdivision may be waived in certain portions of the subdivision if a suitable pathway
system, apart from the street right-of-way, is provided and serves all those dwelling units for
which a sidewalk would normally be required.
Subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, minimum cartway width may be reduced on
any street if:
Vehicular traffic has been suitably separated from pedestrian traffic.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 538/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
Such reduction in cartway width allows for the passage of two vehicles in opposite
directions with due allowance for any on-street parking that may be permitted on the
street.
Adequate off-street parking has been provided in sufficient quantity to warrant such
reduction.
Such reduction does not impede circulation of traffic, especially emergency vehicles.
§ 610. Helistops and heliports.
Helistops and heliports are permitted within the Township as a special exception subject to the
following general requirements.
Where permitted as an accessory use on the same lot with, and incidental to a use permitted in
the particular zoning district, the heliport or helistop also shall comply with the area, coverage and
yard requirements of the applicable zoning district, however, in no case shall any such landing
surface be located closer than 300 feet from any residential district boundary line.
The landing surface shall be paved and level, and shall be at least 60 feet square or in the case of
a circle shall be at least 60 feet in diameter. A secondary thirty-foot perimeter area shall adjoin the
landing surface, and, if not paved, shall contain a gravel or grass cover. Both the landing surface
and secondary perimeter shall be well maintained and shall be kept dirt-free to preclude blowing
dust or debris caused by other obstacles other than those required for safety purposes. Rooftop
pads do not require this surface.
The entire perimeter area shall be enclosed by a securable, well constructed fence, a minimum of
four feet high, which will serve to prevent unauthorized entry into the landing area. Trees,
shrubbery, and other landscaping and/or acoustical barrier where appropriate shall be provided in
quantities and dimensions deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and Zoning Hearing
Board to minimize offensive noise and to afford a softening of the visual impact of the landing
area. Rooftop pads shall be excluded from these requirements.
At least two approach lanes to each landing pad shall be provided and maintained free of
obstructions and shall be located within 45° left or right of the prevailing winds of the landing pad
to a width of 1,000 feet, and shall have a glide angle slope of eight to one measured from the
outer edge of the pad.
Clear areas for emergency landings of the helicopter in the event of mechanical failure shall be
available. Such emergency landing areas shall be located within the normal glide range of the
helicopter with one engine off when operating in the approved takeoff or landing lane.
An application for a landing pad on a roof shall be accompanied by a certification by a registered
engineer that the loads imposed by the helicopter will be supported by the structure.
All fire and safety equipment provided in conjunction with a heliport or helistop shall be subject to
the approval of the Township Fire Marshall.
In reviewing any application for a heliport of helistop, the Zoning Hearing Board shall be guided by
the standards of review included in § 903.5 hereof, and, in addition, may impose restrictions on
hours of operation, lighting, noise levels, and flight altitude over residential areas, and such other
requirements as may be appropriate and reasonable to protect the health, welfare, and safety of
Township residents and their property.
No permit shall be used for the construction of a heliport until the site plan has been approved by
the Planning Commission.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 539/620
j.
(1)
(2)
(3)
k.
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
In addition to the requirements of the Township, any applicant for a heliport of helistop shall
comply with the rules and regulations pertaining thereto of the Bureau of Aviation, Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation and the Federal Aviation Administration. No permit for the use of a
heliport or helistop shall be issued by the Township until the applicant has obtained an appropriate
license for the operation thereof from the Bureau of Aviation, Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to land, discharge, load, or take off in a helicopter any place
within the Township other than at a heliport or helistop which has been authorized in accordance
with the foregoing provisions of this section, except:
In conjunction with a special event as an athletic contest, a holiday celebration, parade, or
similar activity, after seven days advance notice has been given to the Township Manager and
permission obtained to make such landing and takeoff.
When necessary for law enforcement purposes and for emergencies.
In connection with a construction project where a helicopter is to be used to lift equipment in
connection with such a project.
§ 611. Conditional uses.
[Amended 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-11]
Notwithstanding any other section or provision of this ordinance, with respect to any proposed use
meeting the following criteria shall be permitted only by conditional use in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth in § 806 of this ordinance:
Any residential open space option that:
[Amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
Is less than 10 acres.
Reduces lot size by more than 50%.
Proposes on-site sewage systems.
Any restaurant, tearoom, cafe, confectionery or other place serving food or beverages whether
freestanding or occupying a portion of a building containing another use.
Any nonresidential structure(s) on one lot that contain more than 40,000 square feet or have total
combined parking space count of over 200.
Any structure(s) on a lot used strictly for retail use with a combined size of 10,000 square feet or
more.
[Amended 8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-13]
Any nonresidential development having three or more lots or three or more buildings on one lot
shall have the option of having one conditional use hearing at which time a master concept plan
with restrictive covenants would be approved. With the successful completion of this process, the
developer would be exempted from individual conditional use hearings for each site or building
as required by other sections of this ordinance as long as the site development plan is deemed
to be in keeping with the master concept plan. As an alternative to a master conditional use
hearing, the owner/developer may submit to the Township restrictive covenants in form and
substance satisfactory to the Township in its sole discretion, which shall bind the subject property
and development in perpetuity. The restrictive covenants shall be recorded against the subject
property in the office of Recorder of Deeds of Chester County prior to preliminary land
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 540/620
[1]
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
612.1
a.
(1)
(2)
(3)
b.
612.2
development approval. The restrictive covenants, at a minimum, shall include covenants and
conditions necessary to ameliorate the impact of the proposed development and to satisfy the
objective and subjective standards and criteria set forth in the Zoning Ordinance applicable to
conditional uses in general and the proposed use specifically. The covenants may include
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in the Zoning Ordinance, as the
Township may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,[1] the Zoning Ordinance, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of, and
prevent any financial or other burden on, the Township and its residents. All developments
existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance that have gone through the conditional use
process and have master concept plan approval and restrictive covenants in place shall also be
exempted from further conditional use hearings pursuant to this ordinance.
[Amended 8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-13]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 612. Historic preservation.
Intended purposes.
To promote the general welfare by protecting the integrity of the historic resources of Uwchlan
Township, especially those that are federal/state-certified.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
To establish a clear process by which proposed changes affecting historic resources are
reviewed by Uwchlan Township.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
To mitigate the negative effects of proposed changes on historic resources.
To encourage the continued use of historic resources and facilitate their appropriate reuse.
To tailor protective measures to those clearly delineated historic resources in Uwchlan worthy
of preservation.
To encourage the preservation of historic settings and landscapes.
To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
General provisions.
Compliance. Any alteration to an historic resource shown on the current Historic Resources
Map and Inventory shall occur only in full compliance with the terms of this section and other
applicable regulations.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Historic preservation overlay district.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
The Historic Resources Map shall be deemed an overlay on all zoning districts now or
hereafter established to regulate the use of land in the Township.
For any historic resource, the requirements and opportunities contained in this section
shall supplement the otherwise applicable requirements of the underlying zoning district.
If, due to legislative or administrative action, judicial decision, or any other reason, this
overlay district is determined to not be applicable, zoning requirements and other
regulations applicable to the property in question shall be those of the underlying zoning
district, without consideration of this section.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 541/620
c.
[1]
a.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(3)
b.
612.3
Preservation of other restrictions. It is not intended by this section to repeal, abrogate, or
impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
Historic Resources Map and Inventory.
[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04; 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Adoption. The Historic Resources Map and Inventory, together with the classifications set
forth in § 612.3.b and any explanatory material, is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as part of this ordinance, together with any revisions approved in accordance with
§ 612.3.c. The Historic Resources Map and Inventory shall be on file in the Township
administrative offices and shall be the final authority as to the designation and description of
historic resources in the Township, regardless of any unofficial copies which may be made or
published from time to time.[1]
Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map and Inventory, and the Historic Resources
Inventory List, are included as attachments to this chapter.
Classifications. The Historic Resources Map and Inventory delineates the following
classifications of the historic resources in Uwchlan Township, as defined below:
Class 1: historic buildings and structures certified by the Secretary of the Interior and
listed by the National Park Service (NPS) on the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP).
Class 2 DOE-Eligible: buildings and structures (including those within the Lionville
Historic District) part or all of which were built prior to 1900 and have received an
approved determination of eligibility (DOE) by the NPS based upon the review and
opinion of the Bureau of Historic Preservation (BHP) of the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission (PHMC) and are listed as eligible for inclusion on the NRHP.
Class 3: buildings and structures part or all of which were built prior to 1900 that are
included in the Historic Resources Map and Inventory and i) which are documented on a
Pennsylvania historic resource survey form and retain local, state, or national
significance per National Register criteria or for their local significance or ii) which meet
two or more of the criteria listed below:
Associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad
patterns of local, state or national history.
Associated with the lives of persons significant in local, state or national history.
Possess the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction or
that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that
represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction.
Exhibit a high degree of original architectural integrity. This integrity should be
judged in light of the architectural period best represented by the buildings and not
conjecture on how the resource once appeared.
Yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in history or prehistory.
Architecturally significant.
Please note: Though not classified, properties that contain buildings, sites,
structures, and objects that are 50 to 80 years old and whose information has been
recorded by the BHP but no evaluations have been conducted or completed, and
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 542/620
(1)
(2)
c.
[2]
d.
a.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
b.
612.4
are therefore listed as "undetermined," are listed and available at the Uwchlan
Township Historical Commission.
Revisions. The Historic Resources Map and Inventory may be revised from time to time by
administrative action of the Board of Supervisors.
In considering any revision, including additions, deletions, or changes of classification to
the Historic Resources Map and Inventory, the Board may receive a written
recommendation from the Uwchlan Township Historical Commission.
The owners of any property which is the subject of any such proposed administrative
action shall be given written notice by the Zoning Officer at the order of the Board of
Supervisors at least 10 days prior to the public meeting where the proposed
administrative action is on the agenda.
Historic resources inventory list. The Township shall maintain an updated list of resources
shown on the Historic Resources Map and Inventory and their respective classifications.[2]
Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Inventory List is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
Demolition (in whole or part) of historic resources.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Demolition by neglect. No historic resource shall be demolished by neglect. Unoccupied
structures should be tightly sealed and fenced off and the utilities turned off for safety.
Demolition of historic resources by permit. The following procedure is established for the
issuance of a permit for demolition of an historic resource in order to facilitate the purposes of
this section and to allow for consideration of alternatives to the demolition of the historic
resource by the owner of the resource:
Demolition permit. No historic resource shall be intentionally demolished, razed, or
otherwise disturbed, eradicated or destroyed, in whole or in part, unless a permit is
obtained from the Zoning Officer in accordance with the procedures and requirements of
this section and other applicable standards and procedures of Township ordinances and
codes. Except as provided in § 612.4.b(3) hereinbelow, the Zoning Officer shall not make
a decision on an application for a demolition permit for an historic resource until issuance
of the recommendation of the Board of Supervisors as required by this section.
Removal of existing significant exterior architectural features. Demolition, for purposes of
the foregoing permit requirements, shall include the removal of any existing significant
exterior architectural features on an historic resource if such features are identified as
such on a National Register nomination or Pennsylvania historic resources survey form
or so deemed by the Zoning Officer.
Preapplication meeting required. A meeting between the applicant and the Zoning Officer
shall be required prior to the official submittal of a demolition permit application. The
purpose of this meeting is to foster communication about the demolition proposal and
possible alternatives for the resource in question. The Zoning Officer shall inspect the
interior and exterior of the resource with the applicant. If the Zoning Officer determines
that the resource appears to be structurally sound as a whole, the applicant shall follow
the procedure set forth hereinbelow. If the Zoning Officer determines that the resource is
structurally defective to a degree that the structure is in danger of collapse or is a threat
to public safety, the Zoning Officer may issue the demolition permit without compliance
with the procedures set forth hereinbelow.
Application requirements for the demolition, in whole or part, of historic resources. In
addition to applicable requirements under the Township Building Code, any applicant
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 543/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(8)
seeking a permit to demolish, in whole or part, an historic resource shall provide the
following with regard to that historic resource:
Name of legal and equitable owner of record.
Classification on Historic Resources Map and Inventory.
Measured site plan showing the locations, dimensions, use and height of all
buildings and structures on the lot on which the historic resource is located in
relation to lots lines, roadways, and natural features.
Photographs of the historic resource proposed for demolition depicting its
appearance at the time of application. Photographs of historic buildings or structures
must include each exterior elevation.
Detailed reasons for the proposed demolition.
Method of proposed demolition.
Future uses of the site and of the materials from the historic resource proposed for
demolition.
Consideration of the potential for the presence of significant archaeological
resources.
Explanation of the uses for the historic resource which the applicant has considered
prior to, or instead of, demolition.
Application. The applicant shall submit three copies of an application for a demolition
permit involving an historic resource with all of the aforesaid information to the Zoning
Officer. The Zoning Officer may forward the complete application to the Historical
Commission for review, and to the Planning Commission for its information, but shall
reject and return an incomplete application. The time periods for review and decision
under this section shall not commence until the Zoning Officer notifies the applicant, in
writing, that a complete application has been accepted for filing and the date of filing.
Review by Historical Commission. If the application is sent to the Historical Commission,
within 30 days of receipt of the application from the Zoning Officer the Historical
Commission, at a regular or special meeting, shall review the application for demolition.
The applicant shall be notified, in writing, of such meeting at least 10 days prior to its date
and shall have the opportunity to present reasons for filing the application and such other
relevant information as the applicant desires.
Recommendation by the Historical Commission. The Historical Commission shall, after
conducting the meeting as aforesaid, make a recommendation to the applicant and the
Board of Supervisors, and Zoning Officer with a copy to the Planning Commission, within
15 days of the meeting date as to whether the historic resource should be demolished as
requested by the applicant or, in the alternative, as to uses for the historic resource that
should be considered or other actions that could be taken by the applicant or the Board
of Supervisors to promote the preservation of the historic, cultural, educational, and other
values represented by the historic resource.
Board of Supervisors recommendation.
Within 60 days of the date of filing of the application under § 612.4.b(5), the Board of
Supervisors shall consider the application, together with the comments of the
applicant and the recommendations of the Historical Commission, if any, and render
a decision to either recommend to the Zoning Officer approval or denial of the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 544/620
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(9)
(10)
application or defer its decision for up to 60 days and require that the applicant
prepare a financial analysis containing the information required by § 612.4.b(9)
hereinbelow.
If the applicant is directed to prepare a financial analysis, the sixty-day deferral
period above shall be extended a period of 30 additional days after the complete
submission of the financial analysis is delivered to the Township.
The applicant shall be notified of the Board of Supervisors meeting at which the
application for demolition is to be considered at least 10 days prior to the date of the
meeting and shall have the opportunity to present the applicant's reasons for
demolishing the historic resource and filing the application. Within five days of
making its decision, the Board of Supervisors shall provide written communication of
its decision to the applicant and Zoning Officer.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the authority of the Zoning Officer to deny a
permit for:
Failure to provide the information required by this section or any other ordinance
of the Township, including but not limited to the financial analysis if required by
the Board of Supervisors;
Failure to comply with any other ordinance or code of the Township.
Financial analysis for the demolition of an historic resource. The Board of Supervisors
may require an applicant to submit a financial analysis prepared by qualified
professionals in historic preservation, planning, finance, appraisal and related disciplines,
which shall be verified as true and correct by the applicant and the professionals, which
shall include at least the following:
Amount paid for property, date of purchase and party from whom purchased,
including a description of the relationship, whether business or familial, if any,
between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased.
Assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to the most recent
county real estate tax assessment.
Financial information for the previous two years, which shall include, at a minimum,
annual gross income from the property, itemized operating and maintenance
expenses, real estate taxes, annual debt service, annual cash flow, the amount of
depreciation taken for federal income tax purposes, and other federal income tax
deductions produced.
Cost of restoration for permitted uses pursuant to existing zoning.
An appraisal of the fair market value of the property in its existing condition and the
estimated fair market value after restoration for permitted uses pursuant to existing
zoning.
An analysis of the economic viability of the property for sale or rental as it exists and
after restoration.
Bona fide offers to purchase or rent the property, including asking price and offers
received.
Any consideration by the applicant as to economical adaptive uses for the property.
Issuance or denial of demolition permit. Where the Board of Supervisors recommends
approval of the application for the demolition permit, the Zoning Officer shall issue the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 545/620
(11)
(12)
(13)
(1)
(2)
c.
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
612.5
demolition permit to the applicant (provided all other ordinance and code requirements of
the Township have been satisfied). Where the Board of Supervisors recommends denial
of the demolition permit, the Board of Supervisors shall state the recommended
measures for the preservation or adaptive use of the historic resource. The Board of
Supervisors shall state the reasons why a demolition permit was approved or denied.
The applicant's failure to comply with any requirement of this section shall be sufficient
reason for a Board recommendation of denial of a demolition permit and denial of the
permit by the Zoning Officer. Such permit approval or denial action shall be taken by the
Zoning Officer within 10 days after the decision of the Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors may recommend denial of a demolition permit for an historic
resource if the applicant does not demonstrate, through the financial analysis or
otherwise, that the sale or rental of the historic resource cannot provide a reasonable rate
of return and that other potential uses of the property authorized by the Zoning
Ordinance, and specifically this section, which would provide a reasonable rate of return,
are not possible.
Documentation required. Prior to issuance of the demolition permit, the Township may
require that the applicant/owner document the historic resource proposed for demolition.
Such documentation may include photographs, floor plans, measured drawings,
archeological survey or other form of documentation necessary to adequately record the
history and architectural features of the historic resource. The Township may also require
that the applicant/owner remove, preserve, and donate to the Township exterior and
interior architectural features or elements of the historic resource.
Appeal. Appeal of any action of the Zoning Officer under this section shall be to the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with applicable provisions of the Municipalities
Planning Code and the Zoning Ordinance.
Enforcement.
Remedies, fines and penalties. Any person who violates the requirements of this section
shall be subject to the remedies, fines and penalties imposed under this ordinance in
accordance with §§ 1002 and 1003, as well as those fines and penalties imposed under
the Township Building Code.
The Board of Supervisors may withhold issuing any building permits for a minimum of
one year from the date of application for the permit for a property where an historic
resource was located that was demolished in violation of this section.
Standards for rehabilitation.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation. Any proposed rehabilitation, alteration,
or enlargement of a Class 1 and 2 historic resource should be in substantial compliance with
the Secretary of the United States Department of the Interior's most recent "Standards for
Rehabilitation." The Standards for Rehabilitation from a 2011 Department of the Interior
publication titled such are listed below:
A property will be used for its intended historic purpose or be placed in a new use that
requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and
environment.
The historic character of a property will be retained and preserved. The removal of
historic materials or alteration of features, and spaces that characterize a property will be
avoided.
Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its times, place and use.
Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 546/620
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
b.
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
612.6
features or architectural elements from other buildings, will not be undertaken.
Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance
in their own right will be retained and preserved.
Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship
that characterize an historic property will be preserved.
Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of
deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature will match the
old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials.
Replacement of missing features will be substantiated by documentary, physical, or
pictorial evidence. Should replacement or repair costs be prohibitive, a reasonable
facsimile may be approved.
Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic
materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, will be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
Significant archeological resources affected by a project will be protected and preserved
in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be undertaken.
New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction will not destroy historic
materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old
and will be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect
the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
New additions and adjacent or related new construction will be undertaken in such a
manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic
property and its environment would be unimpaired.
Compliance. Final determinations of compliance with these standards shall be made by the
Board of Supervisors.
Historic resource impact study.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Applicability. An historic resource impact study, or any applicable portions thereof, may be
required, unless waived or modified, by the Board of Supervisors or Zoning Hearing Board
when any of the following are proposed:
Subdivision or land development plans which will lead to the new construction of
buildings, structures, roads, driveways, parking areas, etc., adjoining an historic
resource, whether on the same or adjacent property.
Subdivision or land development plans which propose adaptive reuse or demolition, in
whole or part, of an historic resource.
General bridge or road construction or substantial repair adjoining an historic resource
whether on the same or adjacent property.
When required, the historic resource impact study shall be prepared by a qualified
professional in historic preservation, historical architecture, planning or related disciplines and
should contain the following background information, if not otherwise provided by the
applicant, including such items as: a site description, classification and general description,
photographs, and narrative description of the historical development of all historic resources
located on the subject tract. Any proposed change, including a general description of project
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 547/620
a.
612.7
with time table or phases, if known, and measures to mitigate any impacts. The applicant
shall implement the mitigative measures proposed in the study.
Special use provisions.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Additional use opportunities. In addition to the uses permitted by right, special exception, or
conditional use in the zoning districts specified in Article 5 of the Zoning Ordinance, historic
resources may be entitled to the additional use opportunities shown below. These use
opportunities shall be available in addition to any use currently being made of the property
where the historic resource is located, subject to the standards and procedures contained in
applicable sections of this chapter and the additional requirements set forth below. The
additional use must be located within a building which is designated as an historic resource.
Zoning Districts
Uses RA RR R-1 R-2 PC PC-2 PIC PI
Dwelling,
single-family
— — — — BR BR BR CU
Home
occupation,
§ 612.7.c
below
— — — — BR BR BR CU
Residential
conversions,
§ 612.7.e
below
CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU
Professional or
business
offices
NP NP NP NP — — — CU
Cultural studio NP NP NP NP CU CU CU CU
Cultural facility NP NP NP NP CU CU — CU
Guesthouse,
as accessory,
§ 612.7.f below
CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU
Bed-andbreakfast,
§ 612.7.g
below
CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU
Inn NP NP NP NP BR BR CU CU
Restaurant,
tearoom, cafe,
confectionery
NP NP NP NP — — CU CU
Combination of
permitted uses
NP NP NP NP CU CU CU CU
Key for chart:
BR = By right
CU = Conditional use
NP = Not permitted
— = Already available in base district
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 548/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
b.
(1)
c.
(1)
(2)
d.
Design standards. The following design standards shall apply, except where specifically noted
to the contrary in the subsections below, to any of the additional use opportunities specified in
§ 612.7.a above. Compliance with all other sections of this chapter, including, in particular,
"Screening" (§ 608), "Lighting" (§ 615), "Off-street parking and loading" (§ 607) and "Signs"
(§ 606), shall be required as applicable.
Buildings may not be enlarged for residential conversions. For the remaining additional
use opportunities shown in § 612.7.a, no historic resource may be enlarged on the sides
of the structure beyond what is minimally necessary to accommodate the additional use
and permitted by the applicable zoning district. As a guideline, no historic resource
should be enlarged by more than 50% of its existing footprint to utilize these
opportunities.
Unless otherwise specified in § 612.7.c through g hereinbelow, any rehabilitation,
alteration, or enlargement of an historic resource to utilize the opportunities listed in
§ 612.7.a should be in substantial compliance with the standards contained in § 612.5.a.
Plans for any rehabilitation, alteration or enlargement deemed necessary by the applicant
to utilize any of the opportunities listed in § 612.7.a shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer for review with the building permit, conditional use, special exception or land
development application as applicable. Such plans shall be in sufficient detail to allow the
Township to determine the plan's level of compliance with the standards contained in
§ 612.5.a.
Within the applicable time period prescribed for final Township decisionmaking, the
Zoning Officer shall review the plans for compliance with the standards and guidelines in
§ 612.5.a and shall submit his/her findings in a written report to the applicant. The report
shall indicate what specific changes in the plans are necessary to bring them into
substantial compliance.
In any case where the proposed use is permitted only as a conditional use, as provided
in § 612.7.a, the Board of Supervisors, may deny the request for additional use or uses
where it determines that the degree of noncompliance with the standards and guidelines
in § 612.5.a is unacceptable and destructive to the integrity of the historic resource.
Where the additional use opportunity listed in § 612.7.a is available only by conditional
use, landscaping must be provided in accordance with § 612.9. In residential districts,
utilization of an additional use opportunity specified in § 612.7.a requires compliance with
the standards in §§ 602.1 and 603.
Home occupations. In conjunction with the residential use of a property, a home occupation
may be located in any historic resource on a particular property, but there shall be no more
than one home occupation per structure. In addition to the standards for home occupations
contained in § 602 and the general design standards in § 612.7.b, home occupations placed
in historic resources must comply with these additional requirements:
Any rehabilitation, alteration or enlargement of an historic resource (other than the
principal dwelling) to accommodate the home occupation must be in substantial
compliance with the standards contained in § 612.5.a.
Restaurant, tearoom, cafe, confectionery. As specified in § 612.7.a, a restaurant, tearoom,
cafe, or confectionery may be located in an historic resources by conditional use, provided the
following are adhered to in addition to those standards in § 612.7.b.
In a residential district, the historic resources must be located on a lot not less than four
acres. In all other cases, the base zoning district lot size shall apply.
There shall be no paving within 50 feet of the side and rear lot lines.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 549/620
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
e.
(1)
(2)
(3)
f.
(1)
(2)
(3)
g.
Lighting shall be in accordance with § 615 and any additional requirements of the Board
of Supervisors.
Signs shall be in accordance with § 606.
Residential conversions. As specified in § 612.7.a, the conversion of any historic resource
into residential use by conditional use must comply with the following requirements in addition
to § 612.5.a, the criteria in § 612.8 below, and the general design standards in § 612.7.b:
Site and architectural plans for the conversion of the building shall be submitted, together
with an application for a conditional use.
Such plans shall provide adequate and suitable parking or storage space for at least
three automobiles per dwelling unit.
Required parking spaces shall be located between the building and the required
minimum yard areas, and provided parking shall be prohibited in the front yard.
The lot area per dwelling unit shall not be reduced to less than the lot area required for
the residential zoning district in which such lot is situated. For nonresidential zoning
districts, the lot area per dwelling unit shall not be reduced to less than 20,000 square
feet per dwelling unit, provided that the property is served by public sewer and water.
The applicable area and bulk requirements of the underlying zoning district shall be met.
There shall be no external alteration of the building except as provided herein and as
may be necessary for reasons of safety; fire escape and outside stairways shall, where
practicable, be located to the side or rear of the building.
The resulting dwelling units shall have a minimum floor area of 500 contiguous square
feet.
Guesthouse, as an accessory dwelling. As specified in § 612.7.a, historic resources may be
used as guesthouses if more than one historic resource exists on a property. Utilization of this
additional use opportunity shall be contingent upon compliance with the general design
standards contained in § 612.7.b and these additional requirements:
No guest, individual or family may stay longer than 90 consecutive days during any
consecutive period of 180 days.
Any other amenities shall be for the benefit of guests only; no walk-in trade shall be
permitted.
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces, in addition to those required for the principal
dwelling units, shall be provided.
Bed-and-breakfast. As specified in § 612.7.a, historic resources may be used as a bed and
breakfast. Utilization of this additional use opportunity shall be contingent upon compliance
with the general design standards in § 612.7.b and these additional requirements:
No guest, individual or family may stay longer than 90 consecutive days during any
consecutive period of 180 days.
There shall be no separate kitchen or cooking facilities in any guest room. Meals shall be
served to guests only.
Any other amenities shall be for the benefit of guests only; no walk-in trade shall be
permitted.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 550/620
(4)
a.
b.
612.8
a.
b.
c.
612.9
a.
612.10
613.1
For each room, a minimum of one off-street parking space, in addition to those required
for the primary dwelling units, shall be provided.
Integrity of historic setting.
The subdivision or land development of a lot that contains an historic resource shall be
accomplished in such a manner that the resulting lot that will contain the resource is large
enough to preserve the integrity of the historic setting of the resource. A goal of the Township
shall be to preserve outbuildings, significant site features and immediate yard areas
significant to the resources on the lot with the resource.
The size and configuration of the subdivided lot shall depend upon the class of the historic
resource and the natural characteristics and the landscaping of the subdivided lot and
adjacent lots. Lot boundaries shall, in general, conform to the lines of identifiable natural
features, including landscaping, topography, geology, lot configuration, etc., on the site. Site
development shall be based, in general, upon § 612.5. Review and recommendations
regarding the resource, its subdivided lot, and the proposed land developments may be made
by the Zoning Officer to the Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors. The Board
may require that a lot size be increased above the minimum lot size for the underlying zoning
district in which the resource is located.
Landscaping.
Applicability. In addition to applicable buffering requirements under § 608 of this ordinance, a
landscape plan for the grounds surrounding an historic resource may be required by the
Board of Supervisors when a tract proposed for subdivision or land development contains an
historic resource and when such historic resource is proposed for use by conditional use.
Landscape plan. The plan must be prepared by a landscape architect or a qualified nursery
and show all pertinent information, including the location, size and species of all individual
trees and shrubs to be planted or preserved. Through screening, buffering and selection of
plant material, the plan should strive to protect the integrity of the setting, including any
historic plant material.
Review by Zoning Officer. The landscape plan will be reviewed for appropriateness and effect
by the Zoning Officer within the applicable time periods prescribed for Township
decisionmaking on the application. The Zoning Officer shall set forth his/her comments in a
written report.
Residential open space option and planned single-family development.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
In developments proposing to use the residential open space option and planned singlefamily
development in accordance with §§ 609 and 613, one additional lot may be created in
excess of the maximum number of lots otherwise permissible under the terms of this chapter
where such lot will contain an historic resource to be preserved as part of the development
plan.
§ 613. Planned single-family development.
Purpose. The intent of this provision is to allow for the high quality lot layout, planning and
landscape design for single-family residential subdivision in the R-1 District, where, in exchange
for the provision of common open space, the required area and dimensional specifications shall be
reduced, resulting in the creation of attractive open space, preservation of desirable natural
features and the provision of creative and practical designs in lot layout, street alignment and
building orientation. In order to comply with the intent of the ordinance, the developer shall be
required to submit information pertaining to his personal experience in real estate development to
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 551/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
613.2
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
613.3
613.4
include all corporations now or formerly in existence in which the developer exercised substantial
control. Developer also shall submit proof of financial responsibility showing evidence of his
present financial condition to include existing or proposed credit sources, all of which to prove the
ability to acquire sufficient funds for the completion of the proposed development.
Locational criteria. Planned single-family development shall be permitted as a conditional use in
the R-1 District subject to the following:
Minimum tract area: 100 acres.
Minimum open space: 30%.
Public sewer.
Public water.
Permitted uses in planned single-family development.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Noncommercial recreation facilities.
Open space (common).
Accessory uses.
Public uses, structures or buildings owned or operated by the Township or an Authority
created by the Township, or an Authority of which the Township is a member, or any other
public use subsidized by the Township.
Area and bulk regulations.
Minimum lot size: 8,000 square feet.
Average lot size: 15,000 square feet.
Maximum density: 2.5 dwelling units per acre.
Lots 8,000 to 15,000
square feet Lots 15,001+ square feet
Minimum lot width at curbline 40 feet 50 feet
Minimum lot width at building line 80 feet 100 feet
Minimum side yards 15 feet 15 feet minimum/
40 feet aggregate
Minimum rear yards 25 feet 35 feet
Building height 35 feet maximum
(2 1/2 stories)
35 feet maximum
(2 1/2 stories)
Maximum lot coverage:
Building coverage 25% 20%
Impervious coverage 40% 35%
Minimum front yard 30 feet 35 feet
Front yard variation: Along straight sections of roads not more than four homes shall have
the same setback; where varied setbacks are utilized, the difference shall be at least five
feet. Lots which are to have the increased setbacks shall be noted and so restricted on the
final subdivision plan.
1 2
1
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 552/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
613.5
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
613.6
Garage may encroach five feet to a minimum setback of 25 feet.
Open space.
A minimum of 15% of open space shall be provided.
The nature, extent, location and use of common open space shall be subject to approval by the
Board of Supervisors and shall, as a minimum, meet the following requirements:
There shall be governing documents for the development that include provisions which insure
that the common open space land shall continue as such and be properly maintained in
accordance with an approved open space management plan as described in § 617. These
provisions shall be in a form acceptable to the Board of Supervisors. The developer shall
either:
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Dedicate such land to public use of the Township or other public agency that has
indicated it will accept such dedication;
Provide for and establish one or more organizations for the ownership and maintenance
of the common open space; or
Other arrangement agreeable to both the developer and Board of Supervisors.
Common open space shall not be merely leftover or unusable land; it must be usable and
accessible for either active or passive recreation. Common open space must remain in its
natural condition unless designed for active or passive recreation as delineated on the
approved subdivision plan.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Common open space areas will be suitably landscaped either by retaining existing natural
cover and wooded areas or by an approved comprehensive landscape plan prepared by a
registered landscape architect and submitted with the preliminary and final plans, designed to
improve open space areas through planting and other means in such a way that future
maintenance costs are minimized.
[Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
The minimum size of any single parcel of open space shall be three acres except that at the
discretion of the Supervisors, a smaller parcel shall be permitted if such smaller parcel is
necessary for an improved site design or for topographic reasons. Further, the location, shape
and topography of the open space shall be subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors
and such land shall be in an acceptable condition before any building permit is issued for the
next phase of development.
Sidewalks and streets.
Subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, minimum cartway width may be reduced on
culs-de-sac if:
Vehicular traffic has been suitably separated from pedestrian traffic.
Such reduction in cartway width allows for the passage of two vehicles in opposite
directions with due allowance for any on-street parking that may be permitted on the culde-
sac.
Adequate off-street parking has been provided in sufficient quantity to warrant such
reduction. This shall be accomplished by creating a driveway that accommodates
vehicles side by side.
2
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 553/620
(4)
(1)
(2)
a.
(1)
(2)
b.
(1)
c.
(1)
(2)
d.
613.7
615.1
Such reduction does not impede circulation of traffic, especially emergency vehicles.
Submission and review procedure.
Sketch plan submission. Subsequent to preapplication conference, applicant shall submit a
sketch plan in accordance with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Sketch plan shall be reviewed at public meeting or meetings as may be required to
determine its general compliance with ordinance requirements and conceptual
requirements.
Sketch plan submission does not constitute formal submission but merely a vehicle for
public discussion purposes.
Preliminary plan submission. Once applicant and Township are satisfied with basic concept
and ordinance compliance, the applicant shall submit a preliminary plan in accordance with
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, § 304.
Township will send copies of preliminary plan to all proper reviewing agencies for
comments and plan will be discussed at public meeting or meetings as may be required.
Applicant shall deal with any changes, alterations or modifications that may be
recommended by the Board of Supervisors or any reviewing agency.
Public hearing for conditional use. Before the approval of the preliminary plan, the Board of
Supervisors shall schedule a public hearing per § 806 of this ordinance to discuss the
applicant's proposal.
Criteria used by the Board of Supervisors in making their determination will be as is
stated in § 806.4 of this ordinance.
Final plan. In the event that the applicant receives conditional use approval and preliminary
plan approval, they may then submit a final plan in accordance with the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, depending upon size of the tract involved
and possible development over a number of years, the applicant may submit a final plan
in stages.
Submittal of the final plan in stages will not require the applicant to make any additional
changes as long as the final plan is in accordance with the preliminary plan. The
preliminary plan will stand as a plan of record as long as no substantial changes are
made.
§ 614. Environmental Impact Assessment report.
An Environmental Impact Assessment report shall be submitted for any subdivision or land
development in accordance with the Uwchlan Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
§ 615. Lighting.
[Added 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07; amended 10-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; 12-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-06]
Purpose:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 554/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
615.2
(1)
a.
(1)
(2)
b.
615.3
To establish minimum standards for outdoor lighting to:
Provide lighting in outdoor public places where public health, safety and welfare are
potential concerns.
Protect drivers and pedestrians from the glare of nonvehicular light sources that shine
into their eyes and thereby impair safe traverse.
Protect neighbors and the night sky from nuisance glare and stray light from incorrectly
aimed, placed, applied, maintained or shielded light sources.
Promote energy-efficient lighting design and operation.
Protect and retain the intended visual character of the various Township venues.
Applicability.
Where required or permitted by the Zoning Ordinance or other Township ordinances or
requirements, outdoor lighting shall be provided for safety and personal security in areas of
public assembly and traverse; including but not limited to the following: multifamily residential,
commercial, industrial, public-recreational and institutional uses.
The Board of Supervisors may require lighting to be incorporated for other uses or locations,
as it deems necessary.
The glare-control requirements herein contained apply to lighting in all above-mentioned uses
as well as, but not limited to, sign, architectural, landscaping and residential lighting.
Temporary seasonal decorative lighting is exempt from all but the glare-control and other
safety requirements of this ordinance.
Emergency lighting, as may be required by any public agency while engaged in the
performance of its duties, is exempt from the requirements of this ordinance.
If, in the judgment of the Board of Supervisors, the International Green Construction Code
(IGCC) negatively impacts the health, safety, and welfare of this ordinance, the requirements
of adjoining or nearby properties or the general public.
Criteria.
Illumination levels.
Lighting, where required by this ordinance, shall have intensities and uniformity ratios in
accordance with the current recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America (IES) as contained in the current IES Lighting Handbook or
recommended practices.
Lighting fixture design.
Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the lighting application and
aesthetically acceptable to the Board of Supervisors.
For lighting predominantly horizontal tasks, such as roadways, pathways, vehicular and
pedestrian passage areas, merchandising and storage areas, automotive-fuel-dispensing
facilities, automotive sales areas, loading docks, cul-de-sacs, active and passive
recreational areas, building entrances, sidewalks, bicycle and pedestrian paths, site
entrances, and parking areas, fixtures shall meet IES “full cutoff” criteria or “fully
shielded” criteria. Fixtures with an aggregate lamp output not exceeding 500 lumens,
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 555/620
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
c.
e.g., the rated output of a nondirectional forty-watt incandescent or ten-watt compact
fluorescent lamp, are exempt from the requirements of this subsection.
For predominantly non-horizontal surfaces, the use of floodlighting, spotlighting, wallmounted
fixtures, decorative globes and other fixtures not meeting IES “full cutoff” or
“fully shielded” criteria shall be permitted only with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors or its designee, based upon acceptable glare control. Fixtures with an
aggregate lamp output not exceeding 500 lumens, e.g., the rated output of a nondirectional
forty-watt incandescent or ten-watt compact fluorescent lamp, are exempt
from the requirements of this subsection.
Fixtures shall be equipped with or be capable of being back-fitted with light directing
devices such as shields, visors or hoods when necessary to redirect offending light
distribution.
Control of nuisance and disabling glare.
All outdoor lighting, whether or not required by this ordinance, on private, residential,
commercial, industrial, municipal, recreational or institutional property, shall be aimed,
located, designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a hazard to drivers or
pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely traverse, i.e., disabling glare, and so as not
to create a nuisance by projecting or reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring use
or property, i.e., nuisance glare.
Floodlights and spotlights, when permitted, shall be so installed or aimed that they do not
project their output into the windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, directly
skyward or onto a roadway.
Parking facility and vehicular and pedestrianway lighting (except for safety and security
applications and all-night business operations), for commercial, industrial and institutional
uses shall be automatically extinguished no later than 1/2 hour after the close of business
or facility operation. When safety or security lighting is proposed for after-hours
illumination, it shall not be more than 25% of the number of fixtures or illumination level
required or permitted for illumination during regular business hours. When it can be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township that an elevated security risk exists,
e.g., a history of relevant crime, an appropriate increase above the 25% limit may be
permitted.
Fixtures shall be automatically controlled through the use of a programmable controller
with battery power-outage reset, which accommodates daily and weekly variations in
operating hours, annual time changes, and seasonal variations in hours of darkness
operation. The use of photocells is permitted when in combination with the programmable
controller to turn fixtures on at dusk and also for all-night safety/security dusk-to-dawn
fixture operation when such lighting is specifically approved by the Township. The use of
motion detectors is permitted as long as the fixture extinguishes after two minutes of the
initial illumination.
Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary means for controlling
glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved primarily through the use of such means as
cutoff fixtures, shields and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height,
wattage, aiming angle and fixture placement.
The illumination projected from any use onto a residential use shall at no time exceed 0.1
footcandle, measured at line-of-sight at any time and from any point on the receiving
residential property.
Except as permitted for certain recreational lighting and permitted elsewhere in this §
615.3.c(7), fixtures shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet of finished grade of the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 556/620
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
d.
(1)
e.
(1)
(2)
f.
surface being illuminated. Fixtures not meeting full cutoff criteria when their use is
specifically allowed by the Township shall not be mounted in excess of 16 feet above
finished grade. “Mounting height” shall be defined as the distance from the finished grade
at the base of the fixture to the optical center of the fixture. Where parking lots consist of
100 or more contiguous spaces, the Township may, at its sole discretion, based partially
on mitigation of off-site impacts, allow a fixture mounting height not to exceed 25 feet
above finished grade. For recreational lighting maximum mounting height requirements,
refer to § 615.5 of this ordinance.
Only the United States and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania flags shall be permitted
to be illuminated past 11:00 p.m. Flag lighting sources shall not exceed 7,000 aggregate
lamp lumens per flagpole. The light source shall have a beam spread no greater than to
illuminate the flag and shall be shielded so the light source (lamp or reflector) is not
visible at normal viewing angles of the flag.
Under-canopy lighting for such applications as gas/service stations, hotel/theater
marquees, fast-food/bank/drugstore driveups shall be accomplished using flat-lens, fullcutoff
fixtures aimed straight down and shielded in such a manner that the lowest opaque
edge of the fixture shall be below the light source and its light-directing surfaces, at all
lateral angles around the fixture. The average maintained illumination in the area directly
below the canopy shall not exceed 20 initial footcandles, with no value exceeding 30
footcandles.
Fixtures used for architectural lighting, e.g., facade, fountain, feature and landscape
lighting, shall be designed, fitted and aimed so as not to project their output beyond the
objects intended to be illuminated.
Installation.
Electrical feeds for lighting standards shall be run underground, not overhead.
Poles supporting fixtures for the illumination of parking areas and located within the
parking area or directly behind parking spaces, or where they could be hit by snow plows
or wide-swinging vehicles, shall be suitably protected by being placed a minimum of five
feet outside of paved areas or tire stops or placed on concrete pedestals at least 30
inches high above the pavement or suitably shielded by steel bollards or suitably
protected by other Township-approved means.
Maintenance.
Lighting fixtures and ancillary equipment shall be maintained so as always to meet the
requirements of this § 615.
Permitting; specifications. The lighting of new or existing signs, or the replacement of fixtures
for existing signs, whether from internal or exterior lighting source, shall require a building
permit and shall comply with all applicable requirements of this ordinance and the following
requirements:
Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall have fixtures mounted at the top of the
billboard or sign and aimed downward. The fixtures shall be designed, fitted and aimed to
shield the lamp and its reflective surfaces from direct off-site view and to place the light
output onto and not beyond the sign or billboard. Lighting shall be linear fluorescent
unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township that equal or superior
results with respect to glare, light trespass and light pollution control can be achieved
with an alternative source.
Channel letter signs shall have dimming capability to allow for adjustment of sign
brightness when required by the Township to accommodate local ambient conditions.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 557/620
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
a.
615.4
(1)
(2)
a.
615.5
Illumination of billboards shall be permitted only in the PIC and PCID Districts, provided
that illumination of billboards whose illuminated surface is visible from a residential use
within 400 feet of the billboard shall not be permitted.
Illumination of billboards and signs shall be extinguished automatically by a
programmable controller, with an astronomical and semiannual time change control and
spring or battery power-outage reset, by no later than 11:00 p.m. each evening until
dawn, except that signs for establishments open to the general public (e.g., restaurants,
retail stores) that operate or remain open past 11:00 p.m. may remain lighted no later
than 1/2 hour past the time of the close of the establishment.
Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing or oscillating light sources, lasers, beacons,
searchlights or strobe lighting shall not be permitted.
LED billboard and sign lighting shall only be permitted in the PIC, PCID and PI
Commercial and Industrial Districts, shall be static, shall not be allowed to operate
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and dawn when located where visible from a residential
district or use, and shall not be located within 1,000 feet of an intersection, interchange or
traffic-merging lane. Except for time and weather signs, the digital message shall not be
permitted to change more than once every 1/2 hour. During hours of darkness, the LED
output shall be automatically reduced to a brightness level that does not create glare, i.e.,
150 cd/m . The sign or billboard brightness shall be capable of being further dimmed if
the Township requires a reduction in brightness when the lighting is judged to be a
nuisance or hazard.
Residential development fixture placement.
If required streetlighting fixtures in residential developments shall be placed at the following
locations:
At the intersection of public roads with entrance roads to the proposed development.
Intersections involving proposed public or nonpublic major-thoroughfare road within the
proposed development.
The apex of a curve of any major thoroughfare road, public or nonpublic, within the
proposed development, having a radius of 300 feet or less.
Cul-de-sac bulbs.
Terminal ends of center median islands having concrete structure curbing, trees and/or
other fixed objects not having breakaway design for speeds of 25 mph or greater.
Defined pedestrian crossings located within the development.
At other locations along the street as deemed necessary by the Township.
Recreational lighting.
When facilities for such outdoor recreational activities as baseball, tennis, football and
miniature golf are specifically permitted by the Board of Supervisors for operation during
hours of darkness, the following requirements shall apply:
Lighting shall be accomplished only through the use of "cutoff" fixtures or as otherwise
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Except as otherwise permitted by the Board of Supervisors, sporting events shall be
timed to end such that all lighting in the sports facility, other than lighting for the safe exit
2
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 558/620
(1)
(2)
b.
(1)
c.
a.
b.
c.
615.6
of patrons, shall be extinguished by 9:45 p.m., regardless of such occurrences as extra
innings or overtimes.
The following outdoor recreational activities shall not be artificially illuminated if they are
located within any R-A, R-R, R-1 or R-2 District or on a nonresidential property located within
1,200 feet of a residential use.
Race tracks and such recreational venues as golf driving ranges and trapshooting
facilities that necessitate the horizontal or near horizontal aiming of luminaires and
projection of illumination.
Recreational facilities for basketball, baseball, football, soccer, miniature golf, tennis,
track and similar active recreational activities.
Mounting heights.
Maximum mounting heights for outdoor recreational lighting shall be generally in
accordance with the following:
Sport
Mounting Height
(feet)
Basketball 20
Football 50
Little League Baseball*
200-foot radius 60
300-foot radius 70
Miniature golf 20
Tennis 30
* Minimum mounting heights in accordance with league regulations shall prevail.
Plan submission. Where lighting is required by this ordinance, is otherwise required by the
Township or proposed by the applicant, lighting plans shall be submitted to the Township for
review and approval as part of subdivision and/or land development, conditional use, variance,
building permit, and special exception applications, as applicable. The submitted information shall
include the following:
A plan or plans for the site, complete with all structures, parking spaces, building entrances
traffic areas, (both vehicular and pedestrian), existing and proposed trees, and adjacent uses
that might be adversely impacted by the lighting. The lighting plan shall contain a layout of all
proposed and existing fixtures, including but not limited to area, architectural, building
entrance, canopy, soffit, landscape, flag, sign, etc., by location, orientation, aiming direction,
mounting height, lamp, photometry, and type.
A ten-foot-by-ten-foot illuminance-grid (point-by-point) plot of maintained horizontal
footcandles overlaid on a site plan, plotted out to 0.0 footcandle, which demonstrates
compliance with the light trespass, illuminance and uniformity requirements as set forth in this
ordinance or as otherwise required by the Township. When the scale of the plan, as judged by
the Township, makes ten-foot-by-ten-foot grid plot illegible, a more legible grid spacing may
be permitted.
Light-loss factors, IES candela-test file name, initial lamp-lumen ratings and specific lamp
manufacturer's lamp ordering nomenclature used in calculating the plotted illuminance levels.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 559/620
d.
e.
f.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
g.
(1)
(2)
a.
(1)
(2)
b.
615.7
615.8
Description of the proposed equipment, including fixture catalog cuts, photometries, glare
reduction devices, lamps, lamp color temperature, on-off control devices, mounting heights,
pole foundation details, pole protections means, and mounting methods.
Landscaping plans shall contain fixture locations, demonstrating that the lighting and
landscaping have been coordinated to minimize conflict between vegetation and light
distribution, both initially and at vegetation maturity.
When requested by the Board of Supervisors, the applicant shall submit a visual impact plan
that demonstrates that appropriate steps have been taken to mitigate potential consequences
of on-site and off-site glare and to retain the intended character of the Township. This plan
may require the inclusion of initial vertical footcandle values at specific off-site venues, e.g.,
bedroom windows of adjacent residential uses.
Plan notes. The following notes shall appear on the lighting plan:
Post-approval alterations to lighting plans or intended substitutions for specified lighting
equipment on the approved plan shall be submitted to the Township for review and
approval prior to installation. Requests for substitutions shall be accompanied by catalog
cuts of the proposed equipment that demonstrate that the proposed substitution is equal
to or exceeds the optical quality and maintainability of the specified fixtures; and
accompanied by a lighting plan, including a point-by-point plot, which demonstrates that
proposed substitutions will result in a lighting design whose quality equals or exceeds the
lighting on the approved plan.
The Township reserves the right to conduct post-installation inspections to verify
compliance with ordinance requirements and approved lighting plan commitments, and, if
deemed appropriate by the Township, to require remedial action at no expense to the
Township.
All exterior lighting, including building-mounted lighting, shall meet IES full cutoff or fully
shielded criteria and shall be submitted to the Township for review and approval prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
All proposed building exterior and site lighting shall be installed and maintained by the
property owner.
Compliance monitoring.
Safety hazards.
If Township judges a lighting installation creates a safety or personal security hazard, the
person(s) responsible for the lighting shall be notified and required to take remedial
action.
If appropriate corrective action has not been effected within 30 days of notification, the
Township may commence legal action as provided in §§ 615.9 and 615.10 hereinbelow:
Nuisance glare and inadequate illumination levels.
When Township judges an installation produces unacceptable levels of nuisance glare,
skyward light, excessive or insufficient illumination levels or otherwise varies from this
§ 615, Township may cause notification of the person(s) responsible for the lighting and
require appropriate remedial action.
If appropriate corrective action has not been effected within 30 days of notification, the
Township may commence legal action as provided in §§ 615.9 and 615.10 hereinbelow.
Nonconforming lighting.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 560/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
a.
a.
b.
615.9
615.10
(1)
a.
617.1
Any lighting fixture or lighting installation existing on the effective date of this ordinance that
does not conform with the requirements of this ordinance shall be considered as a lawful
nonconformance subject to the following:
A nonconforming lighting fixture or lighting installation shall be made to conform with the
requirements of this ordinance when:
It is deemed by the Township to create a safety hazard.
It is replaced, relocated or abandoned.
Minor corrective action, such as re-aiming or adding shielding, can achieve
conformity.
The number of exiting features is increased.
Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this § 615 shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township before a Magisterial
District Judge, pay a fine as provided in § 1003 of this ordinance. No judgement shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of the violation
by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgement, the Township may enforce the judgement pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
The appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek legal and/or
equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance with this § 615.
Abatement of nuisances. In addition to any other remedies provided in this ordinance, any
violation of § 615.3.c hereof, Control of nuisance and disabling glare, shall constitute a nuisance
and shall be abated by the Township by either seeking mitigation of nuisance or appropriate
equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 616. Retaining walls.
Any retaining walls, whether decorative walls or supporting walls, that are over four feet in height shall
be permitted in all zoning districts only after the submission of plans sealed by a structural engineer
have been approved by Township Engineer.
§ 617. Open space management provisions.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Required open space management plan.
Any application for conditional use approval for development requiring common open space in
accordance with this ordinance shall contain a conceptual open space management plan
providing for the long-term management of the common open space which is to be created as
part of the development, including maintenance and management of any stormwater
management, recreation, or any other common facilities which may be located within areas of
common open space. Such a plan shall include a narrative discussion of:
The manner in which the common open space and any facilities included therein will be
owned and by whom they will be managed and maintained;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 561/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
b.
c.
d.
a.
617.2
The specific conservation and land management techniques and practices which will be
used to conserve and perpetually protect the common open space, including, for
example, stormwater management, where applicable, woodland stewardship planning,
anticipated mowing schedules, management of invasive vegetation, provision for
introduction of landscape materials, trail maintenance, recreation facilities, etc.;
The professional and personnel resources that will be necessary in order to maintain and
manage the common open space;
The nature of public or private access that is planned for the common open space and
the means by which such access shall be managed and/or controlled, as appropriate;
and
The source(s) and approximate amounts of funding that will be available for such
management, preservation and maintenance on a perpetual basis.
As required in § 617.1.a above, where an application for conditional use approval is submitted
prior to preliminary plan submission, such application shall include a conceptual open space
management plan outlining compliance with the issues stated above. The adequacy and
feasibility of this conceptual management plan as well as its compatibility with the open space
resource protection objectives of the Township shall be a factor in the approval or denial of
the conditional use application by the Board of Supervisors. A complete final open space
management plan shall be submitted with preliminary subdivision and land development plan
submission.
The Board of Supervisors may require that the open space management plan be recorded in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County with the home association document
submitted with the final subdivision and land development plans. In addition, the Board may
require, as a condition of land development approval, that appropriate management contracts
be established as evidence of the ability to adhere to the provisions of the approved
management plan.
In order to allow for the changing needs inherent in the perpetual management of land, the
open space management plan shall contain a provision to the effect that it may be changed
by written application to the Board of Supervisors. Approval of such application by the Board
shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, so long as the proposed change is feasible
and consistent with the purposes of preservation of open space set forth in this ordinance and
so long as the plan for such change avoids a likelihood of the obligation for management and
maintenance of the land falling upon the Township without the consent of the Board of
Supervisors.
Provisions for default of open space maintenance. Upon default by any owner, homeowners'
association, conservation organization, or other entity responsible for maintenance of designated
open space and/or associated facilities, where such maintenance is required under the terms of
the open space management plan, homeowners' association or condominium documents, any
subdivision and/or land development plan for the property, the zoning approval for the property, or
under any applicable requirements of any Township ordinances, permits or approvals, or where
such maintenance is otherwise necessary to abate a nuisance, emergency, hazard or other
condition threatening persons or property or the public health, safety or welfare, the Township
may, but shall not be obligated to, take the following actions:
Upon 30 days' advance written notice to the person, association or entity responsible for such
maintenance (or any such lesser period as may be specified in the notice in instances of
emergency) and the failure of the responsible individual, entity or association within such
thirty-day period (or such lesser period in the event of an emergency) to perform the
necessary maintenance and otherwise remedy the condition set forth in the Township's
notice, to enter upon the open space, accessing the same through any other lands of such
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 562/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
b.
a.
(1)
(2)
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
618.1
a.
b.
618.2
entity, association or individual as may be necessary, to perform such maintenance and take
any other action necessary to correct the condition provided in the Township's notice.
Any and all costs incurred by the Township in connection with such notice and maintenance
shall be paid by the responsible individual, entity or association within 10 days after written
demand by the Township. Upon failure of the responsible entity, association or individual to
pay such costs by the time required, there shall be added thereto interest at the rate of 15%
per annum as well as all costs incurred by the Township in collection thereof.
All such costs of maintenance, remediation, notices and collection, including court costs
and attorneys' fees, shall constitute a municipal lien and shall be enforceable as such
against the responsible entity, individual or association.
Such lien shall apply to all property of such individual, entity or association within the
development containing the affected open space.
In the case of an association or if individual lot owners are individually or collectively
responsible for maintenance of common open space, such lien shall apply, pro rata,
against all lot owners who are members of the association, in addition to applying to the
affected open space.
§ 618. Steep slope standards.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Intended purposes:
To promote the public health, safety and welfare by the protection of steep slope areas and by
encouraging the retention of open space located and designed so as to constitute a
harmonious and appropriate part of the physical development of Uwchlan Township.
To permit only those uses of steep slope areas which are compatible with the conservation of
natural conditions and which maintain stable soil conditions by:
Minimizing disturbances to vegetative ground covers; and
Restricting the regrading of steep slope areas.
To limit soil erosion and the resultant destruction of the land, siltation of streams, and damage
to the property of individuals.
To protect low-lying areas from flooding by limiting the increase in stormwater runoff caused
by grading of slope areas, changes of ground cover, or the erection of structures.
To maintain the ecological integrity and habitat value of steeply sloped areas, i.e., indigenous
vegetation and wildlife, which could be adversely affected by otherwise permitted
disturbances.
To allow the continuing replenishment of groundwater resources and the maintenance of
springs.
General provisions.
Compliance. No area within the steep slope shall hereafter be disturbed or used without full
compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations.
Steep slope overlay concept. Steep slopes shall be deemed to be an overlay zoning district
on any zoning district(s) now or hereafter enacted to regulate the use of land in Uwchlan
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 563/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
c.
d.
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
618.3
Township.
Steep slopes shall have no effect on the permitted uses in the underlying zoning district,
except where said uses are intended to be located within the boundaries of either
precautionary or prohibitive slopes, as defined herein, and said uses are in conflict with
the permitted uses set forth in this section.
The requirements of §§ 618.3, 618.4 and 618.5 shall supersede the use and disturbance
requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) for areas where the steep slope overlay
applies.
Should the steep slope boundaries be revised as a result of legislative or administrative
actions or judicial decision, the zoning requirements applicable to the area in question
shall revert to the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) without consideration
of this section.
For any parcel or any part thereof on which steep slope is an overlay, should the zoning
classification(s) be changed as a result of legislative or administrative actions or judicial
decision, such change(s) in classification shall have no effect on the boundaries of the
steep slope, unless an amendment to said boundaries was included as part of the
proceedings from which the subsequent change(s) originated.
Preservation of other restrictions. It is not intended by this section to repeal, abrogate, or
impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
Municipal liability. The granting of a zoning permit or approval of a subdivision or land
development plan within or near steep slope shall not constitute a representation, guarantee,
or warranty of any kind by Uwchlan Township, or by any official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of the proposed use and shall create no liability upon Uwchlan
Township, its officials or employees. This section does not imply that areas outside the steep
slope boundaries or land uses permitted within said district will always be totally free from the
adverse effects of erosion.
Designation and interpretation.
Steep slope consists of two areas which are delineated and defined as follows:
Precautionary slopes are those land areas of 15% to 25% slope measured over three or
more adjacent two-foot contour lines established from a current survey. For land where
construction, development or improvement is not proposed, other survey or GIS data
may be permitted by the Township at its discretion. Areas less than three adjacent
contour intervals and less than 1,000 square feet in area as shown in plan view shall be
excluded, provided that they do not adjoin or abut larger areas of precautionary slopes or
prohibitive slopes on the subject lot or development plan.
Prohibitive slopes are those of greater than 25% slope measured over three or more
adjacent two-foot contour lines established from a current survey. For land where
construction, development or improvement is not proposed, other survey or GIS data
may be permitted by the Township at its discretion. Areas less than three adjacent
contour intervals and less than 1,000 square feet in area as shown in plan view shall be
excluded, provided that they do not adjoin or abut larger areas of precautionary slopes or
prohibitive slopes on the subject lot or development plan.
Man-made slopes are not regulated by this section.
Delineation. The applicant shall delineate the two categories of steep slopes (precautionary
and prohibitive) that are on the site in accordance with the site analysis plans required by
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 564/620
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
d.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
a.
618.4
§ 406.1.d and preliminary and final plans required by §§ 402.1 and 403.1 of the Uwchlan
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
Interpretation and appeals procedure.
Each application for construction or land disturbance within the precautionary slope
and/or prohibitive slope shall be submitted in accordance with § 618.5. Any areas of
precautionary slope and/or prohibitive slope that falls within the subject lot or lots shall be
interpolated and shown on the site plan required under § 618.5 through shading of such
area or areas.
Where an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the slope boundaries in
relation to a given parcel, an initial determination shall be made by the Zoning Officer.
Any party seeking such a determination may submit a topographic survey of the property
and any other pertinent documentation for consideration. The Zoning Officer shall make a
written report of the results of his initial determination, a copy of which shall be provided
to the Board of Supervisors.
Any party aggrieved by any such determination of the Zoning Officer, or other decision or
determination under this section, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The party
contesting the location of the boundary shall have the burden of proof in case of any such
appeal.
Resource protection standards.
Steep slope areas shall be preserved in their natural state whenever possible. Where
permitted and where construction of roads, buildings, structures, driveways or infrastructure
cannot be avoided, disturbance shall be kept to the minimum necessary, and in no case shall
it exceed the following permitted disturbance limits:
Precautionary slopes. The disturbance permitted on precautionary slopes shall be limited
to the following activities:
Any structure permitted by right, special exception or conditional use according to
the terms of the underlying base zoning district.
Any road necessary to provide primary access to a use permitted by this ordinance,
when no practical alternative exists in an area of lesser slope.
All utilities where approved by the Township and all other regulatory agencies.
Parks and outdoor passive recreational uses, consistent with the goals of watershed
protection, as established in this ordinance, the Township Subdivision and Land
Development, and the Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
Tree farming, forestry, and other agricultural uses when conducted in conformity with
accepted conservation practice, including minimum tillage methods, and as may be
approved by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service or the Chester
County Conservation District. Woodland management assistance is available
through the Pennsylvania Forest Stewardship Program administered by the
Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry.
Access roads for the passage of emergency vehicles in the event of fire or accident.
Accessory uses (except swimming pools) necessary for the operation and
maintenance of the above permitted uses.
Yard area(s) of a building.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 565/620
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
b.
c.
d.
e.
(1)
(2)
[2]
f.
Prohibitive slopes. No more than 15% of prohibitive slopes on the entire property
proposed for development shall be regraded, cleared, built upon, or otherwise altered or
disturbed. In addition, the disturbance permitted on prohibitive slopes shall be limited to
the following activities:
Parks and outdoor passive recreational uses consistent with the goals established in
this ordinance, the Township Subdivision and Land Development, and the Township
Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
Logging and woodcutting, where such activity is limited to highly selective removal of
trees. Maximum precautions shall be taken to avoid destruction of or injury to
desirable understory vegetation and remaining trees. Clear-cutting or grubbing of
trees is not permitted on prohibitive slopes. Woodland management assistance is
available through the Pennsylvania Forest Stewardship Program administered by the
Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry.
Grading for the minimum portion of a road or driveway necessary for access to the
principal use and all utility lines where approved by the Township and all other
regulatory agencies, when it can be demonstrated that no other routing is feasible.
Yard area(s) of a building where such building is not within the prohibitive slope.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 618.4.a(2) above, a use or structure existing at the
time of adoption of this section on any lot of one acre or less that contains prohibitive
slope as defined herein may be expanded into the prohibitive slopes, subject to
compliance with the resource protection standards of § 618.4.b through h, the application
procedures of § 618.5, and the approval of the Township Engineer.
An earthmoving plan of the property shall be provided that indicates existing grades with
contour lines at two-foot intervals and proposed grades within the area of any proposed
activity, disturbance, or construction, including the proposed location of all buildings and
structures. All areas of prohibitive and/or precautionary slopes shall be shaded accordingly.
Each building or structure shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide the least
alteration necessary of the existing grade, vegetation and natural soils condition.
New roads and improvements to existing roads should be designed within the existing
contours of the land to the extent possible and strive for compatibility with the character of
rural roads to prevent excessive cuts and fills.
In special protected watersheds, all stockpiles of earth shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized
immediately to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer. In all nonprotected watersheds, all
stockpiles of earth intended to be stored for more than 21 days shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer. Any disturbed area of prohibitive
slopes or any cut and fill resulting in slopes of greater than 3:1 shall be protected with an
erosion control blanket.
Any disturbance of land shall be in compliance with the erosion and sedimentation control
standards of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.[2]
An erosion and sedimentation control plan and soil stabilization plan shall be submitted
consistent with the requirements of § 510 of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
The plan shall demonstrate how soil will be protected from erosion during construction
and how soil will be stabilized upon the completion of construction.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 566/620
g.
h.
a.
b.
c.
[3]
d.
e.
618.5
(1)
a.
619.1
The proposed development, any impervious ground cover, and the resultant disturbance to
the land and existing vegetative cover shall not cause runoff and/or related environmental
problems off the site.
Removal of, or disturbance to, existing vegetation on the site shall be minimized. The
proposed impacts on existing vegetation shall be evaluated in terms of the potentially
detrimental effects on slope stability, transportation and recharge of stormwater, aesthetic and
traditional characteristics of the landscape, and existing drainage patterns. Mitigation
measures may be required by the Board as it deems appropriate.
Application procedures. Before a permit is issued for any construction or land disturbance
activity on land within or affecting steep slope for subdivision, land development, building permit,
conditional use, special exception or zoning applications, the following material, in full or in
pertinent parts, shall be submitted for review by the Zoning Officer.
An earthmoving plan as described in § 618.4.b above.
A site plan indicating existing and proposed structures, other impervious surfaces, stormwater
management facilities, and retaining walls. The site plan also shall locate and identify existing
vegetation and ground cover within areas of prohibitive slopes and precautionary slopes, as
well as landscaping material proposed for installation.
Architectural plans, elevations, and sections of any proposed structures, including materials
and type of foundation to be used to overcome structural problems associated with slope
conditions.
A report, signed and sealed by a registered architect or engineer, that describes, in detail, the
site's soil, topographic, and hydrologic conditions; the building and other methods to be used
to overcome foundation and other structural problems created by slope conditions;
preservation of natural watershed boundaries and surface and groundwater flows; prevention
of soil erosion and resulting down-gradient sedimentation in accordance with § 510 of
Township Subdivision and Land Development; and prevention of the runoff of excess water
onto neighboring properties and/or streets. All uses within precautionary or prohibitive slopes
shall control peak rate and volume of stormwater runoff in accordance with the Uwchlan
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.[3]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 214, Stormwater Management.
Plan, profile, and typical cross sections of any proposed street, emergency access, or
driveway within areas of prohibitive or precautionary slopes, with the seal of a registered
professional engineer thereon. The adequacy of access to the site for emergency vehicles
shall be subject to review by the Fire Marshal or his designee. The necessary information
shall be submitted by the applicant to the Fire Marshal or his designee for his review.
§ 619. Woodland protection standards.
[Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Protection standards.
Disturbance limitations for woodlands and hedgerows.
Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, selective harvesting of
timber shall be permitted where undertaken in compliance with a timber harvesting plan
prepared by a qualified forester or equivalent professional and submitted to the Township
prior to commencement of any timber harvesting operation. Clear-cutting of any
woodland area shall be prohibited except to the minimum extent necessary to permit the
implementation of an approved land development or building permit in conformance with
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 567/620
(a)
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(a)
(4)
this section. Except for approved timber harvesting as provided above, all woodland
disturbance shall be subject to the following total disturbance limitations, regardless of
calculation of disturbance allowances for purposes of determining replacement planting
requirements:
Outside of areas designated as riparian buffer, permitted woodland disturbance on
any lot or tract shall not exceed 25% of the total area of any woodland(s) or
hedgerow(s). This limitation shall not apply within the PC, PC-2, and PI Districts.
Disturbance limitations shall be measured based on the extent of the subject
woodland at the time of initial submission of applicable application(s) after the
adoption of this section and shall be indicated on applicable plan(s). The 25%
disturbance limitation shall run with the land, once established. Subsequent
applications shall be subject to the initial determination of the 25% disturbance
limitations, regardless of intervening disturbance which may have occurred.
Disturbance of woodands on a lot or tract shall never exceed the 25% limitation
established by the initial application. If at any time within three years prior to an
applicable application there had existed a greater extent of woodland, such greater
area shall be utilized to calculate the extent of permitted woodland disturbance and
the limitations set forth herein.
Where disturbance to existing areas of woodlands exceeds any of the standards set forth
in § 619.1.a(1) above, woodland replacement shall be two shade trees of two-and-onehalf-
inch to three-inch caliper for each tree removed that is 12 inches dbh or greater.
Determination of the extent of woodland disturbance shall be as described in § 619.1.a(1)
herein.
Guidelines for determining permitted woodland disturbance. In determining where
permitted woodland disturbance will occur, the following factors shall be considered:
The applicant shall consider the location(s) and benefit of conservation of healthy
mature woodland stands.
Each building or structure shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide the
least alteration or disturbance necessary of the existing woodland. Clear-cutting shall
be minimized, trees shall be selectively removed, and a tree protection zone shall be
established.
In each situation where the standards of this section are applied, consideration shall
be given to balancing the benefits of woodland preservation with other valuable
resources on the site, including scenic views. The Township shall not unreasonably
restrict woodland disturbance where limited disturbance may permit siting of
buildings in less visually obtrusive areas of the tract.
The remaining undisturbed woodlands and other vegetation shall interconnect with
woodlands or wooded areas of adjacent properties to preserve continuous woodland
corridors and allow for the normal movement, dispersion, and migration of wildlife.
The applicant shall consider the impacts, in terms of functions and values to wildlife,
of separating, dividing or encroaching on wildlife travel corridors or extensive habitat
areas, especially woodlands exceeding 10 acres in area.
Protection of woodlands to remain on site. Woodlands, individual trees, and other
vegetation that are to remain on the site shall be identified on the plan and protected from
land disturbance and construction activities in accordance with the tree protection
provisions of § 512.1 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.[1] In addition:
Reserved woodlands and hedgerows may be used to provide the vegetative screens
and buffers required by § 608 of this ordinance. Where necessary to meet the intent
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 568/620
[2]
(b)
[1]
a.
b.
(1)
(2)
c.
d.
e.
620.1
and minimum standards of § 608, additional planting may be required to supplement
existing vegetation.
Provisions for the long-term management of woodland areas not subject to
woodland disturbance shall be consistent with the woodland management planning
requirements of § 512.2 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 620. Wireless communications facilities.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
General requirements.
Design. In order to reduce the number of communications antenna support structures in the
Township in the future, the proposed communications antenna support structure shall be
designed to accommodate other potential communication users, including not less than one
wireless communication company, and not less than one local police, fire or ambulance
service communications provider, through the addition or incorporation of antenna anchored
at a location or in locations on the communications antenna support structure which the
applicant does not intend to anchor its communications antenna.
Fencing. A security fence shall be required around the antenna support structure and other
equipment, unless the communications antenna(e) is mounted on an existing structure, as
provided herein.
Landscaping. The following landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a newly
constructed communications antenna support structure as possible. The Board of Supervisors
may permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or
other features instead of landscaping, if, in the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, they
achieve the same degree of screening as the required landscaping.
An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the communications antenna support
structure. The screen can be either a hedge planted three feet on center maximum or a
row of evergreen trees planted 10 feet on center maximum. The evergreen screen shall
be a minimum planted height of six feet at planting and shall be capable of growing to a
minimum of 15 feet at maturity.
Existing vegetation on and around the land site shall be preserved to the greatest extent
possible.
Licensing and applicable regulations. The applicant must demonstrate that it is licensed to
provide wireless communications services by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), through the submission of a copy of a license issued by the FCC, authorizing the
provision of wireless communications services by the applicant directly or through licensure or
other authorized permission. A copy of this license is to be provided to the Township within 15
days of the submission of an application for conditional use or other municipal approval.
Proof of inspection. The owner of a communications antenna support structure shall submit to
the Township Engineer proof of the annual inspection of the communications antenna support
structure and communications antenna(e) by an independent professional engineer as
required by the ANSI/EIA/TIA-222-E Code. Based upon the results of such an inspection, the
Board of Supervisors may require removal or repair of the wireless communications facility. In
the event the annual inspection referred to above is not performed in a timely manner, the
landowner as well as the applicant or other licensed provider of wireless communications
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 569/620
f.
(1)
(2)
(3)
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
service shall be subject to civil enforcement proceedings in accordance with § 1002 of this
ordinance, and such other remedies as are provided by law.
Required parking. If the wireless communications facility is fully automated, an adequate
parking area shall be required for all maintenance workers. If the wireless communications
facility is not fully automated, the number of required parking spaces shall equal the number
of employees present at the wireless communications facility during the shift with the greatest
number of employees or staff.
Visual appearance. Communications antenna support structures shall be painted silver or
another color approved by the Board, or shall have a galvanized finish. All wireless
communications equipment buildings and other accessory facilities shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and shall maximize the use of a
like facade to blend with the existing surroundings and the neighboring buildings to the
greatest extent possible. The Board of Supervisors may require that:
Communications antenna support structures be painted green up to the height of nearby
trees; and/or
Wireless communications equipment buildings which house electrical transmitter
equipment shall be placed underground, unless determined to be detrimental to the
functioning and physical integrity of such equipment.
In making these determinations, the Board of Supervisors shall consider whether its
decision will: i) promote harmonious and orderly development of the zoning district
involved; ii) encourage compatibility with the character and type of development existing
in the area; iii) benefit neighboring properties by preventing a negative impact on the
aesthetic character of the community; iv) preserve woodlands and trees existing at the
site to the greatest possible extent; and v) encourage sound engineering and land
development design and construction principles, practices and techniques.
Site plan. A full site plan shall be required for all wireless communications facilities, showing
all existing and proposed structure(s) and improvements, including, but not limited to, the
communications antenna(e), communications antenna support structure, building, fencing,
buffering and ingress and egress. The plan shall comply with the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, with the exception of such planned documentation/information
which would be required to demonstrate compliance with those provisions of the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance (or a Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act)
pertaining to stormwater management.
Signs. No sign or other structure shall be mounted on the wireless communications facility,
except as may be required by the FCC, FAA or other governmental agency and except for an
identifying sign of no greater than three square feet, setting forth the name and means of
contacting the operator.
Lighting. Communications antenna support structures shall meet all Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) regulations. No communications antenna support structure may be
artificially lighted except when required by the FAA or other governmental authority. When
lighting is required by the FAA or other governmental authority, it shall be limited to not
greater than 50% in excess of the minimum lumens and number of lights so required and, if
not inconsistent with FAA or other governmental regulations, shall be oriented inward so as
not to project onto surrounding properties. The applicant shall promptly report any outage or
malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental authorities and to the
Township Secretary.
Maintenance. The applicant shall describe anticipated maintenance needs, including
frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and the traffic safety and notice
impacts of such maintenance. This information shall be submitted, in writing, in the form of a
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 570/620
l.
m.
(1)
(2)
(3)
n.
proposed maintenance schedule, as part of the conditional use application or other
application for zoning or building authorization.
Vehicular access. In the event a communications antenna(e) is attached to an existing
structure, vehicular access to the wireless communications facility shall not interfere with the
parking or vehicular circulation on the site for the existing principal use.
Co-location. If the applicant proposes to build a communications antenna support structure
[as opposed to mounting the communications antenna(e) on an existing structure], the
applicant shall demonstrate that it has contacted the owners of structures of suitable location
and height (such as smokestacks, water towers and buildings housing existing
communications antenna support structures) within a one-mile radius of the site proposed,
and asked for permission to install the communications antenna(e) on an existing structure as
set forth in this subsection or demonstrate that the applicant cannot adequately extend or infill
its communication system through the use of these structures. Uwchlan Township would be
authorized, at no cost and/or rental fees, to install antenna and transmission cable equipment
on the tower for the Township and emergency use.
Abandonment.
If use of a wireless communications facility is abandoned or is not properly maintained
(so as to assure continued structural integrity and safety) or if the wireless
communications facility is not in use for a period of six months or longer, the owner shall
demolish and/or remove the wireless communications facility from the land site within six
months of such abandonment and/or nonuse. All costs of demolition and/or removal shall
be borne by the owner of the wireless communications facility. In the event the demolition
and/or removal referred to above is not performed in a timely manner, the owner shall be
subject to civil enforcement proceedings in accordance with § 1002 of this ordinance, and
other legal remedies available to the Township.
In addition, prior to the issuance of any building permit or use authorization or similar
municipal authorization which may result in construction or installation of a
communications antenna, communications antenna support structure (tower), or wireless
communications facility, a declaration of covenant must be submitted by the applicant,
and approved by the Board of Supervisors, for recording in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Chester County, by which the landowner, and his/her/its successors in interest,
authorize Township officials and Township designees to effectuate the disassembly,
demolishment and/or removal of any wireless communications facility antenna or similar
structure, as contemplated by this provision. Appropriate documentary proof must be
submitted to the Township staff, confirming the recording of the declaration of covenant,
prior to commencement of any construction or installation of any communications
antenna, communications antenna support structure or wireless communications facility.
The covenant requiring proper maintenance (or removal in the case of abandonment) of
a wireless communications facility shall expire promptly upon the expiration of any lease
or other arrangement by which the applicant has permission to maintain a wireless
communications facility (or any component thereof) on a land site or other property. Upon
submission of appropriate documentary proof of the expiration of the lease or other
permission specified herein, the Township will authorize the recording of a document
memorializing the expiration of the effective terms of the declaration of covenants.
The requirements of this section may be waived or altered by the Board of Supervisors in
the event that either: i) another appropriate form of guarantee for the continued
maintenance (or removal in the case of abandonment) of a wireless communications
support structure is provided; or ii) the Board of Supervisors is satisfied that adherence to
these requirements would be unnecessary, duplicative or violative of Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, or other applicable law.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 571/620
o.
p.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
620.2
Notification. All applicants seeking to construct, erect, relocate, or alter a wireless
communications facility shall file a written certification with the Township Zoning Officer that all
property owners within a three-hundred-foot radius of the proposed communications antenna
support structure have been given written notice by the applicant, mailed at least 14 days
prior to the date of the hearing of the applicant's intent to construct, erect, relocate, or alter a
wireless communications facility. The certification shall contain the name, address and tax
parcel number of the property owners so notified. Such notice shall also contain the date and
time of the Board of Supervisor's meeting at which the applicant will appear and demonstrate
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Interference. In the event the wireless communications facility causes interference with the
radio, subscriber equipment or television reception of any Township resident for a period of
three consecutive days, the resident shall notify the Township, in writing, of such interference.
The Township shall notify the owner/operator of the wireless communications facility of such
interference and the owner/operator, at the owner/operator's sole expense, shall thereafter
ensure that any interference problems are promptly corrected. In the event the interference is
not corrected in a timely manner, the owner/operator shall be subject to the civil enforcement
proceedings in accordance with § 1002 of this ordinance, and may have the conditional use
or other municipal approval revoked.
General requirements for all tower-based wireless communications facilities. The following
regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless communications facilities (WCF):
Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed, constructed, operated,
maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the most recent
editions of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and responsible workmanlike industry
practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. Any tower-based WCF shall at all
times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance
and construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any
property in the Township.
Monopole design. All tower-based WCFs shall be monopoles.
Wind. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind according to
the standards designed by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSFEINTIA-222-E Code, as amended). Further, due to local weather
conditions, the tower-based WCF must be built to withstand one-hundred-mile-per-hour
sustained winds with a uniform loading of 50 pounds, or short duration gusts of up to 150
miles per hour. An independent professional engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall attest
to the proposed tower-based WCF structure's ability to meet this requirement and certify
proper construction of the foundation and erection of the tower.
Security. All tower-based WCFs shall have an integral security platform, or other means with
locked access, to prevent unauthorized climbing of the tower.
Maximum heights. No tower-based or nontower-based wireless communications facility shall
be taller than 120 feet measured from undisturbed ground level, unless the applicant proves
that another provider of wireless communications services has agreed to co-locate
communications antenna(e) on the applicant's communications antenna support structure or
the applicant demonstrates that a greater tower height is necessary to provide satisfactory
service for wireless communications. In such case, the communications antenna support
structure shall not exceed 150 feet unless the applicant secures approval as a condition of the
conditional use process from the Supervisors by demonstrating such proof as would be
required under § 806.4 of this ordinance. In no event shall mounted communications
antenna(e) height on any tower extend more than 25 feet above the installed height of the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 572/620
f.
(1)
(2)
(3)
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
m.
tower. While evidence relating to the criteria set forth in § 806.4 of this Zoning Ordinance shall
be considered by the Board of Supervisors, the Board of Supervisors will impose reasonable
limitations on the admissibility of evidences sought to be introduced by any objecting party
seeking to question the need for any wireless communications facility (or component thereof).
The requirement of establishing a need for any such component and/or the height of any
proposed wireless communications support structure shall be deemed to be satisfied through
the submission of a report or testimony by a properly qualified radio frequency engineer
confirming that the installation of the proposed wireless communications facility will
substantially improve the provision of wireless communications service.
Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall interfere with public safety
communications or the reception of broadband, television, radio or other communication
services enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties. If measurable interference does result
from the installation and use of the tower-based WCF, the owner of the tower-based WCF
shall take appropriate measures to abate the interference or cease operation.
Maintenance and inspections. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis and shall
be visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.
Proper maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the facility in order to
promote the safety and security of the Township's residents.
At least annually the tower-based WCF and its appurtenances shall be inspected both
visually and with the appropriate nondestructive testing techniques. The results of those
tests and written certification of structural integrity by a registered professional engineer
shall be provided annually to the Township. Any structural faults thus noted will be
immediately corrected by the owner. Failure to provide proof of certified inspection is a
violation of this chapter and may subject the owner to the violations and penalties in
Section 1003 of this chapter.
[Amended 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
Radio frequency emissions. No tower-based WCF may, by itself or in conjunction with other
WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the
FCC.
Historic buildings or districts. No tower-based WCF may be located on a building or structure
that is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places or is defined
as an historic resource pursuant to this chapter.
Identification. All tower-based WCFs shall display a notice in a readily visible location
identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact in the event of an emergency,
subject to approval by the Township.
Lighting. Tower-based WCFs shall not be artificially lighted, except as required by law and as
may be approved by the Township.
Appearance. Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive paint of an
appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings.
Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so as not to produce noise in
excess of applicable noise standards under state law and in Chapter 166 of the Code, except
in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise standards
may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
[Amended 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 573/620
n.
o.
p.
a.
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
d.
e.
620.3
Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations concerning aviation safety.
Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a tower-based
WCF is filed with the Township, the Township shall notify the applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application. All applications for towerbased
WCFs shall be acted upon within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed
application for the approval of such tower-based WCF and the Township shall advise the
applicant in writing of its decision. If additional information was requested by the Township to
complete an application, the time required by the applicant to provide the information shall not
be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review period.
Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly
related to the Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval
of a tower-based WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring and related costs.
Tower-based communications facilities outside the rights-of-way. The following regulations shall
apply to tower-based wireless communications facilities located outside the rights-of-way:
Permitted in the PIC Planned Industrial-Commercial District. Tower-based WCFs are
permitted in the PIC Planned Industrial-Commercial District by conditional use with a setback
of 800 feet from the district boundaries, through the issuance of a conditional use decision
and order issued by the Board of Supervisors. Additionally, wireless communications facilities,
including all components thereof, as specified herein, may be located on any land owned by
the Township. In the case of the location of such facilities on land owned by the Township, no
conditional use application or approval will be necessary; however, the Board of Supervisors
will determine whether permission will be granted for the location of such facilities on
Township-owned land, pursuant to the terms of a leasing or other agreement, which will
incorporate the requirement of compliance with such substantive regulations of this
ordinance.
Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based WCF must demonstrate that a significant
gap in wireless coverage exists with respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area
and that the type of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap
in wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a
factor in the Township's decision on an application for approval of tower-based WCF.
Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF is permitted as a sole use on a lot subject to the
minimum area and bulk requirements for the PIC District.
Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be permitted on a property with an
existing use or on a vacant parcel in combination with another use permitted in the PIC
District subject to the following conditions:
Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall comply with the requirements for the PIC
District and shall be the area needed to accommodate the tower-based WCF and guy
wires, the equipment building, security fence, and buffer planting.
Minimum setbacks. The tower-based WCF and accompanying equipment building shall
comply with the setback requirements for the PIC District, provided that no tower-based
WCF shall be located within 500 feet of a lot with a residential use or a residential district
boundary.
Co-location. An application for a new tower-based WCF shall not be approved unless the
Township finds that the wireless communications equipment planned for the proposed towerbased
WCF cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved structure or building. Any
application for approval of a tower-based WCF shall include a comprehensive inventory of all
existing towers and other suitable structures within a one-mile radius from the point of the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 574/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
f.
g.
(1)
(2)
h.
(1)
(2)
i.
j.
a.
b.
620.4
proposed tower, unless the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the Township that a
different distance is more reasonable, and shall demonstrate conclusively why an existing
tower or other suitable structure cannot be utilized.
Design regulations.
The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology available in an effort to
appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Board of Supervisors as part of the conditional use.
Any substantial change to an existing tower-based WCF shall require prior approval of
the Township.
Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all
respects to accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and comparable antennae
for future users.
Soil report. The applicant shall submit a soil report to the Township complying with the
standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/ETA 222-B, as amended, to
document and verify the design specifications of the foundation of the tower-based WCF, and
anchors for guy wires, if used.
Fence/screen.
A security fence having a maximum height of six feet shall completely surround any
tower-based WCF, guy wires, or any building housing WCF equipment.
The Board of Supervisors may also require the applicant to install an effective screen as
defined in this chapter to further screen the tower-based WCF.
Accessory equipment.
Ground-mounted equipment associated to, or connected with, a tower-based WCF shall
be underground unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer that the equipment cannot be located underground, in which case the groundmounted
equipment shall be screened from public view using stealth technologies, as
described above.
All utility buildings and accessory structures shall be architecturally designed to blend into
the environment in which they are situated and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
Additional antennae. The applicant shall allow other service providers to co-locate antennae
on tower-based WCFs where technically and economically feasible. The owner of a towerbased
WCF shall not install any additional antennae without obtaining the prior written
approval of the Township.
Tower-based facilities in the rights-of-way. The following regulations shall apply to tower-based
wireless communications facilities located in the rights-of-way:
Permitted in the PIC Planned Industrial-Commercial District. Tower-based WCF are permitted
in the ROW only in the PIC Planned Industrial-Commercial District by conditional use of the
Board of Supervisors.
Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based WCF must demonstrate that a significant
gap in wireless coverage exists with respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area
and that the type of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap
in wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 575/620
c.
d.
(1)
(2)
(3)
e.
(1)
(2)
(3)
f.
g.
h.
factor in the Township's decision on an application for approval of tower-based WCFs in the
ROW.
Co-location. An application for a new tower-based WCF in the ROW shall not be approved
unless the Township finds that the proposed wireless communications equipment cannot be
accommodated on an existing structure, such as a utility pole or traffic light pole. Any
application for approval of a tower-based WCF shall include a comprehensive inventory of all
existing towers and other suitable structures within a one-mile radius from the point of the
proposed tower, unless the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the Township that a
different distance is more reasonable, and shall demonstrate conclusively why an existing
tower or other suitable structure cannot be utilized.
Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time, place and manner of
construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW based
on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Township and the requirements of the Public Utility
Code.
Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and accessory equipment shall be located so as not
to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public
use of the ROW as determined by the Township. In addition:
All ground equipment associated with the tower shall be located underground so as not
to cause obstruction of the right-of-way.
Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall be removed at the sole
expense of the owner within 30 business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs shall be reviewed and approved
by the Township.
Design regulations.
The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology available in an effort to
appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
Any substantial change to an existing tower-based WCF shall require prior approval of
the Township.
Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all
respects to accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and comparable antennae
or future users.
Additional antennae. The WCF applicant shall allow other service providers to co-locate
antennae on tower-based WCFs where technically and economically feasible. The owner of a
tower-based WCF shall not install any additional antennae without obtaining the prior written
approval of the Township.
Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written notice from the Township,
or such longer period as the Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of tower-based WCF in the ROW shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any WCF when the Township, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public Utility
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 576/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
i.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
620.5
Commission regulations, shall determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Township or other public
improvement in the right-of-way.
The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in the right-of-way.
Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement.
An emergency as determined by the Township.
Compensation for ROW use. Every tower-based WCF in the ROW is subject to the
Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for use and
occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
Township's actual ROW management costs including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other
ROW management activities by the Township. The owner of each tower-based WCF shall pay
an annual fee to the Township to compensate the Township for the Township's costs incurred
in connection with the activities described above. The annual ROW management fee for
tower-based WCFs shall be determined by the Township and authorized by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors and shall be based on the Township's actual ROW management costs
as applied to such tower-based WCF.
General requirements for nontower wireless communications facilities. The following regulations
shall apply to all nontower wireless communications facilities:
Permitted in all zones subject to regulations. Nontower WCFs are permitted in all zones by
conditional use on an existing smokestack, utility pole, water tower, commercial or industrial
building or any similar tall structure (but not a communications antenna support structure),
provided:
The height of the communications antenna(e) and apparatus attaching the antenna(e)
thereto shall not exceed 10 feet in height, unless the applicant obtains conditional use
approval for a greater antenna(e) height and demonstrates that such height is required to
make it an adequately functional component of the applicant's system, but in no case
shall such height exceed 25 feet;
The applicant proves that such location is necessary to satisfy their function in the
applicant's wireless communications system or will obviate the need for the erection of a
communications antenna support structure in another location where the same is
permitted;
The applicant submits a plan showing each of the contiguous properties, identified by tax
parcel number and owner, depicting all buildings and structures located on such
properties and their principal and/or accessory uses; provided, however, that the
applicant shall not be required to trespass upon the land of another in order to obtain the
information set forth in this provision;
The applicant employs concealment or other reasonable appropriate stealth measures
(the determination of which shall be in the Board's reasonable discretion) to camouflage
or conceal antennas, such as the use of neutral materials that hide antennas, the location
of antennas within existing structures, such as steeples, silos, and advertising signs, the
replication of steeples and other structures for such purpose, the simulation of elements
of rural landscapes, such as trees, and such other measures as are available for use for
such purpose;
The proposed use otherwise complies with the requirements of this ordinance (with the
exception of the provisions herein pertaining to the maximum height and location of a
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 577/620
(6)
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
communications antenna support structure or tower); and
If the Board finds that location of antenna(e) on an existing structure obviates the need
for the construction and erection of a communications antenna support structure in any
zoning district in which the same is a permitted use, the Board may authorize by
conditional use the location of either a building not exceeding 500 square feet or metal
boxes placed on a concrete pad not exceeding, in the aggregate, 600 square feet in
area, housing the receiving and transmitting equipment necessary to the operation of the
antenna(e), for each unrelated entity or company sharing communications antennae
space on the smokestack, utility pole, water tower, commercial or industrial building or
other similar tall structure. The building and/or concrete pads may be located within a
side yard or rear yard, provided that: a) the concrete pad and metal boxes or buildings
are located within 25 feet away from the property line, or, in the case of the building, the
minimum setback distance applicable in the zoning district, whichever is greater; b) the
combined height of the concrete pad and metal boxes or building does not exceed eight
feet; and c) an evergreen landscape buffer screen, having a planted height of six feet, is
installed and maintained so as to provide a visually effective barrier, for individuals
standing at ground level in the nearby area, between the building or metal boxes and any
adjacent property.
Standard of care. Any nontower WCF shall be designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the most recent editions of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, and
National Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained in good
condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the
same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in the Township.
Wind. Any nontower WCF structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind
according to the standard designed by the American National Standards Institute as prepared
by the engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSFEINTIA-222-E Code, as amended).
Public safety communications. No nontower WCF shall interfere with public safety
communications or the reception of broadband, television, radio or other communication
services enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
Aviation safety. Nontower WCFs shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
Radio frequency emissions. No nontower WCF may, by itself or in conjunction with other
WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the
FCC.
Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a nontower
WCF is filed with the Township, the Township shall notify the applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application. Within 90 calendar days of
receipt of a complete application, the Township shall make its final decision on whether to
approve the application and shall advise the applicant in writing of such decision. If additional
information was requested by the Township to complete an application, the time required by
the applicant to provide the information shall not be counted toward the Township's ninety-day
review period.
Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly
related to the Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval
of a nontower WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 578/620
i.
j.
a.
(1)
(2)
(3)
b.
c.
d.
(1)
e.
620.6
Noncommercial usage exemption. The design regulations enumerated in this subsection shall
not apply to direct broadcast satellite dishes installed for the purpose of receiving video and
related communications services at residential dwellings.
Removal and replacement. The removal and replacement of nontower WCPs and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing the WCF is permitted, so long
as such repair or upgrade does not increase the overall size of the WCF or the numbers of
antennae.
Nontower wireless facilities in the rights-of-way. The following additional regulations shall apply
to all nontower wireless communications facilities located in the rights-of-way:
Co-location. Nontower WCFs in the ROW may only be co-located on existing poles, such as
existing utility poles or light poles.
Design requirements.
WCF installations located above the surface grade in the public ROW including, but not
limited to, those on streetlights and joint utility poles, shall consist of equipment
components that are no more than six feet in height and that are compatible in scale and
proportion to the structures upon which they are mounted. All ground-mounted
equipment shall be underground.
Antennae and all support equipment shall be treated to match the supporting structure.
WCFs and accompanying equipment shall be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually
compatible with the support structure upon which they are mounted.
The height of the communications antenna(e) and apparatus attaching the antenna(e)
thereto shall not exceed 10 feet in height, unless the applicant obtains conditional use
approval for a greater antenna(e) height and demonstrates that such height is required to
make it an adequately functional component of the applicant's system, but in no case
shall such height exceed 25 feet.
Compensation for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as described above, every nontower
WCF in the ROW is subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for ROW
use shall be directly related to the Township's actual ROW management costs including, but
not limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting,
permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities by the Township. The owner of
each nontower WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate the Township for
its costs incurred in connection with the activities described above. The annual ROW
management fee for nontower WCFs shall be determined by the Township and authorized by
resolution of Township Board of Supervisors and shall be based on the Township's actual
ROW management costs as applied to such nontower WCF.
Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time, place and manner of
construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all nontower WCFs in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations.
For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be consistent with the
police powers of the Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
Equipment location. Nontower-based WCFs and accessory equipment shall be located so as
not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to
otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the Township. In addition:
All ground equipment associated with the tower shall be located underground so as not
to cause obstruction of the right-of-way.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 579/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
f.
Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend in with the surrounding
area to the satisfaction of the Township.
Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall be removed at the sole
expense of the owner within 30 business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs shall be reviewed and approved
by the Township.
Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written notice from the Township,
or such longer period as the Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW shall, at its own
expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
WCF when the Township, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public Utility
Commission regulations, shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Township or other public
improvement in the right-of-way.
The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in the right-of-way.
Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement.
An emergency as determined by the Township.
Article 7. Nonconforming Lots, Uses, Structures and
Buildings
§ 701. Statement of intent.
Within the zoning districts established by this ordinance or subsequent amendments thereto, there
exists or will exist certain nonconformities which, if lawful before this ordinance was passed or
amended, may be continued, subject to certain limitations, although such nonconformities would be
prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or subsequent amendments
thereto.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in the ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of any building or structure on which actual construction was lawfully
begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and on which actual
building construction is completed within two years after such date
§ 702. Nonconforming lots of record.
In any district, structures and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of
record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, notwithstanding limitations
imposed by other provisions of this ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to
meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided
that yard dimensions and requirements, other than those applying to area or width, or both, shall
conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements
shall be obtained only through action of the Zoning Hearing Board.
If two or more lots, combination of lots and portion of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership
are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not
meet the requirements established for lot width and/or area, the land involved shall be considered to
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 580/620
703.1
703.2
703.3
703.4
704.1
704.2
704.3
be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or
sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and or area requirements established by
this ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot width or area below the
requirements stated in this ordinance.
§ 703. Nonconforming uses of land.
Lawful uses of land, which at the effective date of this ordinance or as a result of subsequent
amendments thereto become nonconforming and where such use involves no individual structure or
building with a replacement cost exceeding $1,000 may be continued by the present or any
subsequent owner so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
Extension. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a
greater area of land than was owned or leased by the user at the effective date of adoption of
such amendment of this ordinance.
Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of six
consecutive months, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished unless a certificate of intention
as per § 709 has been filed. Any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance.
Changes or moving of use. A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, shall not
thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may, by special
exception, be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the Zoning Hearing Board
shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate in the zoning district
than the existing nonconforming use.
Additional structures or buildings. No additional structures or buildings not conforming to the
requirement of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
§ 704. Nonconforming structures or buildings.
Structures or buildings which at the effective date of this ordinance or subsequent amendments thereto
become nonconforming by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the
lot, or other requirements concerning the building or structure, may be continued to be used so long as
such structure or building remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
Enlargement. No such nonconforming structure or building may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease
its nonconformity.
Damage or destruction. A nonconforming structure which is accidentally destroyed or partially
destroyed by fire, explosion, or by any means to an extent of 75% or more of the market value
thereof immediately prior to such damage or destruction shall not be repaired or restored to a
nonconforming status, but shall be reconstructed and used only in conformity with the provisions
of this ordinance, unless the structure reconstruction is commenced within six months from date
the structure was damaged and shall be carried on without interruption.
Moving of structure or building. No nonconforming structure or building shall be, for any reason,
moved for any distance unless it shall thereafter conform to the zoning regulations for the district
in which it is located after it is moved.
§ 705. Nonconforming uses of structures or buildings.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 581/620
705.1
705.2
705.3
705.4
a.
(1)
(2)
b.
c.
705.5
Lawful uses of structures or buildings which at the effective date of this ordinance or as a result of
subsequent amendments thereto become nonconforming, may be continued by the present or any
subsequent owner so long as such use remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
Extension. A nonconforming use, other than a nonconforming home occupation or sign, may be
extended throughout any part of an existing structure or building, or a new extension may be
constructed, provided that any structural alterations, extensions or additions shall comply with all
provisions of this ordinance with respect to height, area, width, yard and coverage requirements
for the zoning district in which the structure or building is located. However, such extension of a
nonconforming use shall not exceed 50% of the gross floor area occupied by said nonconforming
use at the time such nonconforming use became nonconforming. Nonconforming home
occupations or adult entertainment use shall not be extended within the building or upon the lot on
which the nonconforming home occupation or adult entertainment use is located.
[Amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
Change of use. A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be
changed back to any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use, other than a nonconforming
home occupation or sign, may, by special exception, be changed to another nonconforming use,
provided that the Zoning Hearing Board shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or
more appropriate in the zoning district than the existing nonconforming use. No nonconforming
home occupation shall be changed to another nonconforming use.
Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use of a structure or building or portion thereof has
been discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months, such structure or building or portion
thereof shall not thereafter be reestablished, unless a certificate of intention as per § 709 has been
filed. Any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
Destruction. Removal or destruction of the structure or building in which a nonconforming use is
located shall eliminate the use of the land upon which the structure or building was erected for a
nonconforming use. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an
extent of 75% or more of the market value of the structure or building immediately prior to such
damage or destruction. However, if construction begins within six months after destruction or
partial destruction, the same nonconforming use may be reestablished. The Zoning Hearing Board
may, by special exception, authorize another equally appropriate or more appropriate use to be
reestablished.
Nonconforming signs.
All signs erected prior to the enactment of this ordinance or subsequent amendment thereto
which are not in conformity with the provisions thereof, shall be deemed nonconforming signs.
The types of such signs listed below shall be removed or otherwise brought into conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance in accordance with the following schedule:
Temporary sidewalk, sandwich, or "A" frame signs, movable freestanding signs, banners,
streamers, pennants, and similar signs shall be abated or removed within 60 days of the
enactment of this ordinance.
Signs painted on buildings, walls, fences or benches shall be abated or removed within
one year of the date of enactment of this ordinance.
Any replacement, reconstruction, alteration, extension or addition to a nonconforming sign,
including any alteration of the structural supports or mechanical facilities thereof, shall require
the prior issuance of a permit for the same from the Uwchlan Township Zoning Officer. No
such permit shall be issued unless the sign, as it is proposed to be replaced, reconstructed,
altered, extended or enlarged shall be in complete and strict conformity with all of the
provisions of this ordinance.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 582/620
709.1
709.2
709.3
801.1
§ 706. Unsafe or unlawful structures or buildings.
If a nonconforming structure or building or portions thereof containing a nonconforming use becomes
physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs or maintenance, and is declared by any duly
authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, such structure or building
shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
§ 707. Uses under special exception provisions not
nonconforming uses.
Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a zoning district under the terms of this ordinance
and which existed at the adoption of this ordinance (other than a change through Zoning Hearing
Board action from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use) shall not be deemed a
nonconforming use in such zoning district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming
use.
§ 708. Registration of nonconforming uses and structures or
buildings.
To facilitate the administration of this ordinance, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to prepare and
maintain an accurate listing of all nonconforming uses, structures, and buildings. Such a listing shall be
a matter of public record and shall constitute sufficient notice of the nonconforming status of said
property and the limitations therein expressed and implied to any transferee acquiring any right to use
or own such property.
§ 709. Certificate of intention.
A certificate of intention shall be required in all instances where a nonconforming use of land or
nonconforming use of a structure or building is discontinued if the owner or operator of such uses
desires to maintain such a nonconforming use.
The Zoning Officer shall maintain proper forms for the registration of any certificate of intention.
It shall be incumbent upon the owner or applicant to file such a form with the Zoning Officer. The
filing of such form shall be considered an administrative duty of the Zoning Officer, who shall not
refuse to accept the completed form.
The Zoning Officer shall maintain a separate file for all certificates of intention.
Each certificate of intention shall be valid for a period of one year unless extended by the Board
of Supervisors for a maximum of two additional terms of one year each. Failure to renew the
certificate of intention shall constitute an end of the nonconforming use status.
Article 8. Administration and Enforcement
§ 801. Enforcement.
Zoning Officer. A Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors to administer
and enforce this Zoning Ordinance. A Zoning Officer may not hold any elective office in the
Township.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 583/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
[1]
801.2
[2]
a.
b.
801.3
Duties and powers of Zoning Officer. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance, and amendments, and he shall have such duties and powers as are
conferred on him by this ordinance and as are reasonably implied for that purpose. The Zoning
Officer's duties shall include, but are not limited to, the following:[1]
Receive applications for and issue zoning (building) permits and sign permits as outlined by
the terms of this ordinance for all construction except that designated as "ordinary repairs"
and outlined in the Township's building permit guideline.
Keep an official record of all business and activities, including complaints of a violation of any
of the provisions of this ordinance and of the action taken consequent on each such
complaint. Make inspections as needed to fulfill his duties. (He shall have the right to enter
any building or structure or enter upon any land at any reasonable hour in the course of his
duties.) All such records shall be open to public inspection. File copies of all applications
received, permits issued, reports and inspections made in connection with any structure,
building, sign and/or land shall be retained as long as they remain in existence.
Issue permits for special exception uses or for variances only after such uses and/or buildings
have been approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the regulations of this
ordinance.
Be responsible for keeping this ordinance and the Zoning Map up to date so as to include all
amendments thereto.
Issue certificates of use and occupancy in accordance with the terms of this ordinance.
The Zoning Officer shall identify and register nonconforming uses and structures created as a
result of the adoption of this ordinance or created as a result of amendments thereto.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Enforcement notices.
If it appears to the Board of Supervisors that a violation of this ordinance has occurred, the
Zoning Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings, consistent with Section 616.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10616.1, by sending an enforcement notice to the
owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other
person requested in writing to be serviced with enforcement notices by the owner of record.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The enforcement notice shall state the name of the owner of record and any other person
against whom the Township intends to take action; the location of the property in violation; the
specified nature of the violation with a description of and citation to the applicable provisions
of this ordinance; the date before which described steps for compliance must be commenced
and completed; that the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Uwchlan
Township Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of the date of the notice; and that failure to
comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by agreement of the
Township or by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible
sanctions as described in the notice.
§ 802. Zoning permit.
No building, structure, or sign shall be erected, constructed, moved, added to, or structurally altered,
nor shall land be put to any use without a permit therefor, issued by the Zoning Officer. No such permit
shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, or upon written order from
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 584/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[1]
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
a.
b.
c.
d.
802.1
802.2
802.3
the Zoning Hearing Board in the form of a special exception, variance, or as otherwise provided for by
this ordinance, any applicable laws or any court of competent jurisdiction.
Form of application.
All applications shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied by two sets of plans
showing at least the following information when applicable:
Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon and a statement that the
applicant is the owner of the lot or a copy of a written agreement between the owner and
the applicant to permit use of the lot by the applicant.
The exact size and location on the lot of buildings, structures, or signs existing and/or
proposed extensions thereto.
The number of dwelling units if applicable.
Parking spaces provided and/or loading facilities.
Statement indicating the existing or proposed use.
Height of structure, building, or sign.
Any and all other information necessary for such Zoning Officer to determine
conformance with and provide for enforcement of this ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
A detailed scaled drawing of the signs showing intended location and stating how it shall
be affixed.
A statement indicating the type of construction and the manner of installation for signs,
together with the materials to be used.
A written statement that the applicant is the owner of the premises on which the sign will
be erected or a written agreement that the applicant has obtained the consent of the
owner or lessee of such premises to erect such sign.
A written agreement that the sign shall be erected according to the accompanying plans
and specifications.
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Zoning Officer after he shall
have marked such copies either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by this
signature on such copy.
One copy of all such plans shall be retained by the Zoning Officer for his permanent records.
Such approval and zoning permit shall be issued or refused within 30 days from date of
application. In case of refusal, the applicant shall be informed of his rights of appeal. The
application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the Zoning Officer may prescribe.
Expiration of zoning permit. Zoning permit shall expire within six months from date of issuance, if
work described in any permit has not begun. If work described in any zoning permit has begun
within the six-month period, said permit shall expire after one year from date of issuance thereof.
However, an extension of time may be granted by the Board of Supervisors.
Revocation of permits. The Zoning Officer may revoke a permit or approval issued under the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 585/620
802.4
a.
b.
802.5
a.
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
d.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
e.
f.
802.6
the application or on the plans on which the permit or approval was based or for any other cause
set forth in this ordinance.
Posting of permit. A true copy of the permit shall be kept on the site of operations open to public
inspection during the entire time of prosecution of the work or use and until the completion of the
same as defined on the application.
Freestanding signs.
If the sign is to be supported by a separate structure to be erected for that purpose, then the
applicant shall supply a map of the lot indicating the location of the proposed sign and the
relative distances to a point perpendicular to the lot lines. A scaled diagram or photograph of
a similar sign shall also be attached.
A certificate of use and occupancy shall be required for freestanding signs only.
Temporary permit.
A temporary permit shall be necessary for all temporary signs, as regulated by § 606.5.h.
A temporary permit shall be necessary for all temporary uses not permitted by the applicable
zoning district.
A temporary permit shall be necessary for all temporary violations of the area and bulk
regulations or performance standards of the applicable zoning district.
For temporary uses in violation to area and/or bulk regulations, applications shall be made in
writing and shall contain the following:
A statement indicating the present owner of the lot in question and the names of the
persons or organizations requesting the permit. Said statement shall also contain the
signature of such persons.
A statement describing the proposed use and the length of time which such use will be
continued.
The following standards must be met:
No temporary violation of this ordinance shall continue for a period of more than one
year, unless extended by the Board of Supervisors.
All temporary violations of this ordinance shall be so designed to minimize the
detrimental effect on surrounding properties.
No temporary violations of this ordinance shall utilize in any manner an adjacent lot.
All temporary violations of this ordinance shall be for the general welfare of the
community and not be detrimental to the public health of the community.
The Zoning Officer may revoke this permit for the repeated violation of the preceding
standards. Such revocation shall entitle the applicant to a hearing before the Zoning Hearing
Board which Board shall then affirm or reverse the actions of the Zoning Officer.
§ 803. Certificate of use and occupancy.
A certificate of use and occupancy shall be required upon the completion of the work contemplated. It
shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, building, and/or land or portions thereof in any
manner until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 586/620
803.1
a.
b.
c.
d.
803.2
[1]
804.1
804.2
804.3
a.
805.1
Form of application. The application for certificate of use and occupancy shall be submitted in
such form as the Zoning Officer may prescribe.
Issuance of certificate of use and occupancy.
The Zoning Officer shall inspect any structure, building, sign, and/or land or portions thereof
within 10 days upon notification that the proposed work that was listed under the permit has
been completed, and if satisfied that the work is in conformity and compliance with the work
listed in the issued permit and all other pertinent laws, he shall issue a certificate of use and
occupancy.
The certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted or refused in writing within a
reasonable period of time from the date of inspection.
A temporary certificate of use and occupancy may be issued by the Zoning Officer for such
temporary uses such as tents, use of land for religious or other public or semipublic purposes,
and similar temporary use or occupancy. Such temporary certificates shall be for the period of
time to be determined by the Zoning Officer, however, in no case shall the period of time
exceed six months.
In zoning districts in which performance standards are imposed, no certificate of occupancy
shall become permanent until 30 days after the facility is fully operating and only after, upon
reinspection by the Zoning Officer, it is determined that the facility is in compliance with all
performance standards. After said reinspection the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant
that the facility is in full compliance with all performance standards and that the certificate of
use and occupancy is permanent or that the facility does not comply and that the certificate of
use and occupancy is still temporary.
§ 804. Schedule of fees, charges and expenses.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees, charges, and
expenses and collection procedures for zoning permits, certificates of occupancy, special
exception, variances, and appeals and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. Until such
resolution is passed, the current fee schedule shall apply.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The schedule of fees shall be available for inspection in the office of the Zoning Officer and may
be altered or amended by the Board of Supervisors, by resolution.
Until all application fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken
on any application or appeal.
§ 805. Amendments.
The provisions of this ordinance and boundaries of zoning districts as set forth on the Official Zoning
Map may from time to time be amended or changed by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,[1] as amended.
Procedure. The following procedures shall be observed prior to making any amendment or
change of this ordinance or Official Zoning Map:
Every such proposed change not initiated by the Planning Commission shall be referred to
the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the Board of Supervisors holding a public
hearing to provide the Planning Commission opportunity to submit recommendations.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 587/620
b.
c.
d.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
e.
The recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be submitted in writing to the Board
of Supervisors.
At least 30 days prior to the public hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall submit the
proposed amendment to the Chester County Planning Commission for recommendation.
Within 30 days following enactment, a copy of the amendatory ordinance shall be forwarded
to the Chester County Planning Commission.
Proposed action shall not be taken until the Township Planning Commission and County
Planning Commission recommendation is made. Provided, however, that in the event the
Township Planning Commission and/or the County Planning Commission fail to provide the
Township with written recommendations within 30 days of submission of the proposed
amendment to said bodies, then the Board of Supervisors shall proceed without such
recommendation(s).
Landowner curative amendments.
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of an
ordinance or map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the
Board of Supervisors with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment
be heard and decided as provided in Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10916.1, as amended. The Board of Supervisors shall
commence a hearing thereon within 60 days of the request provided in Section 916.1 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The curative amendment and challenge
shall be referred to the planning agency or agencies as provided in § 805.1.a. and
805.1.c. hereof and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as provided in Section
610 and 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10610 and
10916.1. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with § 902 hereof and all
references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board shall, for the purposes of this section, be
references to the Board of Supervisors.
In consideration of the landowner's curative amendment, the Board of Supervisors shall
consider the plans and explanatory materials submitted by the landowner as well as the
following factors: the impact of the proposed amendment upon roads, sewer facilities,
water supply, schools and other public service facilities; if the proposal is for residential
use, the impact of the proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the
proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available to and affordable by
classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
ordinance or map; the suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's
soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the tolerance of
the resources to development and any adverse environmental impacts; and the impact of
the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses which are essential to
public health and welfare.
The landowner's request for a curative amendment is denied when:
The Board of Supervisors notifies the landowner that it will not adopt the
amendment; or
The Board of Supervisors adopts another amendment which is unacceptable to the
landowner; or
The Board of Supervisors fails to act on the landowner's request, in which event the
denial is deemed to have occurred on the 30th day after close of the last hearing on
the request on which day the request is deemed to be automatically denied by the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 588/620
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
f.
a.
805.2
governing body absent extension of said time period by mutual agreement between
the landowner and the Township.
Procedure upon municipal curative amendments.
The Township, by formal action, may declare its Zoning Ordinance or portions thereof
substantively invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome such
invalidity. Within 30 days following such declaration and proposal the Board of
Supervisors shall:
By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared invalidity of the Zoning
Ordinance which may include:
References to specific uses which are either not permitted or not permitted in
sufficient quantity;
Reference to a class of use or uses which require revision; or
Reference to the entire ordinance which requires revisions.
Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to
correct the declared invalidity.
Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the Township shall enact
a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm the validity of, the Zoning Ordinance
pursuant to the provisions required by Section 609 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10609, to cure the declared invalidity of the Zoning Ordinance.
Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection 805.1.f(1), the Board of
Supervisors shall not be required to entertain or consider any landowner's curative
amendment filed under § 805.1.e nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give
a report requested under Section 909.1 or 916.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. § 10909.1 or 10916.1, subsequent to the declaration and proposal based upon the
grounds identical to or substantially similar to those specified in the resolution required by
Subsection 805.1.f.(1). Upon completion of the procedures as set forth in Subsections
805.1.f(1) and (2), no rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of § 805.1.e of this
ordinance and 916.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code shall, from the date of the
declaration and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of the unamended Zoning Ordinance for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
The Township having utilized the procedures as set forth in Subsections (1) and (2) may
not again utilize said procedures for a thirty-six-month period following the date of the
enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the validity of its Zoning
Ordinance, pursuant to Subsection (2); provided, however, if after the date of declaration
and proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the Township
by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision,
the Township may utilize the provision of this section to prepare a curative amendment to
its ordinance to fulfill said duty or obligation.
Notice of hearing and amendment.
Before voting on the enactment of an amendment to this ordinance, the Board of Supervisors
shall, by resolution adopted at a stated or special meeting, fix the time and place of a public
hearing on the proposed amendment, which hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice. In
addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of the said public
hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Zoning Officer at points along the perimeter of
the tract sufficient to notify potentially interested citizens. Such posting shall be accomplished
at least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 589/620
b.
c.
d.
[1]
806.1
a.
[1]
b.
[2]
c.
806.2
806.3
806.4
Public notice of the proposed amendment shall include reference to the place within the
Township where copies of the proposed amendatory ordinance may be examined; shall
include either the full text of the amendatory ordinance or the title and a brief summary
prepared by the Township Solicitor setting forth all of the provisions in reasonable detail; and
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township once each week for
two successive weeks not more than 30 days nor less than seven days prior to the date of the
hearing at which enactment will be considered.
If the full text of the amendatory ordinance is not included in the advertised notice, a copy of
the full text shall be supplied by the Township Secretary or Township Solicitor to a newspaper
of general circulation in the Township and an attested copy of the proposed amendatory
ordinance shall be filed by the Township Secretary or Township Solicitor with the Chester
County Law Library.
In the event substantial amendments are made to the proposed amendatory ordinance, the
ordinance shall be readvertised and shall be the subject of public notice.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 806. Conditional use.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the owner or his agent, the developer, or the
applicant for a conditional use approval from obtaining approval in accordance with the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, PRD Ordinance, or other applicable ordinances.
Application. Unless waived by the Board of Supervisors for good cause shown, an application for
a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a proposed plan showing the size and location
of the proposed use, the location of all proposed buildings, and all proposed facilities, including
access drives and parking areas. All streets within 200 feet of the property shall be shown.
Procedures for review.
Application for a conditional use shall be filed with the Secretary of the Township on such
forms as may be prescribed for said purpose. The application shall be accompanied with a
fee as prescribed by the Board of Supervisors. The Secretary shall submit the application for
recommendation to the Planning Commission. Upon receipt of application and proposed site
plan when required, the Planning Commission shall review the conditional use request with
the applicant at its next regularly scheduled meeting or at a special meeting at the discretion
of the Planning Commission.
If the Planning Commission does not render a decision within 30 days from the date that the
application is forwarded, then it shall be deemed that the Planning Commission recommends
disapproval of the application.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
After review by the Planning Commission the Board of Supervisors shall hold a public hearing
giving notice as required by law. The public hearing shall be held within 60 days from date the
application was received. If after any public hearings the application is substantially amended
or changed, the Board of Supervisors shall hold another public hearing pursuant to public
notice. The vote on the conditional use shall be within 45 days after the last public hearing.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Effect of conditional use approval. Any use for which a conditional use permit is granted shall be
deemed to be a conforming use in the zoning district in which such use is located.
Criteria to be used. The following criteria shall be used as a guide in evaluating a proposed
conditional use:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 590/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(1)
(2)
(3)
f.
It shall be the applicant's burden to persuade the Board by substantial evidence that the
proposed use, when located on the property at issue, having all of the characteristics as
proposed, and considering the present (or proposed) development and use of neighboring
lands and the particular characteristics of the supporting public infrastructure, will not cause
negative impacts of a type or to a degree not usually associated with uses of the proposed
category located and operated in the usual manner.
The size, scope, extent, and character of the conditional use desired shall be consistent with
the spirit, purpose, and intent of this ordinance.
Consideration of the character and type of development in the area surrounding the location
for which the request is made, and a determination that the proposed change will constitute
an appropriate use in the area and will not injure or detract from the use of surrounding
properties or from the character of the neighborhood.
The proposed use at the location in question would be in the public interest and best serve
the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
Consideration of the effects of the proposed change with respect to the most appropriate use
of land; conserving building and property values; safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
adequacy of light and air; adequacy of public and community services.
Submission of a fiscal impact study as follows:
With respect to any proposed use consisting of initially or in the aggregate five or more
residential dwelling units or lots, or 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or more than 10
parking spaces to be devoted to nonresidential uses, the developer shall submit as an
integral component of the conditional use application and the Board shall consider a
fiscal impact statement reporting the results of a study of the fiscal impact of the
proposed development on the Township of Uwchlan performed by a qualified
professional and projecting the primary costs that will be incurred by the Township and
the immediate revenues that will be generated to the Township as consequence of the
proposed development permitted by conditional use. The fiscal impact study and analysis
shall employ the Per Capita Multiplier Method in the case of proposed residential
development and the Case Study Method in the case of proposed nonresidential
development, as described in the most recent edition of the Practitioner's Guide to Fiscal
Impact Analysis published by the Center for Urban Policy Research. Demographic
information by housing type; average expenditures, including budgetary information and
operating costs, and estimates of excess or deficient service capacity and expected local
service responses, for use in the fiscal impact analysis shall be obtained from the
Township staff. Conditional use approval shall not be granted unless any demonstrated
adverse fiscal impact is proposed to be borne by the developer in the form of some
combination of contributions, payments in lieu of taxes, and/or the provision of off-site
public improvements and the developer offers in writing to accept a suitable condition to
approval requiring it to so bear the demonstrated adverse fiscal impact.
In lieu of the submission of a fiscal impact study as described in this subsection, a
developer may submit a written undertaking, in form satisfactory to the Township
Solicitor, to make an unrestricted contribution to the Township at the time of application
for building permits necessary to commence construction of the proposed development
and in an amount promulgated from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
The contributions and payments described in Subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall
be in addition to and shall not be offset by any voluntary contributions or donations of the
developer; on-site public or quasi-public improvements, including without limitation open
space lands and active or passive recreation facilities, utilities and utility easements, and
public or private roads; or improvements, whether on or off-site, necessary to implement
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 591/620
(4)
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
m.
n.
806.5
the development proposal, including, without limitation, access highway improvements,
including acceleration and deceleration lanes and traffic signals, access road widening,
utilities and utility easements.
All unrestricted monies received by the Township pursuant to Subsections (1) and (2)
above shall be maintained in a separate, interest bearing account (or alternative
investment instrument), shall be expended only for the purpose of ameliorating the
identified adverse fiscal impact of the developments concerning which the funds have
been contributed, and shall be the subject of an annual report to the Board by the
Township Secretary or Manager demonstrating compliance with this subsection.
Sufficient land area available to be able to effectively screen the proposed conditional use
from adjoining uses.
Sufficient safeguards such as parking, traffic control, screening, and setbacks can be
implemented to remove any potential adverse influences the use may have on adjoining uses.
The written notification of abutting property owners.
Uses shall meet the provisions and requirements of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
Each applicant for conditional use approval shall establish the effect of the proposed
development on the reserve capacity or level of service of the public roads and road
intersections providing access to and in the area of the subject property. Conditional use
approval shall not be granted if the proposed development is predicted to have the effect of
materially increasing traffic congestion on the said roads or at the said road intersections.
Should the applicant fail to complete such construction or alteration within a twelve-month
period, the Board of Supervisors may, upon 10 days notice in writing, rescind or revoke the
granted conditional use or the issuance of the permit, or permits, or the other action
authorized to the applicant. If the Board of Supervisors finds that a good cause appears for
the failure to complete within such twelve-month period, an extension may be granted.
Each applicant for conditional use approval shall establish the effect of the proposed
development on the availability of reliable, safe and adequate public water supply and sewer
service to support the intended uses within the capacity of available water and sewer
resources. Conditional use approval shall not be granted if the proposed development is
predicted to have the effect of adversely affecting available public water and sewer service or
the applicant fails to demonstrate that public water and sewer service is available.
Each applicant for conditional use approval shall establish that the property is free of or has
been remediated of environmental contamination and/or hazardous materials or waste by
complying with §§ 402.f.8(e) and 511 of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. Conditional use approval shall not be granted without compliance with this
§ 806.4.n.
[Added 1-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-01]
Conditions and safeguards. In granting a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this ordinance, as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247 of July 31, 1968, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended or revised, and this
ordinance. The amendment of these conditions is expressly prohibited unless the applicant
therefor establishes to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors by substantial evidence of
record that the proposed amendment is justified by a material change in circumstances incident to
the land itself.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 592/620
[1]
901.1
901.2
901.3
901.4
a.
b.
901.5
901.6
901.7
901.8
Article 9. Zoning Hearing Board
§ 901. Creation; appointment; organization.
Creation of Board. The Board of Supervisors hereby creates a Zoning Hearing Board, herein
referred to as the "Board," consisting of three residents of the Township appointed by the Board of
Supervisors pursuant to Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,[1] as
amended, who shall perform all the duties and have all the powers prescribed by said Code and
as herein provided.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Appointment. One member of the Board shall be designated to serve until the first day of
January following the adoption of this ordinance, one until the first day of the third January
thereafter. Their successors shall be appointed on the expiration of their respective terms to serve
for a term of three years. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the Township.
Removal. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in
office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors, taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be
held, if the Board member requests one in writing.
Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Board of Supervisors for the
unexpired portion of the vacated term.
Compensation and expenditures for services.
The members of the Board may receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors, by resolution, but in no case may it exceed the rate of compensation authorized
to be paid to the members of the Board of Supervisors.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors, the Board may employ or
contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants, and other technical and clerical
services.
Organization. The Board may promulgate such rules and forms for its procedure, not
inconsistent with this and other ordinances of the Township and laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as it may deem necessary to the proper performance of its duties and to the proper
exercise of its powers. Such rules shall be continued in force and effect, until amended or
repealed by the Board or by law. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who
shall serve annual terms as such, and may succeed themselves.
Meetings. Meetings and hearings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at
such other times as the Board, by majority vote, may determine.
Minutes and records. The Board shall keep full stenographic records of its proceedings showing
the vote of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact.
The Board shall also keep full public records of its business and other official action, copies of
which shall be immediately filed with the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors. The Board shall
submit an annual report of its activities each year to the Board of Supervisors.
§ 902. Hearings.
For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority
of all members of the Board, but where two members are disqualified to act in a particular matter, the
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 593/620
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
902.1
remaining member may act for the Board. The Board may appoint a Hearing Officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive decisions or findings by
the Board and accept the decision or findings of the Hearing Officer as final as provided in § 908 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10908, as amended.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following
requirements and the requirements of § 908 of the Municipalities Planning Code:[1]
Notice shall be given to the public, the applicant, the Zoning Officer, and such other persons
as the Board of Supervisors shall designate by ordinance and to any person who has made
timely request for the same. Notice to the public shall be in accordance with the provisions of
§ 805.3 of this ordinance. Notice to others herein provided for shall be by mail to the
designated persons or agency not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. In
addition to the notice provided herein, notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing. The hearing shall be held
within 60 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's request, unless the applicant has
agreed in writing to an extension of time.
The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint any member as a
Hearing Officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made
by the Board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Municipality, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Board
and accept the decision or findings of the Hearing Officer as final.
The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person affected by the application who
has made timely appearance of record before the Board and any other person, including civic
or community organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have power to
require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on
forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the Hearing Officer presiding shall have
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and
the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents
requested by the parties.
The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the
opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine all adverse
witnesses on all relevant issues.
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious
evidence may be excluded.
The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall keep stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant
and the Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is
ordered by the Board or the Hearing Officer or shall be paid by the person appealing the
decision of the Board, if such appeal is made, and, in either event, the cost of additional
copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
The Board or the Hearing Officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party
or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports,
staff memoranda, or other materials unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest
the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given
an opportunity to be present. The Board and/or the Hearing Officer may, however,
communicate with or receive advice from its Solicitor.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 594/620
[2]
i.
j.
[1]
a.
b.
c.
903.1
903.2
The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision, or,
when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after
the last hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer. Each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact and conclusions of law based thereon together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,[2] as
amended, or of this ordinance, shall contain a reference to the provisions relied on and the
reason why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found. If the hearing is
conducted by a Hearing Officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings
are final, the Board shall make its report and recommendations available to the parties within
45 days and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board
prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered no later
than 30 days after the report of the Hearing Officer. Where the Board fails to render the
decision within the period required by this subsection, or fails to hold the required hearing
within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in
writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor
of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as
hereinabove provided, the Board shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days from
the last day it could have met to render a decision. If the Board shall fail to provide such
notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any
party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
A copy of the final decision, or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be
delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following its date.
To all other persons who have filed their name and address with the Board not later than the
last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the
decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be
examined.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 903. Functions of the Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the following powers:
Appeals from the Zoning Officer: interpretation and review.
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer has
failed to follow prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied any provision of
this ordinance or the Official Zoning Map or any valid rule or regulation governing the action of
the Zoning Officer. Such appeals must be taken within 30 days of the Zoning Officer's action
or decision.
To interpret the provisions of this ordinance, with the advice of the Solicitor of the Board of
Supervisors and the Planning Commission where there is doubt as to its meaning or
application. To determine the exact location of a district boundary line on the Zoning Map that
forms a part of this ordinance when the Zoning Officer is unable to make such determinations.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny the appellant the right to proceed directly
to court, where appropriate, pursuant to Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure, Sections
1091 to 1098, relating to mandamus.
Challenges to the validity of Zoning Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map. The Board shall hear
challenges to the validity of this ordinance or the Official Zoning Map except as indicated in
Section 1003 and Subsection (1)(b) of Section 1004 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 595/620
[1]
903.3
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
903.4
Code, as amended.[1] In all such challenges, the Board shall take evidence and make a record
thereon as provided in § 902. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall decide all
contested questions and shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which shall become part
of the record on appeal to the court.
Editor's Note: Sections 1003 and 1004 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code were
repealed 12-21-1988 by P.L. 1329, No. 170, § 100. See now 53 P.S. §§ 11002-A and 10916.1.
Unified appeals. When the Board has jurisdiction over zoning matters pursuant to §§ 903.1,
903.2 and 903.4, the Board shall also hear all appeals which an applicant may elect to bring
before it with respect to any Township ordinance or requirement pertaining to the same
development plan or development. In any such case, the Board shall have no power to pass upon
the non-zoning issues, but shall take evidence and make a record thereon as provided in § 902. At
the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which
shall become part of the record on appeal to the court.
Variances.
To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance(s) from the terms of this ordinance
as will not be contrary to public interest, where a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship. In granting any variance the Board may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,[2] as
amended. The Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of application and may require
preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The Board may grant variance relief in proper
cases, including, without limitation, any case in which it is established to the satisfaction of the
Board that an effect of the zoning regulation at issue or challenged is to deprive the
landowner of a property or other right guaranteed or protected by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or United States Constitutions; and further provided the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case:
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity,
narrowness, or shallowness of lot size, or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship
is due to such conditions, and not circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located.
That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the
property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant, subsequent to
the adoption of this ordinance, or prior ordinances, whether in violation of the provisions
hereof or not, and that such circumstances or conditions are such that strict application of
the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of
such land, structure, or building.
That for reasons fully set forth in the findings of the Board, the granting of the variance is
necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building and that the variance as granted
by the Board is the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood
or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 596/620
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
[2]
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
a.
903.5
That any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the
adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent
with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which the subject
property is situated, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property.
That no nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same
district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of land, structure, or building in other
districts shall be considered grounds for the granting of a variance.
That in no case shall a variance be granted solely for reasons of additional financial gain
on the part of the applicant.
That the jurisdiction of the Board of Supervisors shall not be infringed upon by action of
the Board in any matter which should appropriately be the subject for an amendment to
the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map. No variance shall be granted under this section to
allow a structure or use in a zoning district restricted against such structure or use.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
If a variance is granted, the necessary permit(s) shall be secured and the authorized action
begun within three months after the date when the variance is finally granted, and the building
or alteration, as the case may be, shall be completed within 12 months of said date. For good
cause the Board may, upon application in writing stating the reasons therefore, extend to six
months the three-month application period.
Should the applicant fail to obtain the necessary permits within said six months' period or
having obtained the permit should he fail to commence work thereunder within such six
months' period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the applicant or appellant has waived,
withdrawn, or abandoned his appeal or his application, and all provisions, variances, and
permits granted to him shall be deemed automatically rescinded by the Board.
Special exceptions.
To hear and decide only such special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance upon which
the Board, by the provisions of this ordinance, is specifically authorized. The granting of a
special exception when specifically authorized by the terms of the ordinance shall be subject
to the following conditions:
Such use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a special exception use in the
zoning district.
Such special exception shall only be granted subject to any applicable condition and
safeguards as required by this ordinance.
Such special exception may be granted subject to additional reasonable conditions and
safeguards as may be deemed by the Board to be advisable and appropriate.
Such use shall not adversely affect the character of the zoning district, nor the
conservation of property values, nor the health and safety of residents or workers on
adjacent properties and in the general neighborhood.
Such use shall be of such size and so located and laid out in relation to its access streets
that vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and from such use will not create undue
congestion or hazards prejudicial to the general neighborhood.
Such use shall not conflict with the direction of building development in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan or portion thereof which has been adopted by the Board of
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 597/620
(7)
b.
c.
d.
[1]
Supervisors.
Each applicant for special exception shall establish the effect of the proposed
development on the reserve capacity or level of service of the public roads and road
intersections providing access to and in the area of the subject property. No special
exceptions shall be granted if the proposed development is shown to have the predicted
effect of materially increasing traffic congestion on the said roads or at the said road
intersections.
All applications for special exceptions shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its
review and recommendations. If the Planning Commission does not make any
recommendations within 30 days, it shall be deemed that the Planning Commission has
recommended approval of the application for special exception.
If a special exception is granted, the necessary permit(s) shall be secured within two years
after the date when the special exception is granted.
Should the applicant fail to obtain the necessary permits within said two-year period, or
having obtained the permit should he fail to commence work thereunder within such two-year
period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or applicant has waived,
withdrawn, or abandoned his appeal or his application, and all provisions, variances and
permits granted to him be deemed automatically rescinded by the Board.
§ 904. Procedures for application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
The Board shall act in strict accordance with the procedure specified by Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, and by this ordinance. All appeals and applications made
to the Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal or application shall
refer to the specific provision of this ordinance involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation
that is claimed, the grounds for any challenges to the validity of this ordinance, the use for which a
special exception is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it
is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case may be. In the event the procedures set
forth in this ordinance shall be in conflict with or contrary to the procedures set forth in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,[1] as amended, then and in such event the procedures set
forth in the latter shall prevail.
Applications and appeals together with the required filing fee, as established by the Board of
Supervisors, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 905. Stay of proceedings.
Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in § 903 and during its pendency before the Zoning Hearing
Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning
Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning
Hearing Board facts indicate that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case
the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may
be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on
petition after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an application for
development, preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or
limit the approval are filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by persons other than the applicant, the
applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post
bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board. After the petition
is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the
hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the burden of the applicant
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 598/620
[1]
[1]
for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After consideration of all evidence presented, if the court
determines that the appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond from an order of the court
dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond and the appellate court sustains the order of the
court below to post a bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the petitioner and
after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs,
expenses, and attorney fees incurred by the petitioner.
Article 10. Miscellaneous
§ 1001. Appeals.
Proceedings for securing review of any ordinance, decision, determination or order of the Board of
Supervisors, its agencies or officer, adopted or issued pursuant to this ordinance, shall be in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,[1] as amended.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 1002. Remedies.
In case any building, structure, landscaping, or land is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this ordinance, the Board of
Supervisors, the Zoning Officer, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building,
structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or
use constituting a violation. Notice of any such action instituted by a landowner or tenant shall be
served upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action has begun by serving a copy of
the complaint on the Board of Supervisors.
§ 1003. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys fees
collected for the violation of this ordinance shall be paid over to the Township.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Appendix
Chapter A270. Cable Television Franchise Agreements
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Uwchlan as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Broadband communications — See Ch. 94.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 218.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
Article I. Verizon of Pennsylvania
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 599/620
[Adopted 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-03]
§ A270-1. Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the definitions and word usages set forth in the Communications
Act are incorporated herein and shall apply in this agreement. In addition, the following definitions shall
apply:
ACCESS CHANNEL
A video channel which the franchisee shall make available to the LFA without charge for
noncommercial public, educational, or governmental use for the transmission of video
programming as directed by the LFA.
ADDITIONAL SERVICE AREA
Any such portion of the service area added pursuant to § A270-3A(2) of this agreement.
AFFILIATE
Any person who, directly or indirectly, owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under
common ownership or control with, the franchisee.
BASIC SERVICE
Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals as well as
the PEG channels required by this franchise.
CABLE SERVICE or CABLE SERVICES
Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 602 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 522(6), which currently states: "The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming
or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of such video programming or other programming service."
CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM
Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 602 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 522(7), which currently states: "A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable
service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves subscribers
without using any public rights-of-way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole
or in part, to the provisions of Title II of this Act, except that such facility shall be considered a
cable system [other than for purposes of Section 621(c)] to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely
to provide interactive on-demand services; (D) an open video system that complies with Section
653 of this title; or (E) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility
systems." The cable system shall be limited to the optical spectrum wavelength(s), bandwidth, or
future technological capacity that is used for the transmission of cable services directly to
subscribers within the franchise/service area and shall not include the tangible network facilities of
a common carrier subject in whole or in part to Title II of the Communications Act or of an
information services provider.
CENTRAL CHESTER COUNTY GROUP or CCCG
The municipalities of Caln Township, South Coatesville Borough, Upper Uwchlan Township,
Uwchlan Township, and West Whiteland Township, which jointly negotiated this agreement by
retaining special counsel to negotiate with the franchisee on their behalf, as well as any additional
municipalities that may join this group after the effective date of this agreement.
CHANNEL
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 600/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 602 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 522(4), which currently states: "A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is
used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel (as television
channel is defined by the FCC by regulation)."
COMMUNICATIONS ACT
The Communications Act of 1934, as amended.
CONTROL
The ability to exercise de facto or de jure control over day-to-day policies and operations or the
management of the franchisee's affairs.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL
An access channel available for the use of the local public schools in the franchise area.
EXPANDED BASIC SERVICE
The franchisee's service tier on the cable system which includes basic service and additional
channels, including without limitation twenty-four-hour per-day news channels such as CNN,
MSNBC, FOX News and similar channels.
FCC
The United States Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity
thereto.
FORCE MAJEURE
An event or events reasonably beyond the ability of the franchisee to anticipate and control. This
includes, but is not limited to, severe or unusual weather conditions, strikes, labor disturbances,
lockouts, war or act of war (whether an actual declaration of war is made or not), insurrection,
riots, act of public enemy, actions or inactions of any government instrumentality or public utility
including condemnation, accidents for which the franchisee is not primarily responsible, fire, flood,
or other acts of God, or work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor
utility poles to which the franchisee's FTTP Network is attached, and unavailability of materials
and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary.
FRANCHISE AREA
The incorporated area (entire existing territorial limits) of the LFA and such additional areas as
may be included in the corporate (territorial) limits of the LFA during the term of this franchise.
FRANCHISEE
Verizon Pennsylvania Inc., and its lawful and permitted successors, assigns and transferees.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL
An access channel available for the use of the LFA.
GROSS REVENUE
All revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,
which is derived by the franchisee from the operation of the cable system to provide cable
service in the service area. Gross revenue includes but is not limited to:
Fees charged for basic service;
Fees charged to subscribers for any service tier other than basic service;
Fees charged for premium channel(s), e.g., HBO, Cinemax, or Showtime;
Fees charged to subscribers for any optional, per-channel, or per-program services;
Charges for installation, additional outlets, relocation, disconnection, reconnection, and
change-in-service fees for video or audio programming;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 601/620
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
Fees for downgrading any level of cable service programming;
Fees for service calls and similar repair services;
Fees for leasing of channels;
Advertising revenue as set forth herein;
Rental of any converters and remote control devices;
Late payment fees;
Revenue from NSF check charges;
Franchise fees;
Revenue from the sale of program guides;
Revenues or commissions received from the carriage of home shopping channels
subject to Subsection C(5) below;
Revenue from the sale of subscriber lists; and
Revenue from the sale of video-on-demand services.
Advertising commissions paid to independent third parties shall not be deducted from
advertising revenue included in gross revenue. Advertising revenue is based upon the ratio of
the number of subscribers as of the last day of the period for which gross revenue is being
calculated to the number of the franchisee's subscribers within all areas covered by the
particular advertising source as of the last day of such period, e.g., the franchisee sells two
ads: Ad "A" is broadcast nationwide; Ad "B" is broadcast only within Pennsylvania. The
franchisee has 100 subscribers in LFA, 500 subscribers in Pennsylvania, and 1,000
subscribers nationwide. Gross revenue as to LFA from Ad "A" is 10% of the franchisee's
revenue therefrom. Gross revenue as to LFA from Ad "B" is 20% of the franchisee's revenue
therefrom.
Gross revenue shall not include:
Revenues received by any affiliate or other person in exchange for supplying goods or
services used by the franchisee to provide cable service over the cable system;
Bad debts written off by the franchisee in the normal course of its business; provided,
however, that bad debt recoveries shall be included in gross revenue during the period
collected;
Refunds, rebates or discounts made to subscribers or other third parties;
Any revenues classified, in whole or in part, as non-cable services revenue under federal
or state law, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunications
services; revenue received from information services, including, without limitation,
Internet access service, electronic mail service, electronic bulletin board service, or
similar online computer services; charges made to the public for commercial or cable
television that is used for two-way communication; and any other revenues attributed by
the franchisee to non-cable services in accordance with FCC or state public utility
regulatory commission rules, regulations, standards or orders;
Any revenue of the franchisee or any other person which is received directly from the
sale of merchandise through any cable service distributed over the cable system,
notwithstanding that portion of such revenue which represents or can be attributed to a
subscriber fee or a payment for the use of the cable system for the sale of such
merchandise, which portion shall be included in gross revenue;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 602/620
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
The sale of cable services on the cable system for resale in which the purchaser is
required to collect cable franchise fees from the purchaser's customer;
Any tax of general applicability imposed upon the franchisee or upon subscribers by a
city, state, federal or any other governmental entity and required to be collected by the
franchisee and remitted to the taxing entity (including, but not limited to, sales/use tax,
gross receipts tax, excise tax, utility users tax, public service tax, communication taxes
and non-cable franchise fees);
Any forgone revenue which the franchisee chooses not to receive in exchange for its
provision of free or reduced cost cable or other communications services to any person,
including without limitation employees of the franchisee and public institutions or other
institutions designated in the franchise; provided, however, that such forgone revenue
which the franchisee chooses not to receive in exchange for trades, barters, services or
other items of value shall be included in gross revenue;
Sales of capital assets, but not including sales of non-capital assets to subscribers
related to cable service, or sales of surplus equipment;
Program launch fees;
Directory or Internet advertising revenue, including, but not limited to, yellow page, white
page, banner advertisement and electronic publishing; and
Any fees or charges collected from subscribers or other third parties for any PEG grant.
INFORMATION SERVICES
Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 3 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(20), which currently states: "The offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing,
transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing or making available information via
telecommunications, and includes electronic publishing, but does not include any use of any such
capability for the management, control or operation of a telecommunications system or the
management of a telecommunications service."
INITIAL SERVICE AREA
The portion of the franchise area as outlined in Exhibit B.[1]
INTERNET ACCESS
Dial-up or broadband access service that enables subscribers to access the Internet.
LOCAL FRANCHISE AUTHORITY (LFA)
The Township of Uwchlan or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
NON-CABLE SERVICES
Any service that does not constitute the provision of video programming directly to multiple
subscribers in the franchise area, including, but not limited to, information services and
telecommunications services.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS
Those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers.
In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per
week and/or some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS
Those service conditions which are within the control of the franchisee. Those conditions which
are not within the control of the franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather
conditions. Those conditions that are within the control of the franchisee include, but are not
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 603/620
A.
limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal
demand periods, and maintenance or rebuild of the cable system. See 47 CFR § 76.309(c)(4)(ii).
PEG
Public, educational, and governmental.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, association, joint-stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental
entity.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL
An access channel available for use by the persons within the franchise area.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
The surface and the area across, in, over, along, upon and below the surface of the public streets,
roads, bridges, sidewalks, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, and boulevards, including public utility
easements and public lands and waterways used as public rights-of-way, as the same now or may
thereafter exist, which are under the jurisdiction or control of the LFA. Public rights-of-way do not
include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire communications
or broadcast services.
SERVICE AREA
All portions of the franchise area where cable service is being offered, including the initial service
area and any additional service areas.
SERVICE DATE
The date that the franchisee first provides cable service on a commercial basis directly to multiple
subscribers in the franchise area. The franchisee shall memorialize the service date by notifying
the LFA in writing of the same, which notification shall become a part of this franchise.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION
The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels.
SUBSCRIBER
A person who lawfully receives cable service over the cable system with the franchisee's express
permission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
The franchisee's existing telecommunications services and information services facilities and its
FTTP Network facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES
Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 3 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(46), which currently states: "The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the
public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of
the facilities used."
TITLE II
Title II of the Communications Act, Common Carriers, as amended, under which the franchisee
has upgraded its network with the FTTP Network.
TITLE VI
Title VI of the Communications Act, Cable Communications, as amended, which governs only the
provision of cable services by a franchisee.
TRANSFER OF THE FRANCHISE
Any transaction in which:
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 604/620
(1)
(2)
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
An ownership or other interest in the franchisee is transferred, directly or indirectly, from
one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons, so that control of
the franchisee is transferred; or
The rights held by the franchisee under the franchise are transferred or assigned to
another person or group of persons.
However, notwithstanding Subsections A(1) and (2) above, a transfer of the franchise shall
not include transfer of an ownership or other interest in the franchisee to the parent of the
franchisee or to another affiliate of the franchisee; transfer of an interest in the franchise or
the rights held by the franchisee under the franchise to the parent of the franchisee or to
another affiliate of the franchisee; any action which is the result of a merger of the parent of
the franchisee; or any action which is the result of a merger of another affiliate of the
franchisee.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING
Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 602 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 522(20), which currently states: "Programming provided by, or generally considered comparable
to programming provided by, a television broadcast station."
Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Township office.
§ A270-2. Grant of authority; limits and reservations.
Grant of authority. Subject to the terms and conditions of this agreement and the Communications
Act, the LFA hereby grants the franchisee the right to own, construct, operate and maintain a
cable system along the public rights-of-way within the franchise area in order to provide cable
service. No privilege or power of eminent domain is bestowed by this grant, nor is such a privilege
or power bestowed by this agreement. By this grant, the LFA makes no representation or
guarantee regarding its interest in or right to control any public right-of-way.
LFA's regulatory authority. The parties recognize that the franchisee's FTTP Network is being
constructed and will be operated and maintained as an upgrade to and/or extension of its existing
telecommunications facilities for the provision of non-cable services. The jurisdiction of LFA over
such telecommunications facilities is restricted by federal and state law, and LFA does not and will
not assert jurisdiction over the franchisee's FTTP Network in contravention of those limitations.
Therefore, as provided in Section 621 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541, the LFA's
regulatory authority under Title VI of the Communications Act is not applicable to the construction,
installation, maintenance, or operation of the franchisee's FTTP Network to the extent the FTTP
Network is constructed, installed, maintained, or operated for the limited purpose of upgrading
and/or extending Verizon's existing telecommunications facilities for the provision of non-cable
services. This agreement shall not be construed to limit whatever regulatory authority LFA may
have under Title II, state, and local law with respect to the FTTP Network facilities.
Term. This franchise shall become effective on July 10, 2006 (the "effective date"). The term of this
franchise shall be 10 years from the effective date, with an automatic renewal of five years unless
the franchise is earlier revoked as provided herein.
Grant not exclusive. The franchise and the rights granted herein to use and occupy the public
rights-of-way to provide cable services shall not be exclusive, and the LFA reserves the right to
grant other franchises for similar uses or for other uses of the public rights-of-way, or any portions
thereof, to any person, or to make any such use themselves, at any time during the term of this
franchise. Any such rights which are granted shall not adversely impact the authority as granted
under this franchise and shall not interfere with existing facilities of the cable system or the
franchisee's FTTP Network.
Franchise subject to federal law. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary herein, this
franchise is subject to and shall be governed by all applicable provisions of federal law as it may
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 605/620
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
H.
(1)
A.
be amended, including but not limited to the Communications Act and implementing regulations,
and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to the extent not in conflict with federal law.
No waiver:
The failure of the LFA on one or more occasions to exercise a right or to require compliance
or performance under this franchise or any other applicable law shall not be deemed to
constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance by the LFA, nor to
excuse the franchisee from complying or performing, unless such right or such compliance or
performance has been specifically waived in writing.
The failure of the franchisee on one or more occasions to exercise a right under this franchise
or applicable law, or to required performance under this franchise, shall not be deemed to
constitute a waiver of such right or of performance of this agreement, nor shall it excuse the
LFA from performance, unless such right or performance has been specifically waived in
writing.
Construction of agreement:
The provisions of this franchise shall be liberally construed to effectuate their objectives.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the scope or applicability of Section 625 of the
Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545.
Should any change to state law have the lawful effect of materially altering the terms and
conditions of this franchise, then the parties shall modify this franchise to the mutual
satisfaction of both parties to ameliorate the negative effects on the franchisee of the material
alteration. Any modifications shall be in writing. If the parties cannot reach agreement on the
above-referenced modification to the franchise, then the franchisee may terminate this
agreement without further obligation to the LFA; provided, however, that the franchisee shall
be required to provide the LFA with written notice of such termination, with such termination to
take effect no sooner than 180 days after the provision of such notice, or at the franchisee's
option, the parties agree to submit the matter to binding arbitration in accordance with the
commercial arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association.
Police powers. Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to prohibit the reasonable, necessary
and lawful exercise of the police powers of the LFA. However, if the reasonable, necessary and
lawful exercise of the police power results in any material alteration of the terms and conditions of
this franchise, then the parties shall modify this franchise to the mutual satisfaction of both parties
to ameliorate the negative effects on the franchisee of the material alteration. If the parties cannot
reach agreement on the above-referenced modification to the franchise, then the franchisee may
terminate this agreement without further obligation to the LFA; provided, however, that the
franchisee shall be required to provide the LFA with written notice of such termination, with such
termination to take effect no sooner than 180 days after the provision of such notice, or at the
franchisee's option, the parties agree to submit the matter to binding arbitration in accordance with
the commercial arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association.
§ A270-3. Provision of cable service.
Service area.
Initial service area. The franchisee shall offer cable service to significant numbers of
subscribers in residential areas of the initial service area and may make cable service
available to businesses in the initial service area within 24 months of the service date of this
franchise, and shall offer cable service to all residential areas in the initial service area within
five years of the service date of the franchise, except: (A) for periods of force majeure; (B) for
periods of delay caused by LFA; (C) for periods of delay resulting from the franchisee's
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 606/620
(a)
(2)
B.
C.
inability to obtain authority to access rights-of-way in the service area; (D) in areas where
developments or buildings are subject to claimed exclusive arrangements with other
providers; (E) in developments or buildings that the franchisee cannot access under
reasonable terms and conditions after good faith negotiation, as determined by the
franchisee; and (F) in areas, developments or buildings where the franchisee is unable to
provide cable service for technical reasons or which require nonstandard facilities which are
not available on a commercially reasonable basis; and (G) in areas where the occupied
residential household density does not meet the density requirements set forth in Subsection
A(1)(a).
Density requirement. The franchisee shall make cable services available to residential
dwelling units in all areas of the service area where the average density is equal to or
greater than 30 occupied residential dwelling units per mile as measured in strand
footage from the nearest technically feasible point on the active FTTP Network trunk or
feeder line. Should, through new construction, an area within the initial service area meet
the density requirements after the time stated for providing cable service as set forth in
Subsection A(1) and (2), respectively, the franchisee shall provide cable service to such
area within six months of receiving notice from the LFA that the density requirements
have been met.
Additional service areas. Except for the initial service area, the franchisee shall not be
required to extend its cable system or to provide cable services to any other areas within the
franchise area during the term of this franchise or any renewals thereof. If the franchisee
desires to add additional service areas within the franchise area, the franchisee shall notify
the LFA in writing of such additional service area at least 10 days prior to providing cable
services in such areas.
Availability of cable service. The franchisee shall make cable service available to all residential
dwelling units and may make cable service available to businesses within the service area in
conformance with Subsection A, and the franchisee shall not discriminate between or among any
individuals in the availability of cable service. In the areas in which the franchisee shall provide
cable service, the franchisee shall be required to connect, at the franchisee's expense, all
residential dwelling units that are within 125 feet of trunk or feeder lines not otherwise already
served by the franchisee's FTTP Network. The franchisee shall be allowed to recover, from a
subscriber that requests such connection, the actual costs incurred for residential dwelling unit
connections that exceed 125 feet and actual costs incurred to connect any nonresidential dwelling
unit subscriber.
Cable service to municipal buildings. Subject to Subsection A, the franchisee shall provide,
without charge within the service area, one service outlet activated for expanded basic service to
one fire station, one police station, one emergency operations center, and one ambulance corps,
and one service outlet activated for basic service to each municipal building, public library, and
each public school, and each nonpublic school that (a) receives funding pursuant to Title I of the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, 20 U.S.C. § 6301 et seq., and (b) is considered
a nonpublic, nonlicensed school under the Pennsylvania Private Academic Schools Act, 24 P.S.
§§ 6702-6721, located in the LFA, as may be designated by the LFA in Exhibit A;[1] provided,
however, that the franchisee shall not be obligated to provide any service outlets activated for
basic service to home schools; also provided, however, that if it is necessary to extend the
franchisee's trunk or feeder lines more than 125 feet solely to provide service to any such school
or municipal building, the LFA shall have the option either of paying the franchisee's direct costs
for such extension in excess of 125 feet or of releasing the franchisee from the obligation to
provide service to such school or other municipal building. Furthermore, the franchisee shall be
permitted to recover, from any school or other municipal building owner entitled to free service, the
direct cost of installing, when requested to do so, more than one outlet, or concealed inside wiring,
or a service outlet requiring more than 125 feet of drop cable; provided, however, that the
franchisee shall not charge for the provision of basic service to the additional service outlets once
installed. In addition to the locations designated in Exhibit A, the franchisee shall provide without
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 607/620
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
D.
(1)
A.
charge within the service area up to one service outlet activated for basic service to a maximum of
four additional municipal buildings during the term of the agreement at locations as mutually
agreed upon by the parties, subject to all conditions set forth in this Subsection C; provided,
however, that the franchisee shall not be required to provide any such service outlet if the location
of the additional municipal building resides in an area, development, or building where the
franchisee is unable to provide cable service for technical reasons or which require nonstandard
facilities which are not available on a commercially reasonable basis. Furthermore, the franchisee
shall not be required to provide any such additional service outlets until all cable operators
providing cable service in the franchise area also provide such additional service outlet(s) without
charge.
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township office.
§ A270-4. System facilities.
Technical requirement. The franchisee shall operate, maintain, test on a regular basis, construct
and extend the cable system so as to provide high quality signals and reliable delivery of cable
services for all cable programming services throughout the LFA over its FTTP Network. The cable
system shall meet or exceed any and all technical performance standards of the FCC; the
National Electrical Safety Code; the National Electric Code; and any other applicable federal laws,
as well as state and local laws or regulations, to the extent not in conflict with federal law and
regulations.
System characteristics. The franchisee's cable system shall meet or exceed the following
requirements:
The system shall be designed, constructed, and maintained with an initial analog and digital
carrier passband between 50 and 860 MHz.
The system shall be designed to be an active two-way plant for subscriber interaction, if any,
required for the selection or use of cable service.
Interconnection. The franchisee shall design its cable system so that it may be interconnected with
other cable systems in the franchise area. Interconnection of systems may be made by direct
cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate methods.
Emergency alert system:
The franchisee shall comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS") requirements of the
FCC in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the system.
§ A270-5. PEG services.
PEG set-aside; interconnection:
In order to ensure universal availability of PEG programming within the geographic limits of
those municipalities that comprise the CCCG, the franchisee shall reserve on the basic
service tier up to one dedicated public access channel, one dedicated educational access
channel, and one dedicated government access channel ("PEG channels"); provided,
however, that the franchisee shall not be obligated to reserve the PEG channels until all cable
incumbents within the franchise area of at least one CCCG member jurisdiction similarly
reserve capacity for an equal number of PEG channels. The parties agree that the franchisee
shall retain the right to utilize all such reserved PEG channel capacity, in its sole discretion,
during the term of this franchise until such time that, and to the extent that, a CCCG member
jurisdiction or its designee: a) activates the PEG channels subject to Subsection A(2); or b)
ceases to use the PEG channels during the term for a period of more than one year.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the parties acknowledge that the franchisee shall only be
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 608/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
obligated to provide a maximum of three PEG channels to be shared among all CCCG
member jurisdictions to the extent they are activated subject to Subsection A(2).
A CCCG member jurisdiction with a franchise from the franchisee or its designee may
activate any or all of the reserved PEG channels during the term by providing the franchisee
with written notice 180 days prior to the date it intends to activate any or all of the reserved
PEG channels. Such written notice shall specify the programming to be carried on such PEG
channel(s), and shall include an operation plan providing sufficient information about the
administration, programming, and operation of the requested PEG channel(s).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such operation plan shall provide for the cablecast of any
such PEG channel(s) for a period of not less than eight continuous hours of original
programming per calendar week for not less than four such consecutive weeks. Such notice
shall also authorize the franchisee to transmit the PEG channel(s) within and outside the LFA.
Thereafter, the franchisee shall assign the PEG channel(s) on its channel lineup as set forth
in such notice, to the extent such channel assignment does not interfere with any preexisting
channels. The CCCG member jurisdiction or its designee activating the PEG channel(s) shall
have complete control over the content, scheduling, and administration of the PEG channel(s)
and may delegate such functions, or a portion or such functions, to an appropriate designee.
The franchisee shall neither have nor attempt to exercise any editorial control over PEG
channel programming.
If the LFA or its designee is the CCCG member jurisdiction requesting activation of the PEG
channel(s), following receipt of such activation request, the franchisee shall use reasonable
efforts to interconnect its cable system with existing cable operator(s) in the relevant franchise
area, which may include areas within the geographic limits of those municipalities that
comprise the CCCG. After receiving such notice of activation, the franchisee shall initiate
interconnection negotiations with the existing cable operator(s) to cablecast, on a live basis,
public, educational or governmental programming consistent with this franchise.
Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave link, satellite or other
technically feasible and reasonable method of connection. The franchisee shall negotiate in
good faith with existing cable operator(s) respecting reasonable, mutually convenient, costeffective,
and technically viable interconnection points, methods, terms and conditions. If the
LFA or its designee is the requesting CCCG member jurisdiction, and the interconnection
point is within the LFA's jurisdictional boundaries, the LFA shall use its best efforts to require
the existing cable operator(s) to provide such interconnection to the franchisee on reasonable
terms and conditions. The construction costs and ongoing expenses of interconnection shall
be fairly shared between the franchisee and the existing cable operator(s). The franchisee
and the existing cable operator(s) shall negotiate the precise terms and conditions of an
interconnection agreement, and the LFA or its designee shall use its best efforts to facilitate
these negotiations. If the franchisee is unable to reach such an agreement within 30 days
after requesting in writing to interconnect with other local cable operator(s), the LFA or its
designee shall use its best efforts to assist in mediating such dispute. If no agreement is
reached within an additional 30 days, the franchisee agrees that the LFA or its designee shall
designate the point of interconnection. If the cost of interconnection would be unreasonable,
interconnection is not technically feasible or would cause an unacceptable increase in
subscriber rates, or if an existing cable operator will not agree to reasonable terms and
conditions of interconnection, the franchisee will be under no obligation to interconnect with
the existing cable operator.
If the procedures of Subsection A(3) do not result in interconnection of the franchisee's cable
system with the existing cable operator(s)' for purposes of providing PEG channel(s), the LFA
or its designee may require the franchisee to provide a video link to the Chester County
Intergovernmental Unit (CCIU) Educational Service Center, 455 Boot Road, Downingtown, PA
19335, where PEG access programming is originated for the purpose of cablecasting PEG
programming. The franchisee shall not be obligated to provide the LFA or its designee with
either cablecast equipment and facilities or personnel responsible for maintaining and
operating such equipment and facilities or generating any such PEG programming.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 609/620
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
PEG grant.
The franchisee shall provide an annual grant to the CCCG member jurisdiction(s) or their
designee(s) requesting PEG channel(s) to be used in support of the production of local PEG
programming (the "annual PEG grant"). Such grant shall be used by the requesting CCCG
member jurisdiction or its designee for PEG access equipment, including, but not limited to,
studio and portable production equipment, editing equipment and program playback
equipment, or for renovation or construction of PEG access facilities.
The annual PEG grant provided by the franchisee hereunder shall not exceed $0.25, per
month, per subscriber in the service area to the franchisee's basic service tier; provided,
however, that if any cable operator(s) other than the franchisee providing cable service within
the geographical boundaries of the LFA also provides PEG programming within the
geographical boundaries of the LFA, the franchisee shall not be obligated to pay the annual
PEG grant until the LFA or its designee begins to exercise whatever rights (if any) the LFA
may have pursuant to the LFA's existing franchise agreement(s) with such cable operator(s)
to receive comparable financial or tangible support for PEG programming from such cable
operator(s). The annual PEG grant payment, along with a brief summary of the subscriber
information upon which it is based, shall be delivered to applicable CCCG member
jurisdictions or their designees within 60 days after the beginning of each calendar year
during the franchise term. Calculation of the annual PEG grant will commence with the first
calendar month during which the franchisee receives written request to activate any of the
reserved PEG channels. The annual PEG grant will become effective upon written request by
the LFA or designee following activation of any of the PEG channels held in reserve outlined
in Subsection A. The annual PEG grant shall be payable based on the number of PEG
channels activated pursuant to Subsection A, e.g., if one PEG channel is activated, the
annual PEG grant shall be up to the sum of $0.15, per month, per subscriber in the relevant
service area. If two PEG channels are activated, the annual PEG grant shall be up to the sum
of $0.20, per month, per subscriber in the relevant service area. If three PEG channels are
activated, the annual PEG grant shall be up to the sum of $0.25, per month, per subscriber in
the relevant service area.
Indemnity for PEG. The LFA or its designee shall require all local producers and users of any of
the PEG facilities or channels to agree in writing to authorize the franchisee to transmit
programming consistent with this agreement and to defend and hold harmless the franchisee and
the LFA or its designee from and against any and all liability or other injury, including the
reasonable cost of defending claims or litigation arising from or in connection with claims for failure
to comply with applicable federal laws, rules, regulations or other requirements of local, state or
federal authorities; for claims of libel, slander, invasion of privacy, or the infringement of common
law or statutory copyright; for unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name or service mark; for
breach of contractual or other obligations owing to third parties by the producer or user; and for
any other injury or damage in law or equity which results from the use of a PEG facility or channel.
The LFA or its designee shall establish rules and regulations for use of PEG facilities consistent
with, and as required by, 47 U.S.C. § 531, which currently states: "(a) A franchising authority may
establish requirements in a franchise with respect to the designation or use of channel capacity for
public, educational, or governmental use only to the extent provided in this section; (b) A
franchising authority may in its request for proposals require as part of a franchise, and may
require as part of a cable operator's proposal for a franchise renewal, subject to Section 546 of
this title, that channel capacity be designated for public, educational, or governmental use, and
channel capacity on institutional networks be designated for educational or governmental use, and
may require rules and procedures for the use of the channel capacity designated pursuant to this
section; (c) A franchising authority may enforce any requirement in any franchise regarding the
providing or use of such channel capacity. Such enforcement authority includes the authority to
enforce any provisions of the franchise for services, facilities, or equipment proposed by the cable
operator which relate to public, educational, or governmental use of channel capacity, whether or
not required by the franchising authority pursuant to subsection (b) of this section; (d) In the case
of any franchise under which channel capacity is designated under subsection (b) of this section,
the franchising authority shall prescribe (1) rules and procedures under which the cable operator is
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 610/620
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
E.
permitted to use such channel capacity for the provision of other services if such channel capacity
is not being used for the purposes designated; and (2) rules and procedures under which such
permitted use shall cease; (e) Subject to Section 544(d) of this title, a cable operator shall not
exercise any editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use of channel
capacity provided pursuant to this section, except a cable operator may refuse to transmit any
public access program or portion of a public access program which contains obscenity, indecency,
or nudity; (f) For purposes of this section, the term 'institutional network' means a communication
network which is constructed or operated by the cable operator and which is generally available
only to subscribers who are not residential subscribers." The term "franchising authority" as used
in 47 U.S.C. § 531 shall be interpreted with respect to PEG to mean any CCCG member
jurisdiction or its designee that activates a PEG channel.
Recovery of costs. To the extent permitted by federal law, the franchisee shall be allowed to
recover the costs of an annual PEG grant or any other costs arising from the provision of PEG
services from subscribers and to include such costs as a separately billed line item on each
subscriber's bill. Without limiting the foregoing, if allowed under state and federal laws, the
franchisee may externalize, line-item, or otherwise pass through interconnection costs to
subscribers.
§ A270-6. Franchise fees.
Payment to the LFA. The franchisee shall pay to the LFA a franchise fee of 5% of annual gross
revenue. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if all cable operators providing cable service in the
franchise area pay the LFA a higher franchise fee pursuant to their franchises, the franchisee
agrees to pay the same increased franchise fee to the extent permitted by law. In accordance with
Title VI of the Communications Act, the twelve-month period applicable under the franchise for the
computation of the franchise fee shall be a calendar year. Such payments shall be made no later
than 45 days following the end of each calendar quarter. The franchisee shall be allowed to submit
or correct any payments that were incorrectly omitted, and shall be refunded any payments that
were incorrectly submitted in connection with the quarterly franchise fee remittances within 90
days following the close of the calendar year for which such payments were applicable.
Supporting information. Each franchise fee payment shall be accompanied by a brief report
showing the basis for the computation of the franchise fee payment that shall be prepared by a
qualified representative authorized by the franchisee to prepare and certify the report. The report
shall be certified by such representative to be true and correct.
Limitation on franchise fee actions. The parties agree that the period of limitation for commencing
any action for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be three years from the end
of the calendar year in which payment by the franchisee is due.
Bundled services. If cable services subject to the franchise fee required under this Article 7 are
provided to subscribers in conjunction with non-cable services, the franchise fee shall be applied
only to the value of the cable services, as reflected on the books and records of the franchisee in
accordance with FCC or state public utility regulatory commission rules, regulations, standards or
orders.
Audits.
The LFA may audit the franchisee's books and records during the term, but no more than
once every three years. During any audit period, the LFA may commence an audit of the
franchisee's books and records for the portion of the calendar year preceding the audit in
addition to the three prior calendar years. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the LFA may
commence an audit within 30 days of its final franchise fee payment in order to audit books
and records pertaining to the time period not encompassed by any previous audit period with
respect to the final three years of the term. All records reasonably necessary for any such
audit shall be made available by the franchisee to the LFA.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 611/620
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
Each party shall bear its own costs of an audit; provided, however, that if the results of any
audit indicate that the franchisee underpaid any franchise fee payment by 5% or more, then
the franchisee shall pay the reasonable, documented, out-of-pocket costs of the audit;
provided, however, that the franchisee shall not be required to reimburse the LFA for costs
exceeding $5,000 for each audit.
If the results of an audit indicate an overpayment or underpayment of franchise fees, the
parties agree that such overpayment or under payment shall be returned to the proper party
within 45 days; provided, however, that the franchisee shall be required to remit
underpayments to the LFA together with interest at prime rate (as published in The Wall
Street Journal) plus 0.5% of the amount correctly due from the date such underpayment
would have been due.
Any auditor employed by the LFA shall be a certified public accountant and shall not be
permitted to be compensated on a success-based formula, e.g., payment based on an
underpayment of fees, if any.
§ A270-7. Customer service.
Customer service requirements are set forth in Exhibit C, which shall be binding unless amended by
written consent of the parties.[1]
Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the Township office.
§ A270-8. Reports and records.
Open books and records. Upon reasonable written notice to the franchisee and with no less than
30 days' written notice to the franchisee, the LFA shall have the right to inspect the franchisee's
books and records pertaining to the franchisee's provision of cable service in the franchise area at
any time during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis as are reasonably necessary
to ensure compliance with the terms of this franchise. Such notice shall specifically reference the
section or subsection of the franchise which is under review, so that the franchisee may organize
the necessary books and records for appropriate access by the LFA. The franchisee shall not be
required to maintain any books and records for franchise compliance purposes longer than three
years. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the franchisee shall not be
required to disclose information that it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in
nature, nor disclose any of its or an affiliate's books and records not relating to the provision of
cable service in the service area. The LFA shall treat any information disclosed by the franchisee
as confidential and shall only disclose it to employees, representatives, and agents thereof that
have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. The franchisee shall not be
required to provide subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of the Communications Act,
47 U.S.C. § 551.
Records required. the franchisee shall at all times maintain:
Records of all written complaints for a period of the calendar year after receipt by the
franchisee as well as three years thereafter. The term "complaint" as used herein refers to
complaints about any aspect of the cable system or the franchisee's cable operations,
including, without limitation, complaints about employee courtesy. Complaints recorded will
not be limited to complaints requiring an employee service call;
Records of outages for a period of the calendar year after occurrence as well as three years
thereafter, indicating date, duration, area, and the number of subscribers affected, type of
outage, and cause;
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 612/620
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
Records of service calls for repair and maintenance for a period of the calendar year after
resolution by the franchisee as well as three years thereafter, indicating the date and time
service was required, the date of acknowledgment and date and time service was scheduled
(if it was scheduled), and the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the date
and time the problem was resolved;
Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service extension for a period of the
calendar year after the request was fulfilled by the franchisee as well as three years
thereafter, indicating the date of request, date of acknowledgment, and the date and time
service was extended; and
A map showing the area of coverage for the provisioning of cable services and estimated
timetable to commence providing cable service.
§ A270-9. Insurance and indemnification.
Insurance:
the franchisee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the
franchise term, the following insurance coverage:
Commercial general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit
for property damage and bodily injury. Such insurance shall cover the construction,
operation and maintenance of the cable system and the conduct of the franchisee's cable
service business in the LFA.
Automobile liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage coverage.
Workers' compensation insurance meeting all legal requirements of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
Employer's liability insurance in the following amounts: bodily injury by accident:
$100,000; and bodily injury by disease: $100,000 employee limit; $500,000 policy limit.
The LFA shall be designated as an additional insured under each of the insurance policies
required in this Article 9 of this agreement, except worker's compensation and employer's
liability insurance.
The franchisee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submitting
documentation to the LFA verifying that the franchisee has obtained alternative insurance in
conformance with this agreement.
Each of the required insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with an A- or better rating for financial condition and
financial performance by Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition.
Upon written request, the franchisee shall deliver to the LFA certificates of insurance showing
evidence of the required coverage.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this agreement or elsewhere, any policy
or policies of insurance maintained by the franchisee shall contain waiver of subrogation
clause with regard to the LFA and any of its officials, officers, agents, employees and
contractors and be primary as to all claims thereunder and provide that any insurance carried
by the LFA is not in excess of and is noncontributing with any insurance requirement of the
franchisee hereunder.
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 613/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A.
A.
Indemnification:
Except as directly related to or arising directly out of the negligence or willful misconduct of
the LFA, its officials, officers, agents, employees, independent contractors, or third parties, the
franchisee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the LFA, and its officials,
officers, agents, boards, employees, and independent contractors from and against any
liability for damages, claims, judgments, suits, and awards resulting from tangible property
damage or bodily injury (including accidental death) or financial loss, to the extent proximately
caused by the franchisee's negligent construction, operation, or maintenance of its cable
system, provided that the LFA shall give the franchisee written notice of the LFA's request for
indemnification within 30 days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this subsection and
10 days following service of legal process on the LFA or its designated agent of any action
related to this subsection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchisee shall not indemnify
the LFA for any damages, liability or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence
of the LFA, its officers, agents, employees, attorneys, consultants, independent contractors or
third parties or for any activity or function conducted by any person other than the franchisee
in connection with PEG access, or EAS, or the distribution of any cable service over the cable
system.
With respect to the franchisee's indemnity obligations set forth in Subsection B(1), the
franchisee shall provide the defense of any claims brought against the LFA by selecting
counsel of the franchisee's choice to defend the claim, subject to the consent of the LFA,
which shall not unreasonably be withheld. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the LFA
from cooperating with the franchisee and participating in the defense of any litigation by its
own counsel at its own cost and expense. The franchisee shall neither settle nor compromise
any claim or action without the prior written consent of the LFA, which such consent may be
withheld by the LFA in the reasonable exercise of its governmental discretion. In the event
that the terms of any such settlement do not include the release of the LFA and the LFA does
not consent to the terms of any such settlement or compromise, the franchisee shall not settle
the claim or action but its obligation to indemnify the LFA shall in no event exceed the
maximum possible amount that would have been payable had the LFA consented to the
terms of such settlement.
The LFA shall hold harmless and defend the franchisee from and against and shall be
responsible for damages, liability, or claims resulting from or arising out of the willful
misconduct or negligence of the LFA. The LFA shall provide the defense of any claims
brought against the franchisee by selecting counsel of the LFA's choice to defend the claim,
subject to the consent of the franchisee, which shall not unreasonably be withheld.
The LFA shall be responsible for its own acts of willful misconduct or negligence, or breach of
obligation, subject to any and all defenses and limitations of liability provided by law.
§ A270-10. Transfer of franchise.
Transfer. Subject to Section 617 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 537, no transfer of the
franchise shall occur without the prior consent of the LFA, provided that such consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned. No such consent shall be required, however, for a
transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, by assignment of any rights, title, or interest
of the franchisee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure indebtedness, or for
transactions otherwise excluded under § A270-1's definition of "transfer of the franchise."
§ A270-11. Renewal of franchise.
Governing law. The LFA and the franchisee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the LFA
that relate to the renewal of this franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 614/620
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
Section 626 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546.
Needs assessments. In addition to the procedures set forth in said Section 626 of the
Communications Act, the LFA shall notify the franchisee of all of its assessments regarding the
identity of future cable-related community needs and interests, as well as the past performance of
the franchisee under the then current franchise term. Such assessments shall be provided to the
franchisee by the LFA promptly so that the franchisee has adequate time to submit a proposal
under Section 626 and complete renewal of the franchise prior to expiration of its term.
Informal negotiations. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the franchisee and
the LFA agree that at any time during the term of the then current franchise, while affording the
public appropriate notice and opportunity to comment, the LFA and the franchisee may agree to
undertake and finalize informal negotiations regarding renewal of the then current franchise, and
the LFA may grant a renewal thereof.
Consistent terms. The franchisee and the LFA consider the terms set forth in this Article 12 to be
consistent with the express provisions of Section 626.
§ A270-12. Enforcement and termination of franchise.
Notice of violation. If at any time the LFA believes that the franchisee has not complied with the
terms of the franchise, the LFA shall informally discuss the matter with the franchisee. If these
discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem in a reasonable time, the LFA shall then notify
the franchisee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance in a reasonable time (for
purposes of this article, the "noncompliance notice").
The franchisee's right to cure or respond. The franchisee shall have 15 days in the case of the
failure of the franchisee to pay any sum or other amount due the LFA under this agreement, and
30 days in all other cases, from receipt of the noncompliance notice to: (i) respond to the LFA, if
the franchisee contests (in whole or in part) the assertion of noncompliance; (ii) cure such
noncompliance; or (iii) in the event that, by its nature, such noncompliance cannot be cured within
such thirty-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such noncompliance and notify the LFA
of the steps being taken and the date by which they are projected to be completed. Upon cure of
any noncompliance, the LFA shall provide written confirmation that such cure has been effected.
Written notice from the LFA. In the event that the franchisee fails to respond to the noncompliance
notice pursuant to the procedures required by this article, or in the event that the alleged
noncompliance is not remedied within the applicable cure period pursuant to Subsection B above
or the date projected pursuant to Subsection B(iii) above, if the LFA seeks to continue its
investigation into the alleged noncompliance, then the LFA shall provide the franchisee with
written notice thereof. Such written notice shall set forth the reasons why the LFA believes that the
franchisee has not cured the default and shall set forth the LFA's proposed action, which may
include the following:
Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as
an alternative to damages;
Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or
In the case of a substantial noncompliance with a material provision of this franchise, seek to
revoke the franchise in accordance with Subsection D.
Public meeting; revocation. Should the LFA seek to revoke this franchise after following the
procedures set forth in Subsection C, the franchisee shall have 60 days from receipt of such
notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event the LFA has not
received a satisfactory response from the franchisee, it may then seek termination of the franchise
at a regularly scheduled and properly noticed public meeting pursuant to the schedule announced
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 615/620
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
A.
B.
C.
at the LFA's annual organizational meeting as required by 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 709(a); provided,
however, that the LFA shall cause to be served upon the franchisee, at least 30 business days
prior to such public meeting, a written notice specifying the time and place of such meeting and
stating its intent to revoke the franchise; provided also, however, that the LFA shall provide public
notice of the meeting as defined in 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 703, which shall include the fact that
termination of the franchise will be an agenda item at the public meeting, at least 14 days prior to
such public meeting.
At the designated public meeting, the franchisee shall be provided a fair opportunity for full
participation, including the right to be represented by legal counsel, to introduce relevant
evidence, to require the production of evidence, to compel the relevant testimony of the
officials, agents, employees or consultants of the LFA, to compel the testimony of other
persons as permitted by law, and to question and/or cross-examine witnesses. A complete
verbatim record and transcript shall be made of such meeting at the franchisee's sole cost
and expense.
Following the public meeting described above in this Subsection D, the franchisee shall be
provided up to 30 days to submit its proposed findings and conclusions to the LFA in writing
and thereafter the LFA shall determine: (i) whether an event of default has occurred under this
franchise; (ii) whether such event of default is excusable; and (iii) whether such event of
default has been cured or will be cured by the franchisee. The LFA shall also determine
whether it will revoke the franchise based on the information presented or, where applicable,
grant additional time to the franchisee to effect any cure. If the LFA determines that it will
revoke the franchise, the LFA shall promptly provide the franchisee with a written
determination setting forth the LFA's reasoning for such revocation. the franchisee may
appeal such written determination of the LFA to an appropriate court, which shall have the
power to review the decision of the LFA de novo. The franchisee shall be entitled to such
relief as the court finds appropriate. Such appeal must be taken within the shorter of 45 days
or the period otherwise permitted by law of the franchisee's receipt of the written
determination of the LFA.
The LFA may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action that it deems appropriate to enforce
the LFA's rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise.
The franchisee termination. The franchisee shall have the right to terminate this franchise and all
obligations hereunder within 90 days after the end of three years from the service date of this
franchise if at the end of such three-year period the franchisee does not then in good faith believe
it has achieved a commercially reasonable level of subscriber penetration on its cable system. The
franchisee may consider subscriber penetration levels outside the franchise area in this
determination. Notice to terminate under this Subsection E shall be given to the LFA in writing,
with such termination to take effect no sooner than 180 days after giving such notice. The
franchisee shall also be required to give its then current subscribers not less than 120 days' prior
written notice of its intent to cease cable service operations.
§ A270-13. Miscellaneous provisions.
Actions of parties. In any action by the LFA or the franchisee that is mandated or permitted under
the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner.
Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such
approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned.
Binding acceptance. This agreement shall bind and benefit the parties hereto and their respective
heirs, beneficiaries, administrators, executors, receivers, trustees, successors and assigns, and
the promises and obligations herein shall survive the expiration date hereof.
Preemption. In the event that federal or state law, rules, or regulations preempt a provision or limit
the enforceability of a provision of this agreement, the provision shall be read to be preempted to
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 616/620
(1)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
the extent, and for the time, but only to the extent and for the time, required by law. In the event
such federal or state law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or
otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted,
such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding on the
parties hereto, without the requirement of further action on the part of the LFA.
Force majeure. The franchisee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with, the
provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or
default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by a force
majeure.
Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not the LFA's intention to subject the
franchisee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the franchise for violations of the
franchise where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative
impact on subscribers, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties and
hardship being placed upon the franchisee that outweigh the benefit to be derived by the LFA
and/or subscribers.
Notices. Unless otherwise expressly stated herein, notices required under the franchise shall be
mailed first class, postage prepaid, to the addressees below. Each party may change its designee
by providing written notice to the other party.
Notices to the franchisee shall be mailed to:
William Petersen, President
Verizon Pennsylvania Inc.
1717 Arch Street, Floor 17
Philadelphia, PA 19103
With a copy to:
Jack White
Senior Vice President & General Counsel
Verizon Telecom
One Verizon Way
Room VC43E010
Basking Ridge, NJ 07920-1097
Notices to the LFA shall be mailed to:
Douglas Hanley
Township Manager
Uwchlan Township
715 N. Ship Road
Exton, PA 19341
With a copy to:
Vincent Pompo, Esquire
Lamb McErlane PC
24 West Market Street
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 617/620
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.O. Box 565
West Chester, PA 19381-0565
Entire agreement. This franchise and the exhibits hereto constitute the entire agreement between
the franchisee and the LFA and supersede all prior or contemporaneous agreements,
representations or understanding (written or oral) of the parties regarding the subject matter
hereof. Any ordinances or parts of ordinances that conflict with the provisions of this agreement
are superseded by this agreement.
Amendments. Amendments to this franchise shall be mutually agreed to in writing by the parties.
Captions. The captions and headings of articles and sections throughout this agreement are
intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this agreement.
Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this agreement.
Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, paragraph, term, or provision hereof is
determined to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, by any court of competent jurisdiction or by
any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have
no effect on the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, paragraph, term or provision
hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise.
Recitals. The recitals set forth in this agreement are incorporated into the body of this agreement
as if they had been originally set forth herein.
Modification. This franchise shall not be modified except by written instrument executed by both
parties.
FTTP Network transfer prohibition. Under no circumstance, including, without limitation, upon
expiration, revocation, termination, denial of renewal of the franchise or any other action to forbid
or disallow the franchisee from providing cable services, shall the franchisee or its assignees be
required to sell any right, title, interest, use or control of any portion of the franchisee's FTTP
Network, including, without limitation, the cable system and any capacity used for cable service or
otherwise, to the LFA or any third party. The franchisee shall not be required to remove the FTTP
Network or to relocate the FTTP Network or any portion thereof as a result of revocation,
expiration, termination, denial of renewal or any other action to forbid or disallow the franchisee
from providing cable services, provided that and for so long as the franchisee retains its right
under applicable law to use the public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services. This
provision is not intended to contravene leased access requirements under Title VI or PEG
requirements set out in this agreement.
Independent review. The LFA and the franchisee each acknowledge that they have received
independent legal advice in entering into this agreement. In the event that a dispute arises over
the meaning or application of any term(s) of this agreement, such term(s) shall not be construed
by the reference to any doctrine calling for ambiguities to be construed against the drafter of the
agreement.
Venue. Without waiving any right to bring or remove an action in either state or federal court,
venue for any dispute between the LFA and the franchisee under this agreement shall rest in the
Court of Common Pleas of Chester County, Pennsylvania, or if one or more of the issues within
such dispute shall constitute a federal question, then venue shall rest in the United States District
Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.
Survival. The following sections of the agreement shall survive the revocation, termination, or
expiration of the franchise: §§ A270-6, A270-8, and A270-9.
Article II. Comcast
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 618/620
[1]
[Adopted 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-02]
§ A270-14. Agreement.
The municipality hereby authorizes the entering into of a cable franchise agreement with Comcast to
construct, install, maintain, extend, and operate a cable system, the specific terms of which, agreeable
to both parties, are memorialized in said agreement attached hereto and incorporated herein by
reference.[1]
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ A270-15. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this ordinance or the underlying agreement is, for any
reason, found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity
shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts hereof.
It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been
included herein.
§ A270-16. Effect on prior ordinances.
Any prior ordinances or resolutions granting a franchise in favor of Comcast or its predecessors in
interest are hereby repealed insofar as the same impact this ordinance and the agreement authorized
herein.
§ A270-17. When effective.
This ordinance shall be effective five days following adoption or as by law provided.
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Township of Uwchlan adopted since the
publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling
legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for the original publication of the Code was Ord. No. 2009-01,
adopted 5-11-2009.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2009-02 8-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 238
2009-03 9-14-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2009-04 10-22-2009 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2009-05 10-22-2009 Official Map Ch. 41
2009-06 9-14-2009 Brush, grass, weeds and trees
amendment
Ch. 99
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 619/620
Ordinance No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2009-07 10-13-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2009-08 Sewer rate increase Not adopted
2009-09 12-14-2009 Fees amendment NCM
2010-01 2-8-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2010-02 10-12-2010 Earned income and net profits
tax amendment
Ch. 230, Art. I
2010-03 12-13-2010 Vacation of road NCM
2011-01 1-3-2011 Sewer rates and charges
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. I
2011-02 6-13-2011 Attorney fees, debt collection,
and refunds
Ch. 9
2011-03 7-11-2011 Speed limits See § 238-7
2011-04 12-12-2011 Bridges: Dowlin Forge Road Ch. 92, Art. I
2011-05 12-12-2011 Sewer rates and charges
amendment; Eagleview
Drainage Basin sewer use
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. I; Ch. 200, Art.
III
2012-01 3-12-2012 Street vacation NCM
2012-02 5-14-2012 Cable television franchise
agreement: Comcast
Ch. A270, Art. II
2013-01 4-8-2013 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 260
2013-02 4-8-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2013-03 10-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 238
2013-04 11-11-2013 Designation of stop sign See Ch. 238
2013-05 Number not used
2013-06 12-9-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2013-07 12-9-2013 Stormwater management;
subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 214; Ch. 260
2014-01 1-6-2014 Sewer rates and charges
amendment; Eagleview
Drainage Basin sewer use
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. I; Ch. 200, Art.
III
2014-02 10-14-2014 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 260
2014-03 10-14-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2015-01 3-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2015-02 3-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2015-03 6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2015-04 7-13-2015 Animal control amendment Ch. 87, Art. I
2015-05 7-13-2015 Peddling and soliciting: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 184, Art. I
2016-01 2-8-2016 Speed limits See § 238-7
2016-02 6-13-2016 Noise amendment Ch. 166
2016-03 10-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 238
8/17/2020 Township of Uwchlan, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/UW2708?guid=UW2708&children=true 620/620
Ordinance No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2016-04 11-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 238
2016-05 12-12-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 238
2017-01 1-9-2017 Salary of Tax Collector NCM
2017-02 2-13-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2017-03 3-13-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2017-04 6-12-2017 Noise amendment Ch. 166
2017-05 7-10-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
2017-06 11-13-2017 Police Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
2017-07 12-11-2017 Stop Intersections See § 238-15
2018-01 4-9-2018 Speed Limits See § 238-7
2018-02 4-9-2018 Environmental Advisory
Council
Ch. 17
2018-03 6-11-2018 Noise Amendment Ch. 166